Foreign Relations of the United States, 1948, Germany and Austria, Volume II (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1973)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1948v02).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Germany and Austria (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1948, Volume II)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1948

Volume II

Germany and Austria

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 28, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

Germany and Austria (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1948, Volume II)Contents

Preface

Introduction

List of Abbreviations and Symbols

List of Persons

I. The London Conference on GermanyA. Arrangements for the Conference; the revision of bizonal (U.S.–U.K.) economic organizations (Documents 1-46)

B. The London Conference on Germany, First Part, February 23–March 6, 1948 (Documents 47-95)

C. The Military Governors' Conference at Berlin, March 20–April 12, 1948; arrangements for the resumption of the London Conference (Documents 96-124)

D. The London Conference on Germany (resumed), April 20–June 1, 1948 (Documents 125-210)

E. Approval by the governments of the recommendations of the London Conference (Documents 211-228)

F. Exchanges with the governments of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe regarding Germany (Documents 229-251)

II. Implementation of the recommendations of the London Conference on GermanyA. Preparation of a constitution for West Germany; the Bonn Parliamentary Council (Documents 252-298)

B. The London Conference on the Ruhr, November 11–December 24, 19481. Preparations for the Conference (Documents 299-310)

2. Proceedings of the Conference; Conference documents and supplementary papers (Documents 311-372)

C. Preparation of a draft occupation statute; the work of the Tripartite Committee on the Occupation Statute; the activities of the Committee on Allied Controls (Documents 373-397)

D. Establishment of the Military Security Board (Documents 398-402)

E. Consideration of the question of prohibited and restricted industries (Documents 403-403)

F. Problems of trizonal fusion (Documents 404-411)

G. Rectification of the western frontier of Germany (Documents 412-415)

H. Protection of foreign investments in Germany (Documents 416-416)

III. Other efforts to achieve economic rehabilitation and control in the western zones of occupation of GermanyA. Reparations and restitution policy; the problem of prohibitions and limitations on German industrial production (Documents 417-510)

B. The disposition of German external assets (Documents 511-513)

C. Western Germany and the European recovery program (Documents 514-514)

D. Extension of the U.S.–U.K. bizonal fusion agreement (Documents 515-515)

IV. The Berlin Crisis (Documents 516-516)A. The breakdown of quadripartite control in Germany (Documents 517-547)

B. The establishment of the Berlin blockade (Documents 548-591)

C. The meetings of the representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and the Soviet Union in Moscow (Documents 592-633)

D. The negotiations of the Military Governors in Berlin (Documents 634-669)

E. The Berlin question at the United Nations (Documents 670-716)

V. Policies and problems in the United States zone of occupation of Germany (Documents 717-717)

VI. Basic statements of policy regarding Germany (Documents 718-722)

VII. Department of State policy statement on Austria (Documents 723-723)

VIII. The efforts of the United States to assure the maintenance of the independence and integrity of AustriaA. The interest of the United States in the question of the South Tyrol (Documents 724-728)

B. The interest of the United States in the formation of a future Austrian army and the arming of the Austrian police and gendarmerie (Documents 729-747)

C. The interest of the United States in the economic and political stability of Austria (Documents 748-769)

D. The problems of quadripartite control of occupied Austria (Documents 770-799)

IX. United States participation in the negotiations for an Austrian treatyA. The preparations for the resumption of meetings of the Deputies for Austria of the Council of Foreign Ministers (Documents 800-814)

The meetings of the Deputies for Austria, February–May 1948 (Documents 815-848)

C. The continued interest of the United States in an Austrian treaty; attempts to resume meetings of the Deputies for Austria (Documents 849-856)

D. The unagreed articles of the draft Austrian treaty (Documents 857-857)

Index

Preface Preface

The former Chief of the Foreign Relations Division, S. Everett Gleason, supervised the preparation of this volume and was responsible for its review. All documentation relating to United States policies toward Germany, except the portions dealing with the Berlin Crisis, was the work of William Slany. The compilation on the Berlin Crisis, as well as all the documentation on United States policies toward Austria, was prepared by Charles S. Sampson.

The Publishing and Reproduction Services Division (Jerome H. Perlmutter, Chief) was responsible for the technical editing of the volume. This function was performed by Margie R. Wilber in the Documentary Editing Section, under the supervision of the former Chief Margaret H. Seamon, and the present Acting Chief, May Pohlmann Sharp.

William M. Franklin
Director, Historical Office
Bureau of Public Affairs

Principles for the Compilation and Editing of “Foreign Relations”

The principles which guide the compilation and editing of Foreign Relations are stated in Department of State Regulation 2 FAM 1350 of June 15, 1961, a revision of the order approved on March 26, 1925, by Mr. Frank B. Kellogg, then Secretary of State. The text of the regulation, as further amended, is printed below:

1350 Documentary Record of American Diplomacy

1351 Scope of Documentation

The publication Foreign Relations of the United States constitutes the official record of the foreign policy of the United States. These volumes include, subject to necessary security considerations, all documents needed to give a comprehensive record of the major foreign policy decisions within the range of the Department of State’s responsibilities, together with appropriate materials concerning the facts which contributed to the formulation of policies. When further material is needed to supplement the documentation in the Department’s files for a proper understanding of the relevant policies of the United States, such papers should be obtained from other Government agencies.

1352 Editorial Preparation

The basic documentary diplomatic record to be printed in Foreign Relations of the United States is edited by the Historical Office, Bureau of Public Affairs of the Department of State. The editing of the record is guided by the principles of historical objectivity. There may be no alteration of the text, no deletions without indicating where in the text the deletion is made, and no omission of facts which were of major importance in reaching a decision. Nothing may be omitted for the purpose of concealing or glossing over what might be regarded by some as a defect of policy. However, certain omissions of documents are permissible for the following reasons: a. To avoid publication of matters which would tend to impede current diplomatic negotiations or other business.

b. To condense the record and avoid repetition of needless details.

c. To preserve the confidence reposed in the Department by individuals and by foreign governments.

d. To avoid giving needless offense to other nationalities or individuals.

e. To eliminate personal opinions presented in despatches and not acted upon by the Department. To this consideration there is one qualification—in connection with major decisions it is desirable, where possible, to show the alternatives presented to the Department before the decision was made.

1353 Clearance

To obtain appropriate clearances of material to be published in Foreign Relations of the United States, the Historical Office: a. Refers to the appropriate policy offices of the Department and of other agencies of the Government such papers as appear to require policy clearance.

b. Refers to the appropriate foreign governments requests for permission to print as part of the diplomatic correspondence of the United States those previously unpublished documents which were originated by the foreign governments.

Introduction Introduction

Coverage and Organization of the Volume

This volume presents documentation on the efforts of the United States during 1948 to make progress toward the long-delayed peace settlements for Germany and Austria. Sessions of the Council of Foreign Ministers in Moscow and London, protracted meetings of the Austrian Treaty Commission in Vienna, and innumerable meetings of the Deputies for Germany and Austria of the Council of Foreign Ministers in London had not brought the settlements any closer during 1947. Documentation on these meetings is presented in Foreign Relations, 1947, Volume II. In the face of Soviet intransigence, both at the international conference table and in the quadripartite organizations created to administer post-defeat Germany and Austria, the United States, the United Kingdom, and France were frustrated in the quest for binding, four-power settlements. Unwilling to delay any longer, the United States and its allies set about in 1948, in that portion of Germany under their control, to develop programs aimed at the creation of a viable democratic German government and the rehabilitation of economic life which would enable Germany to contribute to the general European recovery. These programs were carried forward despite increasing Soviet antagonism and the eruption of a major East-West diplomatic crisis resulting from the final breakdown of quadripartite agencies in Germany and the Soviet blockade of Berlin. Although conflicts of crisis proportions were not encountered in occupied Austria, little was achieved in prolonged discussions of the terms of the draft treaty to re-establish an independent Austria.

Chapter I of this volume presents papers relating to the convening, proceedings, and decisions of the London Conference on Germany. From this Conference emerged the basic outline of a program for the step-by-step evolution of a democratic German government and the concomitant transformation of United States-British-French mechanisms for the control of occupied Germany. It was neither possible nor appropriate to include here the complete records of the Conference. The editors have striven, however, to present materials indicating the essential lines of the Conference discussions and delineating the basic considerations and aims of United States policies and attitudes.

The negotiations and activities, at different official levels and in various locations, to implement the decisions of the London Conference on Germany are documented in Chapter II. These included a major conference in London on the Ruhr question, meetings among the three Western Military Governors for Germany and among their representatives on a variety of problems, conferences and exchanges between the Military Governors and German officials, and the efforts of the Germans themselves in the Parliamentary Council. The range and complexity of these negotiations and activities were too great to be presented here in any detail. The editors have sought, however, to present a selection of the most important papers indicating major decisions and the main lines of debate from which they eventuated.

Chapter III of this volume is devoted to documentation on the continuing efforts of the Western Powers to foster economic rehabilitation in Germany while resolving the problems that were a legacy of Germany’s wartime aggression. Major consideration is given to the question of reparations. The endless and detailed arguments over this issue illustrated all the fears and hopes, hidden and revealed, engendered by the revival of Germany. The demands of time and space have deterred the editors from attempting to document, even in a cursory manner, a variety of important and hotly-argued aspects of the problem of German economic rehabilitation such as foreign trade, internal communications, labor policy, the food crisis, and the movement of displaced persons, refugees, and prisoners of war. It also has not been possible to present materials on the functioning of the joint U.S.–U.K. economic agencies. The papers presented in this chapter represent only a fraction of the vast quantity of papers in Central Files of the Department of State on these and related economic topics.

The final breakdown of the quadripartite Allied Control Authority for Germany and the evolution of the major diplomatic crisis over the land and water blockade of Berlin are documented in Chapter IV. The editors have brought together a comprehensive record of the most important negotiations between the Western Powers and the Soviet Union during the crisis. The extensive consideration of the Berlin question in the United Nations is not documented in detail here in view of the availability of those discussions in the public record. Nor has it been possible to present here a record of the airlift and the political and economic events in Berlin resulting from the blockade. Documentary sources and authoritative studies have been identified in annotations and editorial notes at appropriate places in the chapter.

A brief review of principal printed sources and works on the administration of the United States zone of occupation in Germany is presented in Chapter V.

A selection of major policy statements on the overall German question is presented in Chapter VI. Rather than distribute portions of these large documents in the other substantive chapters of the volume, the editors have gathered them together in a separate chapter to enable the reader to examine contemporary syntheses of the issues. A similar statement of policy for Austria is presented in Chapter VII.

Chapters VIII and IX present an outline record of the meetings of the Deputies for Austria of the Council of Foreign Ministers during the spring of 1948 as well as selected materials on the major problems confronting the United States as an occupying power in Austria. The documentation of the transactions of forty-seven meetings of the Deputies for Austria is confined to principal policy statements by the Deputies and instructions to the United States Delegation. A comprehensive record of the quadripartite control mechanism for Austria has not been attempted. Instead, papers included are restricted to important expressions of the United States policies aimed at achieving political stability and economic rehabilitation in Austria.

Unpublished Sources

The principal source of papers included in this volume is the indexed Central Files of the Department of State. Numerous important collections of documents, however, have been retained in special files outside of the Central Files. In addition, missions abroad have accumulated file collections of their own which have eventually been returned to Washington for maintenance by the Department of State. The most important of these collections of special files used in preparing this volume are as follows: 1. CFM Files (Lot M–88)—This special consolidated file of 249 boxes is the Department of State’s principal collection of papers relating to all aspects of the activities of the Council of Foreign Ministers and the antecedents of Council meetings. It includes the most complete collections of the records of the Deputies for Austria, the papers of the London Conference on Germany, the London Conference on the Ruhr, and the various negotiations and meetings on the Occupation Statute, the Ruhr, frontier rectification, reparations, and prohibited industries.

2. Policy Planning Staff Files (Lot 64D563)—These files include the most comprehensive collection of the papers and records of the Policy Planning Staff.

3. Executive Secretariat Files—These files include the principal collections of the papers and records and supporting documentation of the National Security Council as well as collections of the papers of the Policy Planning Staff. Also included are the Department’s collections of the classified publications Current Foreign Relations, Daily Summary, and Top Secret Daily Summary.

4. USPolAd Germany Files (Lots F–80 and F–169)—The files of the United States Political Adviser for Germany were subsequently included as a segment of the Frankfurt Consulate Files. These files are particularly important for their valuable chronological collections of Ambassador Murphy’s telegrams and letters and their subject files of papers collected by the Office, of the Political Adviser.

5. London Embassy Files (Lot 58FA7)—Messages and papers accumulated by the Embassy during the London Conference on Germany, the London Conference on the Ruhr, and London reparations conversations.

6. Moscow Embassy Files (Lot F–132)—These files include an important top secret chronological collection of messages exchanged by the Embassy during 1948 regarding the Berlin Crisis.

7. Paris Embassy Files (Lot 55FA3)—The top secret segment of these files for 1945–1949 contains important messages and communications exchanged between the Embassy and the French Foreign Ministry together with significant subject files on various German topics.

8. Vienna Legation Files (Lots 54F57 and 55F74)—Included in these papers are materials on various aspects of the United States occupation of Austria. The collection of communications of the United States High Commissioner is particularly valuable.

9. Bureau of Economic Affairs Files (Lot 54D361)—These files contain collections of papers of the Informal Working Group on the International Control of the Ruhr and a collection of the Department’s classified publication Current Economic Developments.

10. News Division Files—The principal repository for complete sets of the press and radio conferences of the Secretary of State and the press releases of the Department of State.

Published Sources

In addition to the Foreign Relations of the United States volumes and the Department of State Bulletin, the volumes listed below were found to be of particular value in the preparation of this volume. Other publications consulted by the editors are identified in editorial notes and footnotes.

Berlin (West), Senate, Berlin: Quellen und Dokumente 1945–1951 (Berlin: Heinz Spitzing Verlag, 1964), 2 vols. Hereafter cited as “Berlin Senate, Berlin, Quellen und Dokumente”.

British Cmd. 7534, Germany No. 2 (1948): Germany: An Account of the Events Leading up to a Reference of the Berlin Question to the United Nations, 11th October, 1948. Hereafter cited as “Cmd. 7534”.

Margaret Carlyle (ed.), Documents on International Affairs 1947–1948, Issued under the auspices of the Royal Institute of International Affairs (London, New York, Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1952). Hereafter cited as “Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs”.

Lucius D. Clay, Decision in Germany (Garden City, New York: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1950). Hereafter cited as “Clay, Decision in Germany”.

Raymond Dennett and Robert K. Turner, Documents on American Foreign Relations, Volume X, January 1–December 31, 1948, Published for the World Peace Foundation (Princeton University Press, 1950). Hereafter cited as “Documents on American Foreign Relations”.

Wolfgang Heidelmeyer and Guenter Hindrichs (eds.), Documents on Berlin 1948–1963, Issued under the auspices of the Forschungsinstitut der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Auswärtige Politik (München: R. Oldenbourg Verlag, 1963). Hereafter cited as “Documents on Berlin”.

Edward H. Litchfield and Associates, Governing Postwar Germany (Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 1953). Hereafter cited as “Litchfield, Governing Postwar Germany”.

Walter Millis (ed.), The Forrestal Diaries (New York: The Viking Press, 1951). Hereafter cited as “Forrestal Diaries”.

Office of Military Government for Germany (US), Civil Administration Division, Documents on the Creation of the German Federal Constitution, 1 September 1949. Hereafter cited as “Documents on the Creation of the German Federal Constitution”.

Office of Military Government for Germany (US), Documented Chronology of Political Developments Regarding Germany (Berlin: 1948). Hereafter cited as “Documented Chronology”.

Polish Embassy in London, Press Office, Poland, Germany and European Peace: Official Documents 1944–1948 (London: Polish Embassy, n.d.). Hereafter cited as “Poland, Germany and European Peace”.

Beate Ruhm von Oppen (ed.), Documents on Germany Under Occupation 1945–1954, Issued under the auspices of the Royal Institute of International Affairs (London, New York, Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1955). Hereafter cited as “Ruhm von Oppen, Documents on Germany”.

Walter Bedell Smith, Moscow Mission 1946–1949 (New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1956). Hereafter cited as “Smith, Moscow Mission”.

Soviet Union, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, The Soviet Union and the Berlin Question (Documents) (Moscow: 1948). Hereafter cited as “The Soviet Union and the Berlin Question”. [The Russian language edition of this work contains the original Russian texts of Soviet notes presented to the United States during the Berlin crisis.]

Harry S. Truman, Memoirs, Volume Two, Years of Trial and Hope (Garden City, New York: Doubleday & Company, 1956). Hereafter cited as “Truman, Years of Trial and Hope”.

United States, Department of State, Germany 1941–1949: The Story in Documents (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1950). Hereafter cited as “Germany 1941–1949”.

United States, Department of State, The Berlin, Crisis: A Report on the Moscow Discussions 1948 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1948). Hereafter cited as “The Berlin Crisis”.

List of Abbreviations and Symbols List of Abbreviations and Symbols

Editor’s Note.—This list does not include standard abbreviations in common usage; unusual abbreviations of rare occurrence which are clarified at appropriate points; and those abbreviations and contractions which, although uncommon, are understandable from the context.

AC, Allied Council for Austria

ACA, Allied Control Authority for Germany

ACC, Allied Control Council for Germany

AMG, American Military Government

Ausdel, series indicator for telegrams to the U.S. Delegation for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers

BICO, Bipartite Control Office

CAD, Civil Administration Division, Office of Military Government (U.S.)

CDU, Christian Democratic Union, West German political party

CE, Division of Central European Affairs, Department of State

CFM, Council of Foreign Ministers

CGG(B.E.), Control Group Germany (British Element)

CINCEUR, Commander in Chief, European Command

CSCAD, symbol for Civil Affairs Division, Department of the Army

CSU, Christian Social Union, West German political party

CTK, Czechoslovak Press Bureau

DDSG, Donaudampfschiffahrtsgesellschaft (Danube Shipping Company)

Delaus, series indicator for telegrams from the U.S. Delegation for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers

Delga, series indicator for telegrams from the United States delegation to the United Nations sent via Embassy Paris

Delsec, series indicator for telegrams from United States Delegations at various overseas conferences concerned with the German and Austrian peace settlements

Depinfotel, Department information telegram

Deps, Deputies

Deptel, Department telegram

DM, Deutsche Mark

E, Office of the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs

EAC, European Advisory Commission

ECA, Economic Cooperation Administration

ECATO, series indicator for telegrams from the Economic Cooperation Administration in Washington to its missions abroad

ECE, Economic Commission for Europe, United Nations

EE, Division of Eastern European Affairs, Department of State

Embtel, Embassy telegram

EP, Division of Economic Property Policy, Department of State

ERP, European Recovery Program

ETO, European Trade Organization

EUCOM, European Command, United States Army

EUR, Office of European Affairs, Department of State

FDGB, Free German Trade Union League

FDP, Free Democratic Party, West German political party

FMP, Frankfurt (German) Military Post

FMPC, series indicator for military messages from Frankfurt

FN, Division of Financial Affairs, Department of State

FonOff, Foreign Office

G, Assistant Secretary of State Armour

GA, General Assembly of the United Nations

Gadel, series indicator for telegrams sent to United States Delegation to the United Nations via Embassy Paris

GARIOA, Government and Relief in Occupied Areas

GATT, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

Gerdel, series indicator for telegrams to the United States Delegation at the London Conference on Germany

IAR, International Authority for the Ruhr

IARA, Inter Allied Reparation Agency

ICD, Information Control Division, OMGUS

ICR–D, document designation for papers prepared by or emanating from the Informal Working Group on the International Control of the Ruhr

intel, circular information telegram

ITO, International Trade Organization

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

JEIA, Joint Export-Import Agency (U.S.–U.K. Zones of Occupation in Germany)

JFEA, Joint Foreign Exchange Agency (U.S.–U.K. Zones of Occupation of Germany)

KPD, Communist Party of Germany

L, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

LDP, Liberal Democratic Party, German political party

Legtel, Legation telegram

MA, Military Attaché

Martel, series indicator for telegrams from the Secretary of State while en mission abroad

MG, Military Governor or Government

MGMP, Document designation for papers prepared in connection with meetings between the U.S., U.K. and French Military Governors and the Ministers President of the Western zones of occupation

MILGOV, Military Governor (or Military government)

Mil Sec Board, Military Security Board

MinPres, Minister President (or Ministers President)

MP, Minister President (German)

MRP, Mouvement républicain populaire, French Catholic progressive party

MSB, Military Security Board

mytel, my telegram

Niact, night action telegram; communications indicator requiring attention by the recipient at any hour of the day or night

NSC, National Security Council

O, Office of the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas

OE, Division of Occupied Areas Affairs, Department of State

OEEC, Organization for European Economic Cooperation

OFD, Office of Financial and Development Policy, Department of State

OMGUS, Office of Military Government in Germany (U.S.)

ourad, our radio message

ourtel, our telegram

P, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs

POL, Petroleum, Oil, Lubricants

PolAd, Political Adviser

PPS, Policy Planning Staff

PRL, Parti républicain de la liberté, a minor conservative French political party

refmytel, reference my telegram

reftel, reference telegram

reourads, regarding our radio message

Reps, Representatives

RepSec, series indicator for telegrams from the Special Representative in Europe for the E.C.A. to the Secretary of State

Repto, series indicator for telegrams from the mission of the U.S. Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration

reurad, regarding your radio message

reurniact, regarding your night-action telegram

reurtel, regarding your telegram

Ruhrto, series indicator for telegrams from London regarding the London Conference on the Ruhr, November–December 1948

SANACC, State – Army – Navy – Air Force Coordinating Committee

SC, Security Council of the United Nations

Secdel, series indicator for telegrams to United States Delegations at various overseas conferences and meetings concerned with the German and Austrian peace settlements

SED, Socialist Unity Party in Germany; the Communist Party in East Germany

SMA, Soviet Military Administration in Germany

SMAD, See SMA

SPD, German Social Democratic Party

S/S, Executive Secretariat, Department of State

SWNCC, State–War–Navy Coordinating Committee

SYG, Secretary-General of the United Nations

TANJUG, Telegraph Agency of New Yugoslavia

TASS, Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union

telecon, telecommunication conference

Telmar, series indicator for telegrams to the Secretary of State while en mission abroad

ToRuhr, series indicator for telegrams to London regarding the London Conference on the Ruhr, November–December 1948

UDSR, Union démocratique et socialiste de la résistance, a minor French political party

UKDel, United Kingdom Delegation

UN, United Nations

UNO, United Nations Organization

urtel, your telegram

USDel, United States Delegation

USFA, U.S. Forces in Austria

USIA, Administration for Soviet Property in Austria

USMA, United States Military Attaché

USPolAd, United States Political Adviser for Germany

VDGB, Association for Peasants’ Mutual Aid

Warx, indicator for message originated by the Department of the Army

WE, Division of Western European Affairs, Department of State

WEEKA, weekly telegraphic summary report prepared by a mission on political, military, and economic matters in a country

WX, see Warx

Zentrum, Center Party (in Western Germany)

List of Persons List of Persons

Editor’s Note: The identification of the persons in this list is generally limited to circumstances and positions under reference in this volume. Historical personages alluded to in the volume and certain minor officials are not identified here. All titles and positions are American unless there is an indication to the contrary. A dagger (†) indicates participation in the London Conference on Germany, either at the first part, February 23–March 6 or at the resumed session, April 20–June 1. An asterisk (*) indicates participation in the London Conferences on the Ruhr, November–December. A double dagger (‡) indicates participation in the meetings of the Deputies for Austria of the Council of Foreign Ministers.

Achilles, Theodore C., Chief, Division of Western European Affairs, Department of State

Acker, Heinrich, Deputy Mayor (Buergermeister) of Berlin; member of Socialist Unity Party

Adams, Ware, member, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State

Adcock, Clarence L., United States Chairman, Bipartite (U.S.–U.K.) Control Office

Adenauer, Dr. Konrad, Chairman of the Christian Democratic Union (GDU) in the British Zone of Occupation of Germany; President of the Parliamentary Council

†* Alphand, Hervé, Director General for Economic Affairs, French Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Altenberger, Erwin, Austrian Minister without Portfolio

Altmeier, Peter, Minister President, Rheinland-Pfalz

Anderson, Clinton P., Secretary of Agriculture, until May 1948

Andronikof, Constantin, official translator, French Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Appelt, Rudolf, Vice President of the German Central Administration for Inter-Zonal and Foreign Trade

Armour, Norman, Assistant of Secretary of State for Political Affairs, until July 1948

Arnold, Karl, Minister President of North Rhine Westphalia; leader in the Christian Democratic Union

Auriol, Vincent, President of the French Republic

Austin, Warren R., United States Representative at the United Nations

Babcock, Col. William, United States Deputy Commandant for Berlin

Bapst, Brigadier General Charles, Deputy Chief of the French Group, Control Council, Allied Control Authority for Germany

Baruch, Herman B., United States Ambassador in the Netherlands

Barnes, Ernest J. W., Second Secretary, British Embassy in the United States

Baudet, Philippe, French Minister Counselor in the United Kingdom

Baumis, Frank J., member of the Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations

Beam, Jacob D., Chief, Division of Central European Affairs, Department of State

Beattie, Edward W., Special Advisor, Headquarters United States Forces in Austria

Beaulieu , See Leroy Beaulieu, Paul

Bech, Joseph, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg

Becker, Dr. Max, member of the Hesse Landtag; Chairman of the Electoral Law Committee of the Parliamentary Council; member of the LDP

Bennett, Jack, Finance Adviser, Office of Military Government (United States Zone)

Bérard, Armand, Minister Counselor, French Embassy in the United States

Béthouart, Lieutenant General M. E., French High Commissioner in Austria

Bevin, Ernest, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs

Bidault, Georges, French Minister for Foreign Affairs, until July 1948

Bischoff, Norbert, Austrian Political Representative in the Soviet Union

Bissell, Major General Clayton L., Military Attaché and Military Air Attaché at the United States Embassy in the United Kingdom

Blaisdell, Thomas C., Jr., Acting Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Foreign and Domestic Commerce

Blum, Leon, leader of the French Socialist Party; former Prime Minister, 1936–1937, 1938, December 1946–January 1947

Boch, Lorenz, State President of Wuerrtemberg-Hohenzollern (died August 3, 1948)

Boehm, Dr. Johann, President, Austrian Trade Union Federation

Bohlen, Charles E., Counselor of the Department of State

† Bolton, Kenyon C., Division of International Conferences, Department of State

Bonbright, James C. H., Counselor of the United States Embassy in France

Bonnefous, Edouard, Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the French National Assembly; member of the Union democratique et socialiste de la résistance

Bonnet, Henri, French Ambassador in the United States

Bourbon-Busset, Jacques de, Deputy Chief, Division of Southern Europe, French Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Boyer de Fonscolombe, André, Attaché, French Embassy in the Soviet Union

Bradley, General Omar N., Chief of Staff, United States Army

Bramuglia, Juan Atilio, Acting President of the United Nations Security Council, Third Session, Paris

Brannan, Charles F., Secretary of Agriculture

Brauer, Max, Oberbuergermeister of Hamburg; member of the Foreign Policy Committee of the German Social Democratic Party (SPD)

Bridges, Styles, Senator from New Hampshire; Chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee

Brill, Hermann Louis, State Secretary of the Hesse State Ministry and Chief of the State Chancellery

* Brown, Benjamin H., Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

Browne, Mallory, Counselor, United States Embassy in the United Kingdom

Brownjohn, Major General N.C.D., Chief of Staff and Deputy Military Governor, Control Commission for Germany (British Element); U.K. member on the Committee on Allied Controls

Bruce, Howard, Deputy Administrator, Economic Cooperation Administration

Bruins, John H., Counselor of the United States Embassy in Czechoslovakia

Budd, Ralph, President, Burlington Rock Island Railroad

Butler, George, member, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State

Cadogan, Sir Alexander, British Representative to the United Nations Security Council

Caffery, Jefferson, United States Ambassador in France

Carbonnel, Eric de, Deputy Director, Office of Economic and Financial Affairs, French Ministry for Foreign Affairs, until March 1948

Carter, Marshall S., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

Chamberlin, Lieutenant General Stephen J., Director of Intelligence, General Staff, U.S. Army

Chapman, Oscar L., Under Secretary of the Interior

Chaput de Saintonge, R. A., British Military Government in Germany; U.K. member on the Tripartite Committee on the Occupation Statute

Chase, Warren M., on the staff of the United States Political Adviser for Germany

Chataigneau, Yves Jean Joseph, French Ambassador in the Soviet Union

Chauvel, Jean, Secretary General of the French Ministry for Foreign Affairs

‡ Cherrière, Major General Paul, French Deputy High Commissioner in Austria and Representative to the Austrian Treaty Negotiations

Churchill, Winston, former British Prime Minister and Minister of Defence, 1940–1945; leader of the British Conservative Party

Clappier, Bernard, Director of the Cabinet, French Ministry for Foreign Affairs

†* Clasen, André, Luxembourg Minister in the United Kingdom

† Clay, General Lucius Dubignon, United States Military Governor for Germany and Commander-in-Chief, European Command

Collins, General Joseph Lawton, Deputy Chief of Staff, U.S. Army

Collisson, Captain Norman H., Special Assistant to the Secretary of the Interior; member of the Working Group on Reparations; Chairman of the Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations; E.C.A. Representative in Western Germany from September 1948

Conklin, William G., Division of Western European Affairs, Department of State

† Couve de Murville, Maurice, Director General for Political Affairs, French Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Cullis, M. F., Head of the Austrian Section, German Political Department, British Foreign Office

Dahrendorf, Gustav, Vice President of the Economic Council in the U.S.–U.K. zones of occupation of Germany

Daspit, Alexander B., United States Deputy Delegate to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency; Delegate from October 8, 1948

Davies, John Paton, Jr., member, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State

† Dean, Patrick H., Head of the German Political Department, British Foreign Office

De Gasperi, Alcide, Italian Prime Minister

de Gaulle, Major General Charles, leader of the Rassemblement du peuple français; former President of the French Provisional Government, 1944–1946

Deutsch, General Julius, Socialist Party, Military Representative of the Austrian Socialist Party on the Bipartite Committee for future Austrian Army

deWilde, John C., Associate Chief, Division of Occupied Areas Economic Affairs, Department of State

Dhur, Lieutenant, on the staff of the Luxembourg Military Mission in Germany

Diedrichs, Dr. Georg, member of the Lower Saxony Landtag; delegate to the Parliamentary Council; member of the SPD

Dorr, Russell H., United States Delegate to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency, with the rank of Minister to October 7, 1948

†* Douglas, Lewis W., United States Ambassador in the United Kingdom

Draper, William H., Jr., Under Secretary of the Army

Dratvin, Lieutenant General Mikhail Ivanovich, Deputy Commander in Chief, Soviet Military Administration for Germany

Dulles, John Foster, Republican Party expert on international affairs; member of the United States delegation to United Nations meetings

Dunn, James C., Ambassador in Italy

Eaton, Charles A., Representative from New Jersey; Chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee and House Select Committee on Foreign Aid

Edelstein, Commander Julius C. C., Acting Special Adviser to the Secretary of State on Reparations, February to June 1948; Executive Secretary of the Working Group of the Cabinet Committee on Reparations

Eden, Anthony, leader of the British Conservative Party; former Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, 1941–1945

Ehard, Dr. Hans, Minister President of Bavaria; leader in the Christian Socialist Union

Ehlert, Margarete, Berlin City Councillor (Stadtrat), member of Christian Democratic Union

Eichler, Willy, member from North Rhine-Westphalia of the Executive Committee of the German Social Democratic Party (SPD)

Elbrick, C. Burke, Assistant Chief, Division of Eastern European Affairs, Department of State

‡ Erhardt, John G., United States Minister in Austria

Erofeev , see Yerofeyev, Vladimir Yakovlevich

Evatt, Herbert V., Australian Minister for External Affairs; President of the General Assembly of the United Nations, Third Session, Paris

Falck, Edward, consulting engineer; member of the Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations

Feller, Abraham H., General Counsel and Director, Legal Department, U.N. Secretariat

Fierlinger, Zdenek, member, Executive Commission, Czechoslovak Social Democrat Party

Figl, Leopold, Austrian Chancellor, leader of the People’s Party

Fllippi, Jean, Director General of Economy and Finance, Military Government of the French Zone of Occupation in Germany

Finletter, Thomas K., Minister, Chief of the Mission for Economic Cooperation Administration at the Embassy in London

Fischer, Ernst, member, Executive Committee, Austrian Communist Party

Forest, Alexander, Chief, Secretariat Branch, Civil Administration Division, OMGUS

Forrestal, James V., Secretary of Defense

François-Poncet, André, Special Representative for German Affairs of the French Ministry for Foreign Affairs, from November 1948

Franks, Sir Oliver S., British Ambassador in the United States, from May 1948

Friedensburg, Dr. Ferdinand, Deputy Mayor (Buergermeister) of Berlin; leader of the Christian Democratic Union in Berlin

Friedrich, Carl J., Governmental Affairs Adviser, Office of Military Government (U.S.)

Fulbright, J. William, Senator from Arkansas; member of the Banking and Currency and Judiciary Committees

Gallman, Waldemar J., Counselor of the United States Embassy in the United Kingdom, until July 1948; from July 1948, Ambassador in Poland

Galloway, Lt. Gen. Alexander, British High Commissioner in Austria

Ganeval, Brigadier General Jean, French Commandant for Berlin

Gannett, Michael R., Second Secretary United States Legation in Austria

Gantenbein, James W., Foreign Service officer, Office of the United States Political Adviser for Germany

Geier, Frederick V., President, Cincinnati Milling Machine Company; member of the E.C.A. Industrial Advisory Committee

* Gerard, Olivier, Belgian Acting Deputy Director General for External Trade

Giesl-Gieslingen, Adolf, Counselor of Austrian Federal Ministry of Commerce and Reconstruction

Ginsburg, Charles David, U.S. Deputy Representative to the Austrian Treaty Commission in 1947

† Goethals, Lieutenant General Georges, Chief of the Belgian Military Mission in Germany

Graf, Ferdinand, Austrian State Secretary and Secretary General of the People’s Party

Graf, Julius, Chief Engineer, Jones and Laughlin Steel Corporation; member of the Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations

Gregory, Sir Henry, Administrator of Enemy Property, British Board of Trade

Griffis, Stanton, United States Ambassador in Poland, July 1947–June 1948

* Gros, André, Legal Adviser, French Ministry for Foreign Affairs

† Gruben, Baron Hervé de, Secretary General of the Belgian Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Gruber, Dr. Karl, Austrian Foreign Minister

Guiringaud, Louis de, First Secretary, French Embassy in the United Kingdom

Guillaume, Baron Jules, Belgian Ambassador in France

Gurney, Chan, Senator from South Dakota; Chairman of the Senate Armed Forces Committee

Haas, Dr. Friedrich, Berlin City Councillor (Stadtrat), Director, Finance Department, Berlin Magistrat

† Hall-Patch, Sir Edmund Leo, Deputy Under-Secretary of State, British Foreign Office, May 1946–April 1948; from April 1948, Permanent United Kingdom Representative on the Organization for European Economic Cooperation

* Hannaman, Forrest G., Special Assistant for Policy Coordination, OMGUS: Adviser, U.S. Delegation, London Conference on the Ruhr

Harriman, W. Averell, Secretary of Commerce until April 22, 1948; from April 26, 1948, United States Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration, with the rank of Ambassador

Harris, David, Professor of History at Stanford University; former Assistant Chief, Division of Central European Affairs, Department of State (in 1947); U.S. Representative on the Six-Power Working Party on Provisional Adjustment of the Western Frontier of Germany, July–September 1948

Harrison, G. W., British Minister in the Soviet Union

Harvey, Sir Oliver Charles, British Ambassador in France

Haviland, Dennis W. G. L., Head of the German General Economic Department British Foreign Office

Hayden, Carl, U.S. Senator from Arizona

Hays, Major General George P., Commanding General, OMGUS, and Deputy United States Military Governor for Germany

Heine, Fritz, member of the Executive Committee, Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD)

* Heisbourg, Georges, Secretary, Luxembourg Legation in the United Kingdom

Helmer, Oscar, Austrian Minister of Interior

Hemmendinger, Noel, Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas

Henderson , Lord (William Watson Henderson), Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State, British Foreign Office

Henderson, Loy W., Director, Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs, Department of State

Hendrick, James P., Special Assistant to the Deputy Administrator, Economic Cooperation Administration (Bruce); Executive Secretary of the E.C.A. Industrial Advisory Committee

Herbert, Major General E. O., British Commandant for Berlin

Herz, Martin F., Third Secretary of the United States Legation in Austria

Hickerson, John D., Director, Office of European Affairs, Department of State

Hilliard, Charles C., Office of the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas

Hirschfeld, H. M., Commissioner for German Affairs, Netherlands Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Hodges, Major General James P., Director, Armed Forces Division, OMGUS: U.S. member of the Military Security Board

Hoepker-Aschoff, Dr. Hermann, representative of the Free Democratic Party in the Parliamentary Council

Hoffman, Paul, Administrator, Economic Cooperation Administration

Holmes, Julius C., Counselor of the United States Embassy in the United Kingdom

* Holvoet, Amaury, First Secretary, Belgian Embassy in the United Kingdom

Howley, Colonel Frank, United States Commandant for Berlin

Humelsine, Carlisle H., Director, Executive Secretariat, Department of State

Humphrey, Donald D., Deputy Economic Adviser to the U.S. Military Governor for Germany

Humphrey, George M., President, M. A. Hanna Company; Chairman, Industrial Advisory Committee to the E.C.A.

Igler, Hans, Member Austrian Federal Ministry of Property Control and Economic Planning

Inverchapel , Lord (Archibald John Kerr Clark Kerr), British Ambassador in the United States until May 1948

* Jackson, Wayne G., Special Assistant to the Director, Office of European Affairs, Department of State

Jamieson, Kenneth D., German Political Department, British Foreign Office

Jessup, Phillip, Deputy United States Representative to the United Nations Security Council and United States Delegate to the United Nations General Assembly, Third Regular Session, Paris, with the rank of Ambassador

Kaisen, Wilhelm, President of the Senate, Bremen; member of the Executive Committee of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD)

Keith, Gerald, Counselor of the United States Embassy in the United Kingdom

Kennan, George F., Director, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State

‡ Keyes, Lieutenant General Geoffrey, United States High Commissioner in Austria

Kirk, Admiral Alan G., United States Ambassador in Belgium

Kirkpatrick, Sir Ivone, Assistant Secretary of State, British Foreign Office, August 1948–April 1948; Deputy Under-Secretary of State from April 1948; Superintending Under-Secretary of the German Educational, Internal, and Political Departments and of the Western Department

‡ Kiselev, Evgeniy Dmitriyevich, Political Adviser to the Soviet High Commissioner for Austria; Soviet Political Representative in Austria

Kiridus, Franz, Austrian Police official

Kleinwaechter, Dr. Ludwig, Austrian Minister in the United States

Klingelhoefer, Gustav, Berlin City Councillor (Stadtrat); leader in the SPD

Knapp, Joseph B., Director, Office of Financial and Development Policy, Department of State

Koenig, General of Army Pierre, French Commander-in-Chief for Germany; French member of the Allied Control Council for Germany

Koehler, Erich, President of the Economic Council (Wirtschaftsrats) of the U.S.–U.K. Zones of Occupation of Germany

Kohler, Foy D., Counselor of the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Kohnstamm, M., Deputy Administration Commissioner for German Affairs, Netherlands Ministry for Foreign Affairs

‡ Koktomov, Nikolai Petrovich, Counselor, Soviet Embassy in the United Kingdom

Kolarov, Vasil, Bulgarian Minister for Foreign Affairs; member of the Politburo of the Bulgarian Communist Party

Kopf, Hinrich Wilhelm, Minister President of Lower Saxony

Koptelov, Mikhail Efremovich, Deputy Political Adviser to the Soviet High Commissioner in Austria

Kosanović, Sava N., Yugoslav Ambassador in the United States

Kotikov, Major General Alexander G., Soviet Commandant for Berlin; Soviet member on Allied Kommandatura for Berlin

Kroll, Dr. Gerhard, Landrat in Staffelstein (Upper Franconia); member of the Bavarian Landtag; delegate to the Parliamentary Council; member of the CSU

Krug, Julius A., Secretary of the Interior

Kurasov, Colonel General Vladimir Vasilyevich, Soviet High Commissioner in Austria and Commander in Chief, Soviet Forces in Austria

Laboulaye , see Lefebvre de Laboulaye, François

La Follette, Robert M., Jr., Senator from Wisconsin, 1925—1947

Laloy, Jean, French Commissariat for German and Austrian Affairs

Lausmann, Bohumil, leader in the Czechoslovak Social Democratic Party

Lefebvre de Laboulaye, François, French General Commissariat for German and Austrian Affairs

Le May, Lieutenant General Curtis, Commanding General, United States Air Force in Europe

Leonard, Major General John W., Military Attaché at the United States Embassy in the United Kingdom

Leopold, Rudolf, Head of the Austrian Aid Office

* Leroy Beaulieu, Paul, Economic and Financial Adviser, French High Command in Germany

†‡ Leusse, Pierre de, Chief, German-Austrian Section, French Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Lewis, Geoffrey W., Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas

Lie, Trygve Halvdan, Secretary-General of the United Nations

Liebitzky, General Emil, People’s Party Military Representative on Bipartite Committee for future Austrian Army

† Lightneb, Edwin Allan, Jr., Associate Chief, Division of Central European Affairs, Department of State

Linebaugh, John David, Attaché, United States Embassy in the United Kingdom

† Litchfield, Edward, Director, Civil Administration Division, Office of Military Government for Germany (U.S.)

Loridan, Walter, Assistant Secretary General of the Belgian Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Lovett, Robert A., Under Secretary of State

‡ Luc, Robert, First Secretary, French Embassy in the United Kingdom

Lucas, Scott W., Senator from Illinois; member of the Agriculture and Forestry and Finance Committees

Ludwig, Edward, Chairman, Austrian Parliamentary Committee for Foreign Affairs

Luebbe, Erich, Berlin City Councillor (Stadtrat); member of Socialist Unity Party

Luedemann, Hermann, Minister President of Schleswig-Holstein; leader in the German Social Democratic Party (SPD)

Lukyanchenko, Lieutenant General G. S., Chief of Staff, Soviet Military Administration in Germany

Lunghi, H. A., Third Secretary, British Embassy in the Soviet Union

* Luns, Joseph M. A. H., First Secretary, Netherlands Embassy in the United Kingdom

Macready, Sir Gordon, British Chairman, Bipartite (U.S.–U.K.) Control Office; Director, Frankfurt Headquarters, British Military Government Organization

Maier, Dr. Reinhold, Minister President of Wuerttemberg-Baden

Makins, Roger M., Assistant Under-Secretary of State, British Foreign Office, February 1947–April 1948; Deputy Under-Secretary of State from April 1948; Superintending Under-Secretary of the Economic Intelligence and General Departments

Marek, Anton, Chief Police Inspector, Austrian Ministry of Interior

* Margolies, Daniel F., Acting Chief, Central European Branch, Division of Investment and Economic Development, Department of State; Adviser, U. S. Delegation, London Conference on the Ruhr

*‡ Marjoribanks, James A. M., Assistant Head, German Political Department, British Foreign Office

Marie, Andre, French Prime Minister, July–September 1948; Minister of Justice, January 1947–July 1948; leader in the French Radical Party

Markgraf, Paul, Berlin Police President until July 1948

Maron, Karl, Chairman, S. E. D. group in the Berlin City Assembly

Marshall, George C., Secretary of State

† Martin, Edwin M., Acting Chief, Division of Occupied Areas Economic Affairs, Department of State

† Massigli, René, French Ambassador in the United Kingdom

Mather, Major Walter E., Office of Secretary General of OMGUS; United States Secretary, Bipartite (U.S.–U.K.) Secretariat

Mayer, René, French Minister of Finance from November 1947, to July 1948; from July 1948, Minister of Defence; member of French Radical Party

McCaffrey, John L., President, International Harvester Co.; member of the Industrial Advisory Committee, E. C. A.

McDermott, Michael J., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State (Press Relations)

McNarney, General Joseph R., United States Member of the Allied Control Council for Germany, 1945–1947

McNeil, Hector, British Minister of State; Representative to the United Nations General Assembly

Manzel, Dr. Walter, Minister of the Interior in North Rhine-Westphalia; leader in the German Social Democratic Party; representative in the Parliamentary Council

* Merode, Prince Werner de, Second Secretary, Belgian Embassy in the United Kingdom

† Michiels van Verduynen , Jonkeer Edgar, Netherlands Ambassador in the United Kingdom

Migsch, Dr. Alfred, Austrian Minister of Power

Millard, Hugh, Counselor of the United States Embassy in Belgium

Moch, Jules, French Minister of Interior from November 1947 to February 1950; a leader in the French Socialist Party

Modzelewski, Zygmunt, Polish Minister for Foreign Affairs

Molotov, Vyacheslav Mikhailovich, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union

Mueller, Gebhard, Minister President of Wuerttemberg-Hohenzollern, from August 1948

Mueller, Dr. Josef, Deputy Minister President of Bavaria; Chairman of the Christian Social Union

† Murphy, Robert D., United States Political Adviser for Germany, with the rank of Ambassador

Murville , See Couve de Murville

Myers, Robert, technical consultant to the Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations

* Nelson, Saul, Economic Cooperation Administration

Neumann, Franz, member from Berlin of the Executive Committee of the German (Social Democratic Party (SPD)

Nicholas, Harry I., stockbroker; Economic Adviser to U.S. Representative (Harris) on the Six-Power Working Party on Provisional Adjustment of the Western Frontier of Germany, July–September 1948

†* Nicholls, John W., Head of the German Commercial Relations and Industry Department, British Foreign Office

Nitze, Paul H., Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs

Noblet d’Anglure, Jean de, French General Commissariat for German and Austrian Affairs

Noce, Major General Daniel, Chief, Civil Affairs Division, Special Staff, U.S. Army

Noiret, Lieutenant General Roger, Chief of the French Group, Control Council for Germany; French Representative on the Coordinating Committee of the Allied Control Authority for Germany

†* Obert de Thieusies , Vicomte Alain, Belgian Ambassador in the United Kingdom

Oechsner, Frederick C., Adviser to the Director, Office of Information and Educational Exchange, Department of State

Oliver, Covey T., Acting Chief, Division of Economic Property Policy, Department of State

Ollenhauer, Erich, First Deputy Chairman, Executive Committee, German Social Democratic Party (SPD)

†* Oppenheimer, Fritz E., Special Assistant to the Legal Adviser, Department of State, until July 1948; Consultant to the Department of State, November–December 1948

Ottillinger, Margarethe, Chief of Planning Sections, Austrian Ministry of Property Control and Economic Planning

Panafieu, François de, Chief, Division of Technical Agreements, Office of Economic and Financial Affairs, French Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Panuch, J. Anthony, Special Adviser to General Clay

Panyushkin, Alexander Semyonovich, Soviet Ambassador in the United States

† Paris, Jacques-Camille, Director of European Political Affairs, French Ministry for Foreign Affairs

* Parisot, Georges Louis, Adviser, French Ministry of Industry and Commerce

Parker, Lieutenant Colonel Theodore W., Plans and Operations Division, General Staff, U.S. Army; on temporary duty in London, February–March 1948

Parodi, Alexandre, French Representative to the United Nations Security Council

Pauley, Edwin W., Special Adviser to the Secretary of State on Reparations

Pavlov, Vladimir Nikolayevich, Counselor of the Soviet Embassy in the United Kingdom

Pearson, Lester B., Canadian Alternate Representative to the United Nations Security Council

Penson, Hubert, Adviser on German Affairs, British Embassy in the United States

* Perrineau, Georges, Director of Mines, French Ministry of Industry and Commerce

Peterson, Sir Maurice Drummond, British Ambassador in the Soviet Union

Pfeiffer, Anton, Chief of the Bavarian State Chancellory; leader in the Christian Social Union (CSU)

Philip, André, Socialist party delegate in French National Assembly

Prawin, Major General Jakub, Chief, Polish Military Mission in Germany

Price, Gwilym A., President, Westinghouse Electric Corporation; member of the E.C.A. Industrial Advisory Committee

Raab, Julius, People’s Party Whip in Austrian Parliament

Rawlings, Thomas, Department of State representative on the Cabinet Technical Committee (for Reparations)

†‡ Reber, Samuel, Deputy Director, Office of European Affairs, Department of State

Reimann, Max, Chairman of the German Communist Party (KPD) in the Western Zones of Germany; delegate to the Bonn Parliamentary Council

Reinhardt, G. Frederick, Chief, Division of Eastern European Affairs, Department of State

Reinstein, Jacques J., Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs

Renner, Dr. Karl, President of the Republic of Austria

Reuter, Dr. Ernst, leader of the German Social Democratic Party and member of the Berlin Magistrat

Reynaud, Paul, leader of the French Republican Independent Party; delegate to the National Assembly and former Prime Minister (1940)

† Riddleberger, James W., Counselor of the Mission of the United States Political Adviser for Germany at Berlin; Director of the Office of Political Affairs, Office of Military Government for Germany (OMGUS)

Roberts, Frank, Counselor of the British Embassy in Moscow, 1945–1947; Private Secretary to Foreign Secretary Bevin, 1948

† Robertson, Sir Brian H., British Military Governor for Germany and Commander-in-Chief, Control Commission for Germany (British Element)

Robinson, Hamlin, U.S. Deputy Delegate to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency (from October 1948)

Ross, Irving, with Economic Cooperation Administration in Austria

Royall, Kenneth C., Secretary of the Army

Rueff, Jacques, President, Inter-Allied Reparation Agency

Rusk, Dean, Director, Office of United Nations Affairs, Department of State

Sabatier, Maurice, Director General of Administrative Affairs, Military Government of the French Zone of Occupation in Germany

Sagmeister, Otto, Austrian Minister of Food

St. Hardouin , see Tarbé de Saint-Hardouin

Saintonge , see Chaput de Saintonge

* Salmon, Jean, Belgian Ministry for Foreign Affairs

† Saltzman, Charles E., Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas

Sargent, Sir Orme, Permanent Under-Secretary of State, British Foreign Office

Savage, Carlton, Secretary, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State

Sawyer, Charles, Secretary of Commerce, from May 1948

Schaerf, Dr. Adolf, Austrian Vice Chancellor

Schlange-Schoeningen, Dr. Hans, Director of the Food and Agriculture Agency, Bizonal (U.S.-U.K.) Economic Administration

Schmid, Carlo, Deputy Minister President and Minister of Justice in Wuerttemberg-Hohenzollern; Chairman of the German Social Democratic Party (SPD) in Wuerttemberg-Hohenzollern; representative in the Parliamentary Council and Chairman of its Main Committee

Schmidt, Waldemar Paul, Berlin City Councillor (Stadtrat); member of Socialist Unity Party

Schneiter, Pierre, French Secretary of State, Commissioner General for German and Austrian Affairs

Schoenfelder, Adolf, President of the Hamburg Buergerschaft; leader of the Social Democratic Party (SPD); Vice President of the Bonn Parliamentary Council

Schboeder, Frau Louise, Acting Oberbuergermeister of Berlin

Schumacher, Dr. Kurt, Chairman of the Executive Committee of the German Social Democratic Party (SPD)

Schuman, Robert, French Prime Minister, November 1947–July 1948 and September 1948; Minister for Foreign Affairs from July 1948; leader in the Mouvement Républicain Populaire

Searls, Fred, Jr., Adviser to the Department of Defense

Seebohm, Dr. Hans Christoph, Minister of Labor, Reconstruction and Health in Lower Saxony; Deputy Chairman of the German Party; representative on the Parliamentary Council

Semmler, Dr. Johannes, Director of the Economic Agency (or Department of Economics) in the U.S.–U.K. zones of occupation in Germany until March 1948

† Seydoux Fornier de Clausonne, François, French General Commissariat for German and Austrian Affairs

Seynaeve, Fernand, Minister in the Belgian Military Mission in Germany

Sforza, Count Carlo, Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs

Silvercruys, Baron, Belgian Ambassador in the United States

Simons, Dr. Hans, Chief, Governmental Structures Branch, Civil Affairs Division, OMGUS

Smirnov, Andrey Andreyevich, Chief, Third European Division, Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union

Smith, Waiter Bedell, United States Ambassador in the Soviet Union

Sobolev, Arkady Alexandrovich, United Nations Assistant Secretary-General in Charge of Security Council Affairs

Sokolovsky , Marshal of the Soviet Union Vasiliy Danilovich, Chief of the Soviet Military Administration for Germany; Soviet Representative on the Allied Control Council for Germany

‡ Southam, Alexander W., Director, Economic Group, British Element, Allied Control Authority for Germany

Spaak, Paul-Henri, Belgian Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs

Stalin, Generalissimo Iosif Vissarionovich, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union

Stebbins, Henry E., First Secretary of the United States Embassy in the United Kingdom

† Steel, Christopher E., Political Adviser to the British Commander in Chief in Germany and President of the Governmental Subcommission, Control Commission for Germany (British Element)

Steelman, John R., Special Assistant to President Truman

* Stevens, Roger B., Assistant Under-Secretary of State, British Foreign Office from March 1948; Superintending Under-Secretary of the German Commercial Relations and Industry Department, the German General Economic Department, and the German Supply Department

Stock, Christian, Minister President of Hesse; member of the Central Committee of the German Social Democratic Party (SPD)

† Strang, Sir William, Permanent Under-Secretary of State for the German Section, British Foreign Office

Suesterhenn, Dr. Adolf, Minister of Justice in Rhineland-Palatinate; member of the Christian Democratic Union; representative to the Parliamentary Council

Suhr, Dr. Otto, Chairman of the Berlin City Assembly; member of the National Executive Committee of the German Social Democratic Party

† Tarbé de Saint-Hardouin, Jacques, Political Adviser to the French Commander in Chief for Germany

Tarchiani, Alberto, Italian Ambassador in the United States

Thompson, Llewellyn E., Deputy Director, Office of European Affairs, Department of State

Thorp, Willard Long, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs

Todd, Joseph A., Division of Occupied Areas Economic Affairs, Department of State; Department of State Representative on the Working Group on Reparations

Tomkins, Edward E., Assistant Private Secretary to British Foreign Secretary Bevin

* Trimble, William C., First Secretary of the United States Embassy in the United Kingdom

Troyanovsky, Oleg Aleandrovich, Interpreter, Soviet Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Truman, Harry S., President of the United States, 1945–1953

Tulpanov, Sergey I., Head of the Political Department of the Soviet Military Administration in Germany

Uebeleis, Vinzenz, Austrian Minister of Communications

Ulbricht, Walter, Deputy Chairman and member of the Politburo and Central Committee of the Socialist Unity Party (SED)

†* Valery, François, French Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Vandenberg, Arthur, United States Senator from Michigan; Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee

Voorhees, Tracy S., Assistant Secretary of the Army

Voorst tot Voorst, Baron S. G. M. van, Political Adviser and Deputy Chief of the Netherlands Military Mission in Germany

Verduynen , see Michiels van Verduynen

* Vooys, J. G. de, Netherlands Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Vorys, John M., Representative from Ohio; member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee and the House Select Committee on Foreign Aid

Vyshinsky, Andrey Yanuaryevich, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union

Waldbrunner, Karl, General Secretary, Austrian Socialist Party

Wallner, Woodruff, Associate Chief, Division of Western European Affairs, Department of State, August 1947–July 1948; from July 1948, First Secretary and Counselor of the United States Embassy in France

Wedemeyer, Lieutenant General Albert C., Director of Plans and Operations, General Staff, United States Army

† Wehrer, Colonel Albert, Chief of the Luxembourg Military Mission in Germany

Weir, Sir Cecil, President of the Economic Subcommission, British Military Government for Germany

West, Robert R., Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army

Westropp, Major General V. J. E., Deputy Chief of Staff, Control Commission for Germany (British Element)

Whitham, Gilbert S., Director, Reparations, Deliveries, and Restitution Division, Control Commission for Germany (British Element)

Wierblowski, Stefan, Secretary General of the Polish Ministry for Foreign Affairs from March 1948

Wilds, Walter, Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas

† Wilkinson, Lawrence, Economic Adviser, Office of Military Government for Germany (United States Zone)

Williamson, Francis T., Assistant Chief, Division Central European Affairs, Department of State

Wilson, Charles E., President, General Motors Corporation; member of the E.C.A. Industrial Advisory Committee

Winant, John G., Ambassador in the United Kingdom, 1941–1946

Wintewicz, Jozef, Polish Ambassador in the United States

Winterton, Major General T. S. W., British Deputy Commissioner in Austria

† Wisner, Frank G., Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas

Wohleb, Leo, Minister President, South Baden

Wolf, George W., President, United States Steel Export Corporation; head of the Wolf Mission on German steel industry, May–June 1948; Adviser to the E.C.A. Industrial Advisory Committee, October–December 1948

Yelisarov, Colonel A. I., Soviet Deputy Commandant for Berlin

Yerofeyev, Vladimir Yakovlevich, Deputy Chief of the Second European Division, Soviet Foreign Ministry

Yost, Charles W., Counselor of the United States Legation in Austria

Zarubin, Georgiy Nikolayevich, Soviet Ambassador in the United Kingdom

Zheltov, Colonel General Alexey Sergeyevich, Soviet Deputy High Commissioner in Austria

Zhukov , Marshal of the Soviet Union Georgiy Konstantinovich, Chief of Soviet Military Administration for Germany, July 1945–March 1946

Zinn, Georg August, Minister of Justice in Hesse; German Social Democratic Party member; representative in the Parliamentary Council

Zorin, Valerian Alexandrovich, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union

I. The London Conference on GermanyI. The London Conference on Germany

Contents

A. Arrangements for the Conference; the revision of bizonal (U.S.–U.K.) economic organizationsA. Arrangements for the Conference; the revision of bizonal (U.S.–U.K.) economic organizations1

1 For documentation regarding the efforts in 1947 to achieve economic cooperation, control and rehabilitation in the American, British and French zones of occupation of Germany, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 909 ff.

[1] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, January 3, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–348: Telegram

[2] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Frankfurt, January 7, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–748: Telegram

[3] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Frankfurt, January 7, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–748: Telegram

[4] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Frankfurt, January 8, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–848: Telegram

[5] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, January 9, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–948: Telegram

[6] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, January 9, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–948: Telegram

[7] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, January 9, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–948: Telegram

[8] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, January 10, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1048: Telegram

[9] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, January 10, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1048: Telegram

[10] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, January 11, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1148: Telegram

[11] Memorandum of Conversation, by William G. Conklin of the Division of Western, European Affairs

[Washington,] January 12, 1948.

862.50/1–1248

[12] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Inverchapel)

[Washington,] January 13, 1948.

862.00/1–848

[13] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, January 15, 1948—11 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1548: Telegram

[14] The Associate Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs (Wallner) to the Counselor of Embassy in France (Bonbright)

[Washington,] January 16, 1948.

French Desk File: Lot 53 D 246: File “Germany”

[15] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, January 17, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1748: Telegram

[16] The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay)

[Washington,] 17 January 1948.

EUR Files: Lot 55 D 374: Saar–1948: Telegram

[17] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Bonnet)

Washington, January 17, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1148

[18] The British Ambassador (Inverchapel) to the Secretary of State

Washington, 17 January, 1948.

862.00/1–1748

[19] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] January 20, 1948.

851.5151/1–2048

[20] The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, January 22, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2248: Telegram

[21] The British Ambassador (Inverchapel) to the Secretary of State

Washington, 23 January, 1948.

740.00119 Council/1–2348

[22] The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, January 24, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2448: Telegram

[23] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington, 26 January, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2648

[24] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, January 28, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2848: Telegram

[25] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, January 28, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2848: Telegram

[26] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, January 28, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2848: Telegram

[27] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Netherlands

Washington, January 29, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Council/1–1948: Telegram

[28] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

Washington, January 29, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2848: Telegram

[29] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Inverchapel)

Washington, January 30, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2648

[30] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, January 30, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–3048: Telegram

[31] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Bonnet)

Washington, January 31, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1148

[32] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, February 1, 1948—3 p. m.

862.60/2–148: Telegram

[33] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, February 4, 1948—noon.

862.00/2–448: Telegram

[34] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

Washington, February 6, 1948—6 p. m.

862.00/1–648: Telegram

[35] The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, February 8, 1948—2 p. m.

862.00/2–848: Telegram

[36] Editorial Note

[37] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

[Washington,] February 11, 1948.

740.00119 Council/2–1148

[38] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs (Achilles)

[Washington,] February 13, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–1348

[39] The Chargé in Belgium (Millard) to the Secretary of State

Brussels, February 14, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–1448: Telegram

[40] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, February 16, 1948—6 p. m.

840.00/2–1648: Telegram

[41] The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, February 16, 1948—2 p. m.

862.50/2–1648: Telegram

[42] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington, 17 February, 1948.

740.00119 Council/2–1748

[43] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

[Washington,] February 17, 1948.

740.00119 Council/2–1748

[44] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, February 19, 1948—10 a. m.

751.00/2–1948: Telegram

[45] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, February 20, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2048: Telegram

[46] Economic Agreement Between the United States, the United Kingdom, and France Regarding the Saar

20 February 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 125: File—Tripartite Agreement Regarding the Saar

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–348: Telegram

[Document 1]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, January 3, 1948—4 p. m.

4. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. US/UK Bipartite Board2 met yesterday at Berlin.…

There was also a lengthy preliminary discussion regarding adjustments to be made in the German bizonal organization.

1. There was a proposal to double the EC Council3 in size. This would provide a membership of 104. US chairman stated that we do not desire a general election at this time. UK chairman suggested asking minister presidents what procedure they would suggest and in agreeing to proposal that size of EC Council be doubled; joint chairmen felt it should be done under approximately the same terms which governed council’s original composition.

2. US chairman suggested creation of an upper house for EC Council composed of two representatives from each Land to be selected by Land government. Their powers would be determined in consultation with EC Council and the several minister presidents with the proviso-that it may not initiate revenue-producing or expending legislation. This was agreed to in principle by UK with the suggestion that instead, of calling it an “upper” house it be called a “second” house. UK doubted initially there should be as many as two representatives from each Land, believing that one would suffice but finally stated it had no objection to two.

3. Executive committee of council as now constituted will be reformed under chairmanship of a coordinator of EC affairs to be selected by the lower and confirmed by the upper group. It would be composed of directors of the several departments who shall be nominated by the coordinator and confirmed by the upper house. The foregoing is the US proposal. This seemed to be agreeable in principle to UK. It was suggested by US and tentatively agreed that coordinator be chosen by lower house of council and confirmed by upper for a fixed term of office. Coordinator would be required to appear before council and he may or may not be a member of it. Lengthy discussion about this feature brought out difference between UK and US approach to this problem. UK representative automatically thinks in terms of Parliamentary Government whereas US side emphasized its predilection for American type equality of powers by the executive, legislative and judicial branches with fixed term of office for the executive who would have the power of removal of his appointees.

4. Agreed in principle that the directors of the several departments will be political appointments and each will be provided with deputy who is qualified civil servant. Appointments will include those now approved, those who may be added from time to time with approval of military government.

5. Branch offices of economic control. US chairman proposed that it be suggested to Germans that they might wish to establish branch offices in the several Laender instead of the present form of operation through offices of the Land governments. The example given is importance of offices dealing with food distribution. This is now handled by the Land offices, UK chairman agreed.

6. Bizonal high court. There was preliminary discussion of judicial apparatus which will be necessary to give authority to the acts of the council. It was tentatively agreed that the charter of the court would be given by military government but that council would have to provide funds, etc. British suggested Cologne be approved as seat of the court. US proposal was agreed tentatively as follows: “a high court with ultimate authority in dealing with economic legislation will be established forthwith under the charter of military government.”

7. Banking. Tentatively agreed to inform Germans that it is proposed to establish board of directors for the Land Central Bank to operate under a general charter issued by military government which council will consider prior to its final issue. Seat of board will be Frankfurt. Financial advisers were instructed to come up with a draft charter by January 15. Board would be charged with accounting for imports and exports.

8. JEIA 4 is now called and working with intricate German machinery. US chairman stated he would like to separate agency from government machinery and have it operate as a quasi government agency but not as a department. There seemed to be no objection. JEIA would establish branch offices.

9. There was considerable discussion of powers of taxation to be granted to council. There seemed to be agreement tentatively to the principle that council should have power to tax for the requirements falling within the limits of its jurisdiction. Case of subsidies to such industries as steel and chemicals was mentioned. It would control revenues of Reichsbahn and posts.

British mentioned this connection that they desire to eliminate their zonal budgets.

US chairman did not agree to an authorization for council to tax for capital improvements at a time when the question of ownership of plants would still be undetermined.

British suggested that taxation would include such items as subsidies for coal and steel; social insurance; expenses of liquidation of Wehrmacht; displaced persons; frontier control. US chairman suggested that in addition to responsibility for customs and excise taxes council may share in income tax collections to meet its operating expenses, direct prices, subsidies and such other operations as might be approved by military government.

There was also preliminary discussion of eventual establishment of a German agency similar to Reconstruction Finance Corp.

British raised question of eventual abolition of Laenderrat now operating in US zone stating that it hoped that this organization would be abolished. US chairman stated his hope that Germans themselves would see advisability of initiating this action. UK pointed out that it has now in UK zone a minister president conference which is strictly a German initiation and could be expanded for both zones.

UK chairman stated that the pace should be forced so that Germans can do business abroad. This was agreed with a reference to the importance of establishment of an exchange rate and promise to pay for expenses of German businessmen travelling abroad.

Reference was made to the agreement on common reports and statistics office in Frankfurt but pointed out that latter cannot agree on form of reports. Agreed that economic reports should cover both zones and that there should be a common use of statistical reports. Narrative reports however may be different forms to meet different needs in UK and US.

10. Agreed that there should be integration of US–UK staffs below chairman level as well as integration of JEIA field staffs. Robertson said regarding latter he would need to get confirmation from his government. US chairman proposed that all operating economic functions be moved to Frankfurt and that there be created a single board of directors for both JEIA and JFEA.5 This was agreed. Board to be composed of financial and economic advisers and chairmen and deputy chairmen of JEIA and JFEA, that is, four on each side. Board will be subject to approval by two military governors and would develop its own procedures. Agreed it was essential that these two agencies operate under single direction. Board would present to bipartite board its own terms of reference by January 15.

US chairman informed the meeting that EUCOM will start vacating one floor of Farben Building, Frankfurt by January 15 and by April 1 there will be available one entire wing of Farben Building for bizonal organization. Space for Central Bank will be provided in Reichsbank Building, Frankfurt.

At end of meeting UK chairman proposed joint telegram to governments, urging prompt attention to the food crisis which bizonal authorities will face next spring. This UK chairman described as comparable to dangerous situation in spring 1947. There was lengthy discussion regarding the failure to collect food from German farmers. Clay doubted there will be possibility of obtaining from US more than the present 300,000 tons of bread grains monthly. Was also a discussion of possibility of the purchase of 100,000 tons, of Norwegian fish. US chairman agreed to draft telegram urging more liberal provision but expressing doubt that this would produce result.

Department is informed of bizonal meeting with Germans in Frankfurt scheduled for January 7–8.

Murphy

2 The Bipartite Board, composed of the American and British Military Governors for Germany, was the highest authority in the U.S.–U.K. bizonal economic administration established in 1946 and reorganized in May 1947. For previous documentation on the reorganization of bizonal agencies in 1947, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 909 ff.

3 In the May 1947 reorganization of U.S.–U.K. bizonal economic agencies, there was established an Economic Council composed of German representatives selected by the Landtage of the Laender in the U.S. and U.K. zones of occupation of Germany. An Executive Committee, similarly selected by the Landtage, was established at the same time. The Economic Council and its Executive Committee supervised those German economic agencies exercising authority.

4 The Joint Export-Import Agency of Military Government (JEIA) was established at the end of 1946 as a means of promoting trade and thereby developing a German economy which could be maintained without further financial assistance from the occupying governments. The Agency, which was located in Minden, was managed by an American Director General and governed by a Board consisting of the Director General and his British Deputy, the financial advisers and economic advisers of the American and British Military Governors.

5 Joint Foreign Exchange Agency, established in March 1947, held all international financial accounts for the U.S–U.K. bizonal area and served as fiscal agent for the Joint Export-Import Agency. Like the JEIA, the JFEA was composed of American and British personnel assisted by German technicians.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–748: Telegram

[Document 2]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Frankfurt, January 7, 1948—7 p. m.

14. Eyes Only personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. Clay and I proceeded to Frankfurt last evening accompanied by Economic Adviser Wilkinson and Financial Adviser Bennett. We met this morning together with American bi-zonal authorities with Robertson and his advisers and bi-zonal group to discuss the strengthening of the bi-zonal organization along the lines denned at last Friday’s bipartite board meeting in Berlin (see my Berlin 4 of January 31 ). Clay presiding made a brief introductory statement regarding this first of a series of routine meetings and asked Robertson to begin a description of the outline of our plan. Robertson explained our purpose in strengthening the German organization as it affected the Economic Council, the Council’s offices in the several Laender, the reorganization of the Executive Committee, and the creation of the second house of the Economic Council, explaining that the latter powers would be a matter of agreement between the Minister-President and the Council with provisions that the second house will not have power to originate “money bills”. Robertson explained that the Executive Committee will be converted into a proper executive body (really a cabinet but we are not calling it that) to be appointed by Council and approved by second house for first period. Chairman of Executive Committee will appoint his colleagues and Germany will have power of hiring and firing.

Clay took up second phase relating to creation of high court to be composed of nine members with responsibility of final court of appeals of all matters coming within purview of Council (disputes with Laender). He explained that it was not to be called a “supreme” court and will have no general powers of the usual court of law. We are seeking uniformity of trial of cases coming under laws of economic matters passed by Council. We are seeking immediate establishment of high court.

Clay also outlined plan for establishment of land union bank, to be owned by the several land banks, which would be empowered to issue currency, control of credit, and act as an accounting agency and depository for export-import business. It would be hoped that soon bank can be given responsibility of issuing credit instruments to German exporters and importers. He stated that the land banks in the UK zone are in process of establishment. Robertson agreed to have directors requested at early date to meet and devise procedures. It was desired that the charter be agreed before the end of January.

Regarding powers of Economic Council, it must have powers to give effect to the measures it authorizes. It is desired that the Council have the right to establish budget within which to take such percentage of income tax assessed by the Laender governments as may be required. Council may include in its percentage of income tax whatever necessary to meet required expenditures. Council also to have immediate control of excise tax and customs and the necessary personnel to enforce under these headings, also have specialized policy control necessary to functioning of the equivalent of a central government. Economic Council already has been given authority to control funds of the Reichsbank and the post. Clay emphasized that the foregoing is an outline of the general phase of measures to strengthen the German organization.

Clay went on to explain that on the US–UK side, it was agreed to do away with any residual functions remaining with the zones (Laenderrat). These would be transferred to the bi-zonal agency as soon as latter is able to absorb them.

It was agreed that branch land offices of the Council would be held to a minimum, but if the state mechanism fails, bi-zonal organization will have the authority to establish necessary land offices to carry out requirements.

In the discussion reference was made to a department for labor (I note reference thereto in your No. 6 of January 6, 8 p. m.2 ) but military government authorities desire to proceed establishment of those departments outlined in the Potsdam Agreement3 plus a civil service department. Regarding latter, its status would be left to plans to be worked out by Adcock and Macready.

On subject of title for Economic Council, it was agreed to listen first to German views and agreed that it was desirable that the word “economic” continue to appear in title.

It was emphasized that high court will be established (MG proclamation).

Regarding land union bank charter would be drawn up in such way to make it most convenient for French eventually to join.

Regarding US–UK bi-zonal organization, it was agreed that the common objective to be pursued would be close integration of bizonal staffs in Frankfurt. Adcock and Macready, joint chairmen, will each continue to have personal staffs. Everything below chairman level will be integrated. In case, for example, there is a US head of group, he will have a UK deputy and vice versa.

It was agreed that the several departments would have chairmen of the nationality indicated below with deputies of the other nationality: Economists, US; food and agriculture, US; civil service, US; transport, UK; finance, UK; post and telegraph (or communications), UK.

Robertson emphasized that the principle to be observed basically is that there must be loyal staffs with integrated opinion and not working in two separate streams. Clay cited the below for heads of departments by observing that in the integrated organization, while some former heads of divisions will be reduced to deputies, the scope of their undertaking becomes far more important.

Clay pointed out that [regarding] JEIA and JFEA both US and UK are agreed that they must be brought closer together. There will be a single body of directors for both organizations in which representatives from each side will include the economic and financial advisers, the director and deputy director of the executive agencies and the director and deputy director of JFEA.

It was also agreed that as rapidly as possible, both agencies will develop parallel German organization which can be made of a public or quasi-public type similar to control organization established for bi-zonal area. This would be pressed in effect immediately. Idea is to maintain present controls but to simplify them. It was emphasized that the present number of German exporters must be expanded largely.

It was also announced that several branches will be integrated for deeding UK personnel into US zone branches and vice versa.

A committee on US–UK reorganization was set up. Steel and Panuch will represent the UK and US sides respectively.4

There was also agreement that all operating functions will be in Frankfurt and none in Berlin. There was a discussion of JEIA functions, Weir pointing out the German weakness of not having a department of external trade. This is important because of future volume of necessary trade agreements with foreign countries, and seeing that foreign trade policy cannot be separated from government. It was pointed out that JEIA will be a semi-independent agency and that the German parallel organization should be set up accordingly.

Clay requested that the charter of the several organizations, that is, the bank, the court, and the German equivalent of JEIA should be prepared as urgently as possible by the respective groups and submitted to Clay and Robertson for approval.

Regarding effective desire of integration of staff, this was to be accomplished just as soon as possible.

There was further discussion of the difficult problem connected with office space and housing. Clay informed the meeting that he was not yet prepared to move the army headquarters out of Frankfurt because of misunderstandings that this might cause in certain quarters. However, some units will start to move January 15 and their departure will provide certain urgently needed space.

Murphy

1  Supra.

2 Telegram 20, January 6, to Berlin, repeated to Frankfurt as 6, not printed. It transmitted to Ambassador Murphy some informal comments and queries formulated at the working-level of the Department on the main points of telegram 4, January 3, from Berlin, supra. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–648)

3 The reference here is presumably to the Political and Economic Principles to Govern the Treatment of Germany in the Initial Control Period, set forth under Part III of the Report on the Tripartite Conference of Berlin, August 2, 1945, Foreign Relations, The Conference of Berlin (The Potsdam Conference), 1945, vol. ii, pp. 1502–1505.

4 As subsequently established, the Bizonal and Bipartite Reorganization Committee (BBRC) operated under the co-chairmanship of J. Anthony Panuch, General Clay’s Special Adviser, and the British Deputy Military Governor, Major General N. C. D. Brownjohn.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–748: Telegram

[Document 3]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent Frankfurt, January 7, 1948—8 p. m.

15. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. Eyes Only. Following the meeting this morning of US–UK groups latter met this afternoon with military government directors and regional commissioners from US–UK Zones and the eight Minister Presidents and their staffs. Clay after welcoming Minister Presidents called on Robertson to explain general purpose of today’s meeting. Robertson referred to CFM meeting in London1 to which he said US and UK Governments had sent representatives in the hope of finding a solution of the German problem but were disappointed. He referred to Bevin’s last speech which made it clear that objectives his government would pursue remained unchanged and it would be impossible to sit with folded hands. Secretary of State Marshall made similar statements. Robertson said that he and Clay had come to Frankfurt because it is not possible to sit here with folded hands and General Clay would outline the immediate steps necessary to overcome the present difficulties. It is our practice, he said, to take account of German opinion and that lie was confident that after the Minister Presidents heard what Clay had to say that they would receive it with understanding and agreements. He emphasized that we had not invited the Germans to Frankfurt in order to outline to them a plan which they would be asked to accept. We desire the benefit of the German views and hope that tomorrow we could receive them. Our emphasis now is on the immediate steps which in our opinion are necessary to overcome present difficulties. Robertson referred to number of statements made regarding a new German constitution and said that for the immediate present we are not interested in that question which would come later. Robertson referred to the possibility that there might be disappointment on the German side because he and Clay would not tell Germans today what we would do under all circumstances in the future. However this not the time for emotion and drama but rather to be calm, careful and wise. Our object is to see a unified Germany under a German government with sufficient powers to govern. During coming months we will do nothing to defeat that purpose. It would be wrong to say that a division of Germany is a fact we must recognize. Neither we nor the Germans do recognize it. As we build we must build something suitable for our object. It would be most foolish if we would write off that part of Germany that is not united with us.

Clay then outlined US–UK thinking, stating that he would then open meeting for questions by the Germans and that after that Robertson would then outline to them changes planned in US–UK organizations.

Clay emphasized purpose in mind is to strengthen German organization so it can take on added responsibility for financial and economic future. We have not come here with a written plan. He said that we were giving our ideas to the German Minister Presidents and will expect to obtain theirs tomorrow.

Clay explained our thought to broaden the economic powers in order to give it a more representative character and sufficient size to operate effectively in the economic and financial legislative field. The Council would be double in size and would be composed of two houses. Second house would be composed of two representatives from each land who may or may not be officials of the land as may be determined by the government of the land. The powers of the two houses are to be worked out by the minister presidents and the Economic Council with two exceptions.

1. Second house would not have the right to initiate legislation regarding revenue or expenditures.

2. Create executive committee under chairman who would be elected by Economic Council and approved by second house.

Clay explained that chairman would select directors of several departments who would be political administrators and each of them would have a civil service deputy. As this is provisional these appointments would be made for provisional period. They have right to appear before Council and latter has the right to summon them for questions and explanations.

Council would be given certain powers it does not now have. Thus to establish and approve bizonal budget; to take over responsibility for customs and excise taxes; to fix its share of income tax. It cannot tax to obtain surplus revenue. It must raise sufficient taxes for its own expenditures. (Clay outlined proposal of high court to be composed of nine persons operating under budget established and approved by Council to serve as court of appeal handling all cases arising out of Economic Council legislation including disputes by the Laender and Council.) It would have authority to establish branches and lower courts by legislation of Council. Court could hear appeals from Laender courts.

On the subject of the central bank Clay pointed out that it was desired that there be immediate authority to establish a Laender union bank which will be owned by several state banks. This will become at some future time a bank of issue and will have certain powers in control of credits, export and internal credit instruments. It would be obviously closely related to the Export-Import Agency. For the present the bank cannot be placed under general bi-zonal organization as we hope other occupying powers will wish to join in the bank eventually. However whether they join or not we have no time to lose waiting for them, Clay explained. He further pointed out that the creation of Laender banks in UK Zone is now in course. JEIA and JFEA will create German organizations as counterparts which will be given responsibility as soon as possible relating to trade opportunities but not trade policy as well as looking to creation of public corporations which will take over these responsibilities. Clay explained that what we have tried to do is to provide tools with which the Germans can take over responsibility for their economic future.

After these US–UK explanations there followed a lengthy question and answer period with the German representatives asking pertinent and searching questions. For example, Dahrendorf asked: “Have you considered putting city of Berlin in bi-zonal organization?” Clay answered that this was not now possible except that special arrangements with Bizonia may be concluded with magistrate. There were a number of questions relating to problems re relationship between Laender and Economic Council, constitutional questions re courts, the central bank and the currency issue. General Robertson objected at one time to the trend of the questions raising the rights of the Laender vis-à-vis council. However questions were constructive. After meeting Clay and I discussed subject with President of Council Koehler who feared that proposals were more far reaching than Germans had anticipated.

There will be meeting Bi-Partite Board tomorrow morning followed by further meeting tomorrow afternoon with German representatives.

Murphy

1 For documentation on the Fifth Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers in London, November 25–December 12, 1947, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, chapter iv .

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–848: Telegram

[Document 4]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Frankfurt, January 8, 1948—3 p. m.

16. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. Remytel 15, January 7, 8 p. m.1 Last evening Military Governors gave dinner for visiting German Minister-Presidents, top members of the Economic Council and heads of agencies. I had conversations with a number of them and mention the following as of interest. President of the Council Koehler and several of the Minister-Presidents, all of whom met late last night to consider US–UK proposals, express alarm over the tempo at which we are moving and plead for more time. They state fear of the effect proposed action may have on public sentiment re partition of Germany and that our action will be exploited by the SED and the USSR; Koehler objects particularly to the appointment of the “political” coordinator (chairman) of the new Executive Committee to a fixed term of office. He has support of several Minister-Presidents who feel that this official should not have a fixed term of office. This question will be debated with Germans today.

I also had long conversation with Arnold, Minister-President of North Rhine Westphalia, who will make a statement today on the subject of food conditions in the Ruhr area. I learned from him, and this seems to be confirmed by subsequent inquiry, that actually the bulk of the population except in North Rhine Westphalia is on feeding level of only about 900 calories. Partially to blame for this condition, is the failure of that land to make the food collection it should have from the recent crop. Arnold describes the situation as alarming and explosive. This condition, of course, has no relation to the special incentive program for the Ruhr miners, but it does affect the population generally, and Arnold says that public disorders are unavoidable and imminent.

I also talked with Ehard, Minister-President of Bavaria, and Semmler, Director of the Economic Agency, who because of his ability we have regarded as one of the up-and-coming younger men in Bavaria. At a party meeting (CSU) at Erlangen, he is alleged to have made a violent attack on some features of our policy and was particularly critical of our food supply program. Clay, having received the report yesterday, was inclined to denounce him publicly at the dinner last evening, but was dissuaded pending further investigation. I have had further conversations referring to this today with Josef Mueller and with Clay. Ehard, Mueller and Semmler indicate incident reflects declining confidence of Bavarians in US.

I also yesterday had a further meeting with St. Hardouin and De Carbonnel. They are naturally full of curiosity regarding bi-zonal developments and I detect a growing eagerness on the part of the French, if the attitude of these two reflects the wishes of the Foreign Office, to participate in bizonal affairs. They pressed hard for immediate discussions in Berlin which the British would have preferred to postpone until next week. As reported, these talks will begin Friday afternoon in Berlin after our return there tomorrow morning.

Murphy

1  Supra.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–948: Telegram

[Document 5]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact Berlin, January 9, 1948—4 p. m.

43. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson (Eyes Only). Reference my telegram 42, January 9.1

General Clay yesterday at Frankfurt opened afternoon meeting with German Minister Presidents and heads of bizonal agencies with statement that military governors were ready to listen to views of Minister Presidents on proposals made to them preceding day by military governors, account of which was telegraphed you from Frankfurt.

Minister President Ehard of Bavaria arose and stated he had been authorized by Minister Presidents to summarize their point of view and, that position of Economic Council would be stated by Koehler. Ehard explained that in view of brevity of time allowed to Germans for consideration these complex problems he would first make general statement in outline form. First of all he stated fundamental agreement with remarks made on preceding day by Clay and Robertson (see mytel Frankfurt 152 ). Minister Presidents fully in accord and welcome clarification given. Minister Presidents also do not want to write off eastern Germany and declare their firm belief in and desire for German unity. They also do not wish to sit with folded hands (repeating language used by Robertson). Terrible distress of the German people demands immediate action in financial and economic fields.

Koehler then made brief statement to effect that this marks beginning of new relationship between occupying powers and Germans and that Germans welcome this opportunity. Germans urgently hope that mutual relationship will be established on basis of law and that it is urgently necessary that statute of capitulation be replaced by statute of occupation. Germans, he said, had listened with pleasure to statements of Clay and Robertson regarding German unity with which they fully agreed. Germans agree with Clay and Robertson that it is false to accept the partition of Germany as a fact. Rather the Germans in complete agreement with US and British Govts want unified Germany with responsible democratic govt and that nothing should happen to prejudice this goal. German attitude will be governed by this principle. Germans will not fail to do everything to improve standard of life in bizonia. Most urgent steps should be taken in area of greatest distress, namely the Ruhr, to support the ration as meager as it is. It is equally important to make available all funds to cover importation of necessary raw materials. He hoped that within framework of Marshall Plan, which Germans welcome, that economic aid will be extended. Koehler then said, on behalf of Germans, Germans are prepared to accept greater responsibility.

Ehard then resumed, stating reactions of Minister Presidents to US–UK proposals. There is, he said, a slight divergence of reaction between Minister Presidents and Economic Council. This divergence, however, is not fundamental and it is largely due to brief time allowed to Germans for consideration of proposals.

1. Regarding doubling of membership of Economic Council Minister Presidents agree and suggest that system of selection be based on one representative to each 375,000 of population. He raised question whether a member could be recalled and recommended that this be settled by the Landtag.

2. On subject of the second house Ehard proposed its title be “Laenderrat of the United Economic Zones”. Minister Presidents agreed to proposed system of composition and recommended that votes of each two delegates from a given land should be made in unison. Minister Presidents suggested a fourteen-day veto right of ordinance and laws of Economic Council. In case of veto by Laenderrat there must be second vote by Council and in that case the second vote must be majority vote of all 104 members of council. Functions of Laenderrat were agreed except that Minister Presidents felt that the two exceptions regarding “money bills” should not be made.

3. On subject of Executive Committee, issue as far as Germans are concerned is whether this body should have a political head. Minister Presidents are against a permanent chairman. They believe that directors of agencies should coordinate their work in regular meetings and that there should be special statute to regulate relationship between council and committee. Appointment and recall of members of committee should, they believe, be in hands of council.

4. Functions of council. Minister Presidents agreed to proposal regarding establishment of budget for council. They suggested that form of revenue-raising be examined further and they would appreciate elucidation of proposal regarding raising of revenues. Laenderrat would be paid for by individual Laender.

5. On subject of the high court they agreed in principle to creation of this tribunal to act as court of arbitration. They urged that details of organization should be studied. It was important to examine more closely the work of court as related to regular administrative and state courts. Regarding selection of members they felt that four members should be appointed from council and Laenderrat. Presiding justice should be chosen by agreement of council and Laenderrat and that this personnel should be qualified as judges or higher administrators.

6. Laender union bank. Germans stated that this proposal was left rather vague. Germans under the circumstances can only note proposal and hope it can be studied further by technicians.

After Ehard’s remarks German statement continued by Koehler, President of Economic Council, and Dahrendorf, vice-president. Koehler stated council agreed its membership should be increased in size. It would be most useful to select additional members following same system used heretofore and to have one representative for each 500,000 of population which would mean increasing size of council from 52 to about 80 members. In Koehler’s opinion this membership should be sufficient to take care of business of council which would then be done at smaller cost than if size of membership were doubled. He also thought this important in view of limited housing and facilities at Frankfurt. He stated that this council was not quite in agreement with Minister Presidents. He recommended that tenure of membership harmonize with life of respective Landtage.

Regarding second house of Laenderrat, composition should be on basis of two members from each land. They would have right to veto laws and ordinances within a period of 14 days. He agreed with Ehard’s proposal regarding passage of laws after veto.

Vice-president Dahrendorf suggested council could not agree with proposal regarding composition of Executive Committee. He felt it was not possible or right to elect one chairman by council if he is not to be responsible to council. Proposal for political directorate, he said, is so novel that it should not be included in the plan (Clay objected to use of word novel stating this had been United States practice since 150 years. Dahrendorf replied that nevertheless it is novel for Germany and that it would be better for Germans to have system to which they are accustomed). Dahrendorf continued that council believed that five directors included in Executive Committee should be retained and be responsible to council. He asked that consideration be given that the directors also include one for labor and social insurance. He felt that this organization should be a group of five or six members to form an Administrative Council of which one of the directors would be chairman. It would be chairman’s function to represent Administrative Council before military governors. In special matters individual directors would report to military governors.

Dahrendorf proposed also to leave civil service agency way it now is. This would be a separate office under direct supervision of Chairman of Administrative Council. Same thing would apply to statistical office. He felt that regulations governing activities of Administrative Council should be issued by Economic Council.

In behalf of Economic Council Dahrendorf summarized that there is basic agreement with proposals made by military governors. He said that Economic Council already had right to draw up budget. Economic Council believed it is urgently necessary create court of arbitration, but that this is matter requiring further discussion and study. Koehler resumed regarding the bank. This is one of most important proposals made. Germans welcome heartily creation of such a banking institution. Naturally in short time available to Germans they could not formulate detailed recommendations.

Dahrendorf then recommended that military governors consider proposal to open discussion as soon as possible in order define competence of respective Laender in bizonia vis-à-vis Frankfurt organization. He also stressed that economic agencies now existing in only one zone would have to be eliminated.

Meeting adjourned for 20 minutes at this point at instance of military governors to permit some time for brief consideration of German reaction.

After meeting resumed Clay announced decisions of military governors stating that these decisions are not such that they may not be changed after a certain time. Clay stated that it is recognized we have exerted pressure to make rapid progress. We do feel that present machinery is not adequate and must be improved as matter of urgency.

1. Size of Economic Council. Military governments believe it would be simpler to double size of that body following its present representative character. Therefore decided that size of membership be doubled. In this emergency situation it is considered best that members continue in office as long as a given Landtag continues in office.

2. German proposal regarding title of second house, namely (Laenderrat of the United Economic Zone) is approved. However military governments are not willing that two representatives in Laenderrat from each Land should be required to vote in unison. If the Land wishes them to vote in certain way that is up to Land itself to make its own arrangements.

3. Function of Laenderrat. Clay stated these would be entirely in German hands and the German proposal is acceptable. Regarding veto provision, approval of a bill after veto would require only simple majority of council rather than majority of all members.

4. Executive Committee and directorates. Due to provisional nature of organization and emergency it faces, US–UK not willing to accept all recommendations Germans have made. In military government’s view duties of chairman make it important for one of members to serve in this capacity without neglecting his other duties. It is necessary for council to approve appointments. Regarding removals, if necessary military government could meet with the two houses to remove chairmen should such a situation develop. There should be one director without portfolio.

5. Regarding Dahrendorf’s remarks on subject of council’s budget Clay pointed out that the power Germans now have is for council’s expenses only. It might, however, be possible that council would wish to enact legislation, for example in subsidy field. Such expenditures would necessarily be included in council’s budget. We agreed that details of where and how funds are collected should be discussed later. This would be done under the broad authority given by charter of council.

6. High court. The military government proclamation will be drafted and submitted to Germans. Charter of high court will not be legislative issue. This will develop later when eventual constitutional provisions of a German government are considered. Details of provisional arrangement will be worked out with Germans. Military government will consult with Germans regarding selection of court personnel and it is entirely possible that German proposals will be quite satisfactory. However, it is not possible to give Germans definite approval today.

7. Bank. Military government financial advisers will consult with Germans promptly (financial and economic advisers have remained in Frankfurt today for discussions on this and other subjects). While German recommendations will be carefully considered Clay said it is hot matter for bizonal legislation because we hope that bank will eventually include other areas. If that should not however materialize bank will then fall under bizonal legislation. Charter will be drafted immediately but prior to its issue committee from council and Minister Presidents will examine it.

Clay stated further that entire plan of bizonal reorganization when drafted will be examined by a committee which Ehard and Koehler will be asked to form. Military government will try to prepare this draft in 10 days. Existing rules will remain in force until the new have been approved and issued.

Clay stated also that German suggestion relating to civil service office is approved, but that regarding separate director for labor and social insurance we are reluctant to increase number of agencies. He wanted Germans to know we are entirely sympathetic their proposal regarding labor office and would work out some form of liaison labor agency. It is our feeling that at the moment in view of quadripartite situation in Berlin that we adhere to Potsdam limitation of five departments. Labor agency can be taken care of without calling the head of it a director. (See following telegram3 for balance of message.)

Repeated Frankfurt for Gantenbein as 3.

Murphy

1 Not printed; it reported that General Clay and Ambassador Murphy left Frankfurt on the evening of January 8 and arrived in Berlin by train the following morning. Because the meetings had been going on in Frankfurt throughout January 8, Murphy had not been able to send any telegraphic reports from Frankfurt. In the remainder of the telegram under reference, Murphy gave a detailed account of the 20th meeting of the Bipartite Board held on the morning of January 8. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–948)

2 January 7, p. 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3].

3 Presumably reference to telegram 46, January 9, from Berlin, infra.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–948: Telegram

[Document 6]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact Berlin, January 9, 1948—7 p. m.

46. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson (Eyes Only). Reference mytel 43 January 9.1

After announcement of decisions on German proposals Military Governors continued discussion with Germans on subject of food and pit props. Clay called upon General Robertson who resumed food situation about as follows. He recognized that maintenance of adequate ration is essential to improvement of economic situation in Bizonia. We are aware that present ration is not being met and that outlook is unsatisfactory. There are two points to consider: (1) why has situation gotten into this condition? and (2) what can we do to improve situation?

The ration, Robertson explained, is made up of two components-imports and domestic production.

On subject of imports, the world shortage of food is of great magnitude. Forecasts regarding imports have not only been fulfilled but have been exceeded.

On domestic production potato harvest was below expectation but we are certain there was no disaster. However potatoes are not now available as they should be in a number of Laender. There was lamentable failure on part of Germans to collect and distribute food. Collection of grain crops was good in some Laender and bad in others. Net results today is that although imported food has arrived according to schedule the ration cannot now be met. Robertson said he would not endeavor to fix blame at this point but asked what can we do (1) increase imports? or (2) get hold of food in the country and distribute it.

On (1) there is no possibility to increase imports sufficiently to make a difference in the ration. Food is simply not available. (2) Regarding better distribution, Germans must focus their attention on this factor if they want to improve situation.

Clay then reviewed import figures for twelve months 1 July 1946 to 30 June 1947, emphasizing an importation of 3,600,000 tons of bread-grain equivalent. He stated that for period 1 July 1947 to end of June 1948 there would be imported 4,228,000 tons. Clay said that investigations by nutritional teams demonstrate that Germans last year were better fed than during previous year, but that industrial laboring class was not. In his opinion the only cause for failure now to meet ration is maldistribution. Minister Presidents should agree immediately on drastic action. Economic Council should authorize, a census of food in possession of every storehouse, factory and individual in Bizonia, and German authorities should confiscate irregular holdings and make proper distribution. Germans cannot count on increased imports.

There followed speech by Arnold, Minister President of North Rhine Westphalia, of which he gave warning on preceding day. Arnold stated, with considerable emotion, that success of new Economic Council will largely depend on way in which food problem is handled. Food position in North Rhine Westphalia (including Ruhr-Aachen basin) is grave. North Rhine Westphalia willing to grant necessary authority to Economic Council to search for and confiscate foodstuffs but these will be insufficient to improve situation materially. Arnold said it was impossible to exaggerate gravity of situation and that all sections of population are aroused. Trade unionist officials, party leaders, etc. He was informed only today that on January 9 there would be general strike in Essen of all workers except miners during hours of 12 to 5 p. m. and that similar action is pending in other areas which will probably also affect the miners. Every action should be taken to avoid general strike in Rhine and Ruhr area. Population does not want to strike but there is complete physical and mental breakdown of workers. Arnold agreed that German steps should be taken to insure better collection and distribution but stated that German power at the moment is insufficient. In his opinion, deficit of fats is most serious. He recommended urgently that following quantities of foodstuffs be imported at a cost of $85 million: 100,000 tons fats, 250,000 tons fish, and 200,000 tons sugar.

There followed brief expose of food situation by director of food and agriculture agency (Schlange-Schoeningen). He declared that Frankfurt and Minister Presidents have done everything reasonably possible to improve food situation. Clay’s suggestion regarding census of foodstuffs and confiscation has already been carefully considered. There is now in operation a corps of 100 German experts who are investigating holdings of milk products, sugar, etc. Director doubted that large volume of foodstuffs is being held back. He admitted that certain potato collections were not successful and complained of difficulty arising from giving first priority transportation to Berlin. He summarized following points: (1) crop estimates were over-optimistic on US–UK side and under-estimated on German side. (2) With present paper currency full collection from farmers is simply impossible. Nobody has confidence in the money. (3) Since farmer has no access to machinery and other urgently needed supplies, it was impossible to stop barter operations. (4) Of all European states, Germans are only one without governmental authority. Director complained there was so much talk of lack of morality in Germany, but when it is considered that for years German people have been living in unlighted and unhealed cellars without adequate food and clothing, that might be understandable. He also felt that black market is not much better in some other countries. Director made two requests: (1) If possible a clearer outline should be given Germans of what may be expected from imports and at what time they might be received, and (2) there should be a clearer distinction between responsibilities of bizonal agencies and Laender on the one hand and between Military Government and German agencies on the other.

Military Governors demanded: (1) precise estimate of food expectation in Germany, and (2) executive council should undertake whatever action may be best to improve food situation.

Clay concluded his remarks with reference to serious situation regarding pit props, stating that quotas are not being met. Military Government has been instructed to accord every help to Germans. Without pit props production of coal will be affected and without coal production improvement of economic situation and living conditions of German population simply is not possible.

Koehler concluded German statement with reference to fact that Germans would have liked opportunity to discuss number of other economic problems but that time would not permit. He presented memorandum, text of which will be transmitted. At end this session it was agreed there should be periodic meetings between Military Governors and Germans.

Repeated Frankfurt for Gantenbein 2, Department 46.

Murphy

1  Supra.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–948: Telegram

[Document 7]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact Berlin, January 9, 1948—8 p. m.

47. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson Eyes Only. I would like to say a word to you regarding telegrams I have sent you from Frankfurt and Berlin (reference mytel 46, January 91 ). Neither on American nor as far as I know on UK side were the proposals made to Germans concerning reorganization of bizonal agencies formally reduced to writing. As far as I know, General Clay has not informed War Department of these plans. He has discussed them with me in rough outline and has had as you know, two discussions with Robertson and Bipartite Board, meeting at Berlin, which I attended and details of which were reported to you in mytel 4 of January 3.2 It is my understanding that this procedure was authorized by the Secretary and Mr. Bevin at the meeting at Mr. Douglas’ house immediately before our departure from London (see my letter December 20 to Hickerson enclosing memo that conversation).3

Results of Frankfurt meeting are now being reduced to written form for the first time and text will only be available in several days. As soon as they are ready, I shall transmit them to the Department.

The French, of course, have manifested active interest in the meeting and I have just talked with my French colleague after returning to Berlin and have promised him that as soon as texts are available in writing he will be provided with copies. He understands that thus far negotiation has been of oral character. I shall fill him in informally.

It should also be said in favor of Germans that they took the rapid fire treatment to which they were subjected at Frankfurt manfully. They were handed an extremely large package and their response was good. You can well understand delicate position they are in vis-à-vis their own population and particularly their political opponents. We will transmit the reaction of Soviet-dominated German press which will be, I believe, fairly rabid.

Murphy

1  Supra.

2  Ante.

3 For the memorandum of conversation by Murphy under reference here, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 827; regarding the Murphy letter referred to here, see ibid., p. 827, footnote 31.

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1048: Telegram

[Document 8]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent Paris, January 10, 1948—2 p. m.

162. Chauvel, who has consistently demonstrated his friendliness to the US, asked to see me this morning. He said that in the absence of Bidault and Acting [Foreign] Minister André Marie, both in the country, he felt constrained to express his government’s alarm and concern over the recently much publicized Clay-Robertson proposals for “a German economic administration”. He referred to tripartite conversations in London on December 17th envisaging further tripartite conversations on German affairs.1 He alleged that the French had been eager since that time to undertake those conversations, but had been “invariably put off”. He emphasized French fear that the Russians will now set up some sort of a government at Berlin. He gave me lengthy telegram on the subject sent to Bonnet at Washington with instructions to communicate it to the Secretary.2 A similar telegram was sent to Massigli who saw Bevin late yesterday afternoon. Bevin told him that he was as surprised as Massigli over the news from Frankfurt; that he had been told a telegram had arrived at the Foreign Office early in the afternoon, but he had not had an opportunity to read it. “This statement”, said Massigli, “was so astonishing that I took measures to check it, and I ascertained from other members of the Cabinet that, at a Cabinet meeting the day before in reply to questions from other member of the Cabinet, Bevin made a similar statement.”

Chauvel asked me urgently what I knew about all this. I replied only what I had read in the newspapers. I should appreciate any guidance from the Department in that connection.3

Caffery

1 For the records of the conversations under reference here, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 811–813.

2 Regarding Ambassador Bonnet’s note of January 11 to Secretary of State Marshall, see footnote 2 to Marshall’s note of January 17 to Bonnet, p. 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 17].

3  In telegram 226, January 14, from Paris, not printed, Ambassador Caffery reported on a talk he had just had with Foreign Minister Bidault who just returned from a Riviera vacation. Bidault had confirmed what Chauvel had told Caffery but in much more vigorous terms. Bidault also said: “I beseech you to endeavor to persuade your people to make it a little easier for me. What happened at Frankfurt is being exploited in such fashion here as to make my position well nigh untenable; and you know that I have cut my bridges behind me.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1448)

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1048: Telegram

[Document 9]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

secret London, January 10, 1948—2 p. m.

94. Kirkpatrick gave us following comments relative London press reports today of French representations to Bevin on Anglo-American proposals on German Economic Council. Kirkpatrick said Massigli first expressed “surprise” concerning aforementioned proposals during conversation with him on another matter on January 8, but Kirkpatrick felt Massigli left in calm frame of mind on subject. However, Massigli then wrote Sargeant expressing surprise at Anglo-American move in Germany and Kirkpatrick thought this letter was result of French Government communication to Massigli. Kirkpatrick said Bevin saw Massigli yesterday evening. According Kirkpatrick, Bevin at once told Massigli that the nature of the publicity given the Anglo-American action in western Germany had made it appear that final agreement had been reached whereas it was ad referendum agreement subject to final approval by the two governments. (Kirkpatrick added in this connection that Bevin had sent a message to Robertson stating that the character of the publicity had given concern to the Cabinet, and Bevin had pointed out to Robertson that agreement is of ad referendum nature).1 Further, according to Kirkpatrick, it was indicated to Massigli that the agreement itself is not as important as are the results hoped for from it. It was also indicated to Massigli that if the French had got together with the bi-zonal officials the French would have been informed of developments.

Kirkpatrick added that Bevin finally told Massigli that as regards “the issue” in Germany (Kirkpatrick explained Bevin here referred to future western German organization), the British “would have to get on with matters and could not hold things up while the French ruminated on the other side of the fence.”

Sent Department 94, repeated Paris 9, Berlin 2.

Gallman

1 In telegram 91, January 13, from Berlin, not printed, Ambassador Murphy reported that General Robertson had received instructions from his government to the effect that the Frankfurt decisions on bizonal reorganization were considered ad referendum and that he was to undertake conversations with the French in Berlin which would reopen the entire question. Robertson had informed General Clay of these instructions. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1348)

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1148: Telegram

[Document 10]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, January 11, 1948—7 p. m.

69. Personal for Thompson. Eyes Only. Your 38 January 10.1 Prior receipt yourtel I discussed informally with Clay outline of Dept’s views indicated in preceding telegram.2 Clay was in accord and together we tentatively and informally discussed that line with Saint Hardouin and De Carbonnel yesterday.3

I asked Clay whether he knew whether Dept of Army entertained different views and he replied that he thought not, stating that he saw no reason why at this stage after Secretary’s announcement regarding takeover in Germany July 1 Dept of Army should have any interest.4 He expressed opinion that possibly Draper may be laboring under some older consideration regarding effect Saar plan would have on appropriations.

We have also noted press reports regarding Bonnet’s so-called protest5 and Massigli’s representations to FO in London because French not consulted a priori about Frankfurt reorganization bizone. Saint Hardouin also referred yesterday to French regret. However here we have done our best to keep French informally advised and they realize that not having indicated desire to fuse their zone with ours that prior consultation not in any way obligated. They also recognize informally urgent need for improvement of economic situation western Germany continue if adverse political trends are to be avoided. Clay telegraphing his point of view regarding French dissatisfaction to Draper. As I see it the French dissatisfaction is rather of a formal nature and probably not of great importance. However, I would appreciate your reaction.

Clay thus far has not received advice from Army as suggested by your 38.

Murphy

1 Telegram 38, January 10, to Berlin, not printed, advised Murphy that the Department of the Army was instructing General Clay that in his coming conversations with the Kronen regarding the Saar question, he was to make no definitive agreements relative to the Saar pending the receipt of a policy cable which the Army hoped to send the following week (862.00/1–1048).

2 Regarding telegram 34, January 9, to Berlin, under reference here, see footnote 1, p. 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16].

3 Telegram 13, January 7, from Frankfurt, not printed, reported that Saint Hardouin had called on Murphy and had expressed French eagerness to meet with American and British representatives in order to discuss the question of the Saar, currency and financial matters, and any other related German topics. Murphy undertook to organize such tripartite meetings. (862.00/1–748) In telegram 64, January 10, from Berlin, not printed, Murphy reported that the first informal meeting was held in Berlin on January 9. Discussions were centered on the question of the integration of the Saar into France. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1048) This and subsequent informal tripartite meetings included Murphy and Wilkinson for the United States Steel and Weir for the British, and Carbonnel and Leroy Beaulieu representing France.

4 Regarding the assumption by the Department of State from the Department of the Army of the responsibility for the administration of the United States zone of occupation in Germany, see the editorial note, p. 1285 [Pg. 1285 is part of Doc. 717].

5 The reference here is presumably to Bonnet’s note of January 11 to the Secretary of State; see footnote 2 to the Secretary of State’s note of January 17 to Bonnet, p. 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 17].

Memorandum of Conversation, by William G. Conklin of the Division of Western, European Affairs 862.50/1–1248

[Document 11]

Memorandum of Conversation, by William G. Conklin of the Division of Western, European Affairs

confidential [Washington,] January 12, 1948.

Participants: Mr. Lovett, Under Secretary

Baron Silvercruys, Belgian Ambassador

Mr. Conklin, Division of Western European Affairs

The Belgian Ambassador called upon Mr. Lovett to leave with him a note1 again expressing the strong desire of the Belgian Government to be associated with any future discussions concerning the economic problems of Germany. As on previous occasions, the Belgian Ambassador emphasized the great importance to Belgium of a rehabilitation of the German economy and also, as heretofore, pointed out that Belgium as a result of its proximity to and long association with Germany was in a position, he felt, to offer practical advice and assistance in the solution of these problems.

The Ambassador referred specifically to discussions which he understood were to take place in the near future between representatives of the governments of the United States, Great Britain, and France and expressed his desire that Belgium be permitted to participate in these discussions. Mr. Lovett stated that he would inquire as to the status and location of the discussions referred to by the Ambassador.

The Belgian Ambassador inquired concerning the joint notes presented by his government and the governments of The Netherlands and Luxembourg to the Council of Foreign Ministers in London on November 26, 19472 to which, he stated, no replies had as yet been made. With respect to this point, Mr. Lovett also stated that he would ascertain the reasons why no replies had been made to the notes in question.

[ William G. Conklin ]

1 The note under reference, dated January 12, is not printed. Similar notes from the Netherlands Embassy and the Luxembourg Legation were delivered to the Department of State on January 14. Those notes, neither of which is printed, are filed separately under 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1448 and 862.50/1–1448, respectively.

2  Foreign Relations 1947, vol. ii, p. 774.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Inverchapel) 862.00/1–848

[Document 12]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Inverchapel)

top secret
urgent [Washington,] January 13, 1948.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I have considered the main conclusions regarding Germany approved by the Cabinet in London on January which you communicated to in of January 8 at Mr. Bevin’s request.1

I am in substantial agreement with the broad purpose of the recommendations, some of which I discussed with Mr. Bevin in London. I have observations to make on certain points, with respect to the rest I am in general concurrence.

I assume that the proposals discussed with the German political leaders in Frankfurt on January 7 and 8 meet the objective set forth in Section B.3 of your Aide-Mémoire. With respect to Section B.4, we are in accord that the trend should be in the direction of setting up a western German administration which would be responsive to popular will and which would perform clearly defined and limited governmental functions, although it should not be constituted as a government for western Germany. We feel there should be an evolutionary development in this regard, dependent to some extent on which action is taken in the Soviet zone, and we would prefer not committing ourselves to a point in time. I do not doubt that when the occasion arises we will be able to reach agreement.

As to Section B.5, I assume that the basis of action would be the political principles which our respective governments presented at Moscow and which differ in few essentials. In general, we feel that within the requirements of security and of extending the bizonal area to include the French, emphasis should be given to the need of affording the Germans greater initiative and freedom of action commensurate with the extent of the responsibility which they are to assume, particularly in connection with food production, collection and distribution.

Insofar as the immediate aim stated in Section B.7 applies to the scale of rations which the population is at present receiving, I agree that every effort should be made to meet the authorized ration. With respect to Sections B.7 and B.8, it might be mentioned specifically that a major objective of our policy is to bring about a more active and mutually beneficial exchange of goods and services between western Germany and the other countries participating in the European Recovery Program. This objective is not inconsistent, of course, with the preservation and development of important trade ties between eastern and western Europe, as envisaged in Section B.8 of the Aide-Mémoire.

I regret that I am still not in a position to agree to the proposal in Section B.9. As I informed Mr. Bevin in London, this is a matter which on our side awaits consideration by the Cabinet and must be determined also in consultation with leaders in Congress. I would suggest in the meantime this lack of agreement between us not be publicized.

With regard to the further negotiations mentioned in Section C, I would appreciate receiving from Mr. Bevin a statement of his understanding of the procedures we have agreed upon with the French. Discussions on the urgent technical problems of interest to the French are now in progress in Berlin. In a note2 summarizing our conversations in London, Mr. Bidault mentions that at the same time as the technical problems are being studied, long-term political questions which arise concerning the German settlement, particularly the future status of the Ruhr, must be considered. Mr. Bidault is agreeable to having these conversations open in London in the second half of January. In view of our commitments to the French, I should like to be clear whether in Mr. Bevin’s opinion negotiation of these matters should be initiated on any other than a tripartite basis, without prior consultation between ourselves.

I have no objection to the communication to Mr. Bidault, through your new Ambassador in Paris, of the British Government’s views as set forth in your Aide-Mémoire, particularly as an early approach might serve to allay French concern respecting recent developments in the bizonal area.

Faithfully yours,

G. C. Marshall

1 At the request of British Foreign Secretary Bevin, Ambassador Inverchapel on January 8 sent to Secretary of State Marshall a paper, not printed, setting forth the main recommendations concerning Germany approved by the British Cabinet that same day. According to those recommendations, the basic objects of British policy towards Germany were to proceed as rapidly as possible with the establishment of a stable, peaceful, and democratic Germany and to avoid the creation of a situation which could eventuate in the emergence of a Communist-controlled Germany. In the absence of a four-power agreement on Germany, Britain Would cooperate with other Western powers in undertaking a number of long-delayed practical economic and political measures. In his personal, top secret letter to Secretary Marshall transmitting the Cabinet recommendations on Germany, Inverchapel indicated that an early American reply would permit Sir Oliver Harvey, the newly appointed British Ambassador to France, to explain British policy to Foreign Minister Bidault during an inaugural audience on January 14 and would assist Bevin in preparing his forthcoming foreign policy statement to the House of Commons (862.00/1–848). For the text of Bevin’s; statement to Commons on January 22, which included an elucidation of British policy towards Germany, see Parliamentary Debates, House of Commons, 5th series, vol. 446, cols. 383–409 passim, or Documents on International Affairs 1947–1948, selected and edited by Margaret Carlyle and issued under the auspices of the Royal Institute of International Affairs (London, New York, Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1952), pp. 201–221.

2 The reference here is presumably to Ambassador Bonnet’s communication of December 22, 1947 to Secretary of State Marshall ( Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 829) summarizing Foreign Minister Bidault’s understanding of his conversation with Marshall in London on December 17, 1947 ( ibid., p. 813).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1548: Telegram

[Document 13]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent
niact Berlin, January 15, 1948—11 a. m.

107. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. Eyes Only. Refer my telegram 100, January 14.1 Last night at dinner I gave for French delegation, St. Hardouin told me he had been severely criticized by Paris for failing to keep them informed regarding Frankfurt decisions. He said confidentially he personally believed that the excitement in Paris over Frankfurt development was exaggerated and unfounded. He asserted that when Bidault returned to Paris from London he announced in FonOff that the Secretary had promised in his conversation there would be consultation with French on all matters of importance relating to Germany. Bidault hereupon requested Couve de Murville to make analysis of situation and prepare for conversations with US/UK representatives in Germany. Before de Murville could complete this work French were faced with what Bidault refers to as a fait accompli. According to St. Hardouin, Bidault responsible for difficulty because he is embarrassed as result of statements he made to FonOff staff after his conversation with the Secretary.

St. Hardouin suggested last evening that the three political advisers and the three economic advisers get together today and see whether they could not prepare joint telegram to govts regarding both Frankfurt development and subjects which have been under discussion in Berlin relating to Saar, et cetera. British were agreeable to this but Clay refused to let his economics adviser participate saying I could do as I pleased about it but that he would not go along in absence of instructions. British had telegraphed London at considerable length yesterday and French desired if possible to have three-way analysis sent London, Paris and Washington today, believing this would produce helpful reconciliation of views.

We may succeed in having some sort of conversations either today or tomorrow and I will telegraph you further.

Sent Department as 107; repeated Paris personal for Caffery 17, London personal for Gallman 11.

Murphy

1 Not printed; it reported that General Robertson had been instructed by his government to invite General Koenig to discuss at Berlin the recent American-British decisions on bizonal reorganization. General Robertson asked General Clay if he would be willing to extend such an invitation to Koenig jointly, but Clay felt he was not authorized to participate in such a meeting in the absence of instructions from Washington (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1448).

The Associate Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs (Wallner) to the Counselor of Embassy in France (Bonbright) French Desk File: Lot 53 D 246: File “Germany”

[Document 14]

The Associate Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs (Wallner) to the Counselor of Embassy in France (Bonbright)

personal and secret [Washington,] January 16, 1948.

Dear Jamie: Deliberately we have not yet answered your cables concerning the French protest on bizonal reorganization, because we feel it is better to wait until the matter is thoroughly clarified in Washington, and you know how difficult it is thoroughly to clarify in Washington policy matters concerning Germany.

I think that at this stage the following points emerge: (1) In London bizonal reorganization and conversations with the French were discussed in water-tight compartments. The connection between them never seems to have been established in the minds of American and British officials and no discussions took place at any time about whether or when the French should be informed or consulted.

(2) The atmospherics, but not the record, of the Bidault-Marshall conversations indicated future collaboration with the French on future German questions. Consequently, the French have some cause for being both surprised and hurt at the manner of announcement of the Frankfurt decisions.

(3) As for substance the French have absolutely no kick coming since no commitment was made or even contemplated that they would be either consulted or informed concerning bizonal reorganization.

(4) The British and ourselves had a different conception of how far and how quickly and with how little consultation Clay and Robertson should proceed in bizonal reorganization. However, both Washington and London was [were] equally surprised at both the scope of the Frankfurt decisions and the dramatic manner of their presentation to the world.

(5) Until the French join trizonia and assume responsibility therefor, they cannot logically expect to have either a voice or a veto in bizonal matters. However, no understanding has yet been reached on this. In cases such as the present one, the French should be relieved that they are not called upon to approve measures which in some respects conflict with their doctrine on Germany. I believe an understanding must be reached whereby the French voice in German decisions will be in exact ratio to the responsibilities which they are willing to assume.

(6) Public opinion in France on the German problem has not been allowed to evolve with the times. The armed truce by the political parties on this subject has frozen French thought on Germany as it was in 1944 when it differed hardly at all from; 1919. The average Frenchman thinks a Frankfurt Government as dangerous as a Berlin Government: he has not digested the significance of the latest CFM, and his Government, with a persistence which according to our standards would add up to treachery, has kept him in the dark about the facts of life. He must be told not to tremble at the Frankfurt mouse as if it were a Berlin lion.

Perhaps before you get this letter the whole thing will be considerably clarified.

I do not conceal my very real disappointment at a development Which contributes to disharmony with the French on the German question at a time when I had hoped that at last a common understanding was about to be reached. As you know, I have been plugging for such a common understanding for two years.

Very best,

W. Wallner

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1748: Telegram

[Document 15]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent
niact Berlin, January 17, 1948—8 p. m.

137. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. Informal discussions were undertaken last night by US and British with French. These were carried on by Steel for British, Saint Hardouin for French and by me. I opened meeting stating that while I had no instructions from my government we should be glad to explain what had been done in Frankfurt. I recalled that basic outline of discussions that had already been given and emphasized that Frankfurt meeting was preliminary discussion to determine what practical steps could be taken to improve economic conditions of Bizonia. I explained that no constitution was envisaged but rather a modus vivendi under which certain proposals have been submitted to Germans. There were no texts as yet to be given but when charters for the bank and the court were prepared they could be shown to the French.

St. Hardouin replied by stating that French delegation would first prefer to take up question of the other discussions which had been proceeding between the experts respecting Saar and particularly question of Saar coal.1 After that they would return to Frankfurt meeting.

We and British then explained that experts had come to agreement on schedule for withdrawal of Saar coal and were now awaiting instructions from our respective governments respecting the date. Negotiations can continue as soon as such instructions are received.

French then stated that in Paris there is apparently misunderstanding with respect to question of Saar trade with Bizonia and question of trade of truncated French zone with Bizonia as result of separation of Saar. French had come prepared to conclude if possible arrangements for separation of Saar from German economy but had not come prepared to discuss in detail question of balance of trade between Bizonia and truncated French zone. French zone would obviously have to pay in goods for coal from Ruhr but difference of opinion had developed in meeting with respect to what goods and what amounts French zone can give for coal. There then ensued long discussion on this point in which British and Americans finally pointed out that if there were a deficit between Bizonia and truncated French zone, deficit would have to be covered in dollars. In other words, Bizonia could not undertake, as result of situation that would arise from separation of Saar, to support economy of truncated. French zone with population of 5 millions. Bizonia had limited funds on which to operate and if balance of payments should lead to deficit it could not be expected that Bizonia could absorb additional costs.

Discussion then ensued regarding amount of deficit and it was brought out that this would depend upon amount and character of commodities which Bizonia could take. While no figures had as yet been submitted by experts, there was obviously difference of opinion respecting how a balanced trade could be accomplished. French pointed out that an equilibrium could be attained if Bizonia were to accept certain products such as wine. US–UK replied that Bizonia obviously could not absorb luxury products and reminded French that in case of Dutch vegetables and Greek tobacco we had refused sometime ago to take such products however desirable they might be because with our limited funds Bizonia must be certain that only essential products are imported. Furthermore if French wish US–UK to share deficit of their zone they must be prepared to share deficit of Bizonia. US–UK have specific instructions to make Bizonia self-sufficient and are not authorized to increase Bizonia deficit.

To this French replied that in their opinion the two questions of separation of Saar and trade relations of truncated French zone, while related, should be settled separately. US–UK pointed out that this segregation is difficult to make and while we realize that separation of Saar would lead to certain consequences, we could not assume added burdens in respect of French zone which was not under our control and which was not covered in funds available for Bizonia deficit.

I then asked what was estimated annual deficit of truncated French zone and French replied it would probably attain $60 million for food alone.

Discussion then turned to effect of free exchange of goods between Bizonia and truncated French zone. French indicated they might cover food deficit of their zone under ERP. I replied I could not debate this aspect in detail here as this would obviously be matter for Washington decision. Both US–UK pointed out that we are primarily concerned with our budget for Bizonia and costs chargeable thereto.

There then ensued brief discussion respecting mechanism for shipping arrangements between Bizonia and French zone and US–UK indicated they could easily establish system by utilizing interzonal shipping documents already approved on quadripartite basis. In conclusion on subject of Bizonia-French zone trade, French pointed out that French could only agree to free circulation of goods between two areas after exchange of important products had been agreed upon and programmed.

Attention was then given to question of currency reform and US–UK indicated that French had been kept informed. Bank charter will not be given to Germans before Monday and French will be shown charter before it is discussed again in Frankfurt. French would likewise be informed before we would go to ACC with currency reform plan.

It was then agreed that while awaiting reply on date of application of coal schedule that experts will continue to examine problem of trade between Bizonia and truncated French zone with particular reference to statistics on probable trade and what commodities could be exchanged. Furthermore they would examine size of probable deficit of French zone.

Re Frankfurt discussions, French stated their government’s surprise over developments at time when we had agreed to examine jointly various German problems. Inquired whether they could be given texts for study after which they might desire to ask questions and submit further observations. As result of information given few days earlier to experts, Paris had been informed of principal points. US–UK replied there are no final texts as yet, that discussions had been of preliminary character, that certain texts are now under discussion with Germans and there is no approved general text as yet of an Anglo-American agreement. French stated their concern at budget provisions of Frankfurt proposals whereby Economic Council would acquire certain financial autonomy and would be able to subsidize German industry. It was stated in reply that Council cannot levy taxes in excess of expenses and subsidies properly legislated. Furthermore, these proposals would not prejudice future tax structure. French were then informed that there is no text as yet available and discussions with Germans on taxing power were still going on.

In any case, it could be stated in general that taxing powers to be conferred upon Council would not go beyond US idea expressed at Moscow respecting segregation of powers between central German government and Laender. US–UK willing to give summary of this question at early date.

French then inquired re proposed Laender union bank and said they must have adequate information on this in connection with any consideration of fusing their zone with Bizonia. It was agreed they would be given this information as soon as charter for bank was more specifically developed.

At conclusion this meeting Generals Clay, Robertson and Koenig met with delegations. After some brief and highly informal exchanges, General Clay made following proposal orally to French. US will agree to sell Ruhr coal to truncated French zone for reichsmarks. When this has been done, if there should still remain deficit in French zone trade with Bizonia, French will have to cover this deficit in dollars. If, on other hand, balance goes against Bizonia, such deficit will be charged against coal shipped to French zone.

French professed themselves personally as delighted with this proposal and think it will make it possible to come to agreement here in near future. British will probably go along as we underwrite costs of Bizonia. However, none of this has as yet been reduced to writing and respective delegations are consulting their governments

St. Hardouin expressed himself as pleased with spirit of meeting and progress made which he hoped would aid in calming Bidault’s irritation and lead to better understanding of problem in Paris.

Sent Department as 137, repeated Paris as 24, to London as 17.

Murphy

1 For additional documentation on the American-British-French discussions regarding the Saar, currently in progress in Berlin, see pp. 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46] ff.

The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) EUR Files: Lot 55 D 374: Saar–1948: Telegram

[Document 16]

The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay)1

secret [Washington,] 17 January 1948.

Warx 94204. From CSCAD cite PL. Reourads Jan WX 98246.2 Personal for Clay.

Negotiations with French re Saar is subj.

Subj negotiations pursuant to Bidault-Marshall conversations in London3 and ur understanding with Secy State. Believe US views in such negotiations should be set forth as fols: 1. US now ready to recognize de facto separation of Saar from Germany and incorporation its economy with that of France subj to agreement on related issues involved and to confirmation of this arrangement in final peace settlement.

2. Accordingly US prepared to have Berlin-agreed formula4 for gradual withdrawal of Saar coal from German coal pool applied forthwith.

3. US Govt prepared to join UK and French Govts in notifying ECE of above formula, but under condition, stated by Secy State to Bidault in London that France will have to make her own case for coal allocations before ECE.

4. Trade between bizone and Saar should, unless you perceive urgent objections, now be included under offset pmt agreement between bizone and France but without prejudice to any later decision re French contribution to support eventual trizonal economic unit. Understand from French here such trade approx balanced at present.

5. Altho attempt should be made to restore prewar boundaries of Saar, US prepared for sake of agreement to accept present boundaries for adm purposes subj to final settlement in peace treaty.

6. France should agree to announce voluntarily in IARA that it will debit its reparation share with value of plant and equip which would have been declared avail as reparation if Saar had remained part of Germany. Value should be subj of tripartite agreement and estimated on basis of Saar industrial plant [apparent omission] of that of three western zones as whole. Rate at which French reparation share shall be debited should be left to decision by IARA. Since on basis of this formula IARA, thru France as IARA member, would receive as reparation all of equip which would have been avail to all reparation claimants from Saar, Potsdam request for 75 to 25 div between IARA and USSR/Poland of reparation plant avail from three western zones would not be met without some upward adjustment of USSR/Polish share of subsequent reparation availabilities. Such adjustment will not need to be made unless agreement ultimately reached to resume reparation deliveries to USSR/Poland. Entire formula outlined above is modification of one agreed by three powers at CFM Moscow session which was transmitted to Berlin as Mos Emb 328 and amended by ourad 98246 and which no longer seems applicable in view of subsequent conclusion bizonal level of industry and untenability of reqmt of Control Council approval.

7. Other questions such as those relating to nationality of Saar residents, disposition of German state property in Saar might be left to later negotiations.

8. Suggest you emphasize to French that in view of our willingness to accommodate them on Saar we would expect them to be cooperative in connection with new arrangements for economic orgn in western Germany. State Dept will probably make same point in reply to French protest.

Pls inform Murphy of above.

1 Numbered paragraphs 1 through 7 of this telegram were transmitted to Murphy earlier in telegram 34, January 9, to Berlin, with the explanation that the message was for Murphy’s personal information and the Department was attempting to obtain Department of the, Army concurrence in having it transmitted to Clay as a formal instruction (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–948). This instruction was discussed by Department of State and Department of the Army representatives on January 12 (see memorandum of conversation by Oppenheimer, January 12, 1948: WE Files: Lot 53 D 246: File “Saar”), and it was referred to Secretary Marshall on January 13 for approval under cover of the following memorandum by Frank Wisner to Under Secretary Lovett: “Referring further to our conversation of Saturday morning [January 10], I attach a draft of proposed cable to General Clay, the text of which has now been cleared with the Army. I understand that you consider it advisable for the Secretary to pass on this message, since it represents a crystallization of US position with regard to the Saar.

“Actually, on several occasions; and as recently as the closing days of the CFM in London, indications have been given to the French of the willingness of the US to agree to the incorporation of the economy of the Saar with that of France, subject to a confirmation of this arrangement in the final peace settlement. The Army raised the question whether we contemplated obtaining any specific quid pro quo from the French in this connection. We have advised the Army, without any stated objection from them, that we do not intend to ask for a specific quid pro quo in consideration of the de facto recognition of the economic integration of the Saar into France, because of our previous expressions of intention and because of our desire to appear helpful to the French in regard to this, matter. However, you will note that the proposed cable contains in paragraph 8 a suggestion that General Clay emphasize to the French that, in view of our willingness to accommodate them on the Saar, we would wish them to be cooperative in connection with new arrangements for the economic organization in Western Germany. We also indicated to the Army that we would consider making a similar point in our reply to the French note protesting the Frankfurt developments.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1348)

2 Not printed.

3 See Ambassador Douglas’ memorandum of the conversation between the Secretary of State and Foreign Minister Bidault at London on December 17, 1947, Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 813.

4 Regarding the formula under reference, see telegram 3244, October 1, 1947, from Berlin, ibid., p. 1098.

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Bonnet) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1148

[Document 17]

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Bonnet)1

Washington, January 17, 1948.

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the French Ambassador and has the honor to acknowledge His Excellency’s note No. 11 of January 11, 1948.2

It is regretted that the French Government was not kept currently informed regarding the discussions in Frankfurt relating to proposed changes in the bizonal economic organization.

The United States Government does not attach to the proposals resulting from these discussions the same interpretation as that set forth in His Excellency’s note. The plans formulated at Frankfurt were intended simply to make the bizonal economic organization more workable and are considered to be within the framework of the present structure. It was not intended that they should establish political institutions prejudging the constitution of a future Germany or in any way set up a western German state. These considerations were impressed upon the German authorities in Frankfurt.

The United States and British Governments are faced with an emergency in their combined zones, as evidenced in particular by the current food difficulties, which requires immediate action to make the bizonal economic administration more effective. Since the two Governments bear primary responsibility for this area, they felt justified in taking the initiative to formulate adequate measures. The United States Government supports the general objective of the plans drawn up at Frankfurt.

While the United States Government must retain freedom of action to deal in agreement with the British Government with the administrative and economic crisis in the combined zones, it will be happy to receive and give sympathetic consideration to any comments which the French Government may wish to offer in detail regarding the Frankfurt proposals for bizonal reorganization. General Clay has been requested to furnish to the French military authorities in Berlin complete information concerning these proposals, including written texts when finally drawn up, to explain the proposals fully, and to transmit to this Government the views of the French authorities. The United States Government is happy in the meantime to note that the tripartite discussions concerning trade and technical relations between the western zones are in progress in Berlin.

The United States Government is prepared to engage at an early date in tripartite discussions at governmental level to explore the possibilities for the development at the appropriate time of a German political organization. This matter is considered to be one of the long-term questions referred to in the talks between the United States Secretary of State and the French Foreign Minister in London, as confirmed in the French Ambassador’s note of December 22, 1947.3

The United States Government takes this occasion to remind the French Government that it has looked forward to French participation from the time when the United States Government first made its proposal for economic fusion of the zones. When this fusion occurs the French Government will be able, of course, to take part, as a welcome and valued participant, in all proceedings relating to zonal organization.

1 A handwritten marginal notation on the source text indicates that this note was initialed by Under Secretary Lovett and was handed to Ambassador Bonnet at the French Embassy on January 17.

2 Not printed. In it the French Government formally protested the creation of a Bizonal Economic Administration in the American-British zones of occupation in Germany. The French felt that the action fundamentally changed the structure of the bizonal area, constituted in reality the creation of a German Government, and was contrary to the understanding reached between Secretary of State Marshall and Foreign Minister Bidault during their conversation in London on December 17, 1947 [see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 813 and 829]. The French feared that the de facto creation of a German government with headquarters in Frankfurt might give the Soviet Union an excuse to create a German government, in Berlin. The French also protested that the American-British bizonal economic reforms, as approved by German authorities, had taken on a contractual character which appeared to predetermine the future political organization of Germany. Finally, the note observed that the economic reforms had been accomplished in a great deal of haste and that discussions with French representatives on the matter had been postponed until after agreement had been reached to establish the Bizonal Economic Administration. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1148)

3  Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 829.

The British Ambassador (Inverchapel) to the Secretary of State 862.00/1–1748

[Document 18]

The British Ambassador (Inverchapel) to the Secretary of State

top secret
personal Washington, 17 January, 1948.

Dear Mr. Secretary: Mr. Bevin has asked me to thank you for your very helpful reply to his communication about Germany.1 He wishes you to know that he was very glad to be able to take account of your views in issuing instructions to Sir Oliver Harvey for his first meeting with M. Bidault.

With regard to the individual points raised in your letter of the 13th of January, Mr. Bevin agrees that the proposals discussed with the German political leaders in Frankfurt on the 7th and 8th of January meet the objective set forth in Section B (3) of the Aide-Mémoire enclosed in my letter of the 8th of January.

Mr. Bevin agrees that it is essential that talks on the official level between representative of the United States, United Kingdom and French Governments should take place in London as soon as possible and that these talks should; cover the whole range of short-term and long-term German problems. He regards the Ruhr as being one of these problems and he considers that, as mentioned in Sections B (5), C (12) and C (14) of my Aide-Mémoire of the 8th of January, an attempt should be made to settle the question of the Saar before passing on to the other French claims such as those connected with the Ruhr. Mr. Bevin also agrees that the discussions of urgent technical problems which are already taking place in Berlin should continue. He does not intend to hold any separate talks with the French in advance of the Three-Power talks in London.

As our two Governments are partners in the bizonal arrangements, Mr. Bevin would like to arrange for three or four days to be kept clear, before the Three-Power talks at an official level take place in London, for a discussion between British and American representatives on the problems which will be discussed subsequently on a Three-Power basis. The object of these earlier discussions would be to cover the ground quickly in advance in order that your representatives and ours may know where our Governments stand on all the points involved and in order that our joint position as partners should not be weakened vis-à-vis the French.

With this plan in mind, Mr. Bevin suggests that the United States Government should send representatives to London in time for discussions to begin with British representatives on the 28th January. These discussions could last until the end of the week and the French Government could be invited to send representatives to join the talks on the 2nd of February.

Mr. Bevin would be glad to know whether you agree to the procedure suggested.2 If so, arrangements will have to be made for appropriate British and United States representatives to attend from Germany, including at a suitable moment the two Military Governors. Mr. Bevin would be grateful if you could help in this connexion and, in particular, if you could arrange for General Clay’s presence in London when he is required.

On receiving your reply, Mr. Bevin will issue an invitation to the French Government.

Yours sincerely,

Inverchapel

1 See Secretary of State’s communication of January 13 to Inverchapel, p. 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12].

2 In conversations with the Secretary of State on January 19 and with Hickerson on January 20, Lord Inverchapel was informed that Ambassador Lewd Douglas, who would head the group of United States officials taking part in the London Three-Power talks on Germany, would not be able to return to London before February 15. It was hoped that the British would agree to the February 15 date rather than the February 2 date first suggested by Foreign Secretary Bevin. Lord Inverchapel was also informed that the United States agreed to preliminary US–UK talks for a day or two in advance of the Three-Power talks. (Memoranda of conversation by Hickerson, January 19 and 20: 740.00119 Council/1–1948 and 1–2047)

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 851.5151/1–2048

[Document 19]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 1

secret [Washington,] January 20, 1948.

At the request of M. Bidault the French Ambassador called on me this afternoon to explain the former’s concern over the recent events involving the Frankfurt decisions and over the publicity which had been given to them in the American press. The press reports which had implied that a new era for Germany would be the result of these decisions, had given the French Government very real concern in the light of the London talks where they had understood not only that France would be consulted with regard to the future of Germany but that it would be allowed to comment upon the bizonal organization. M. Bidault also felt that there might be less desire on the part of the Anglo-American officials in Germany to work with the French than had been evidenced in the London talks.

M. Bonnet said the recent exchange of notes2 had to some extent reassured his Government in the foregoing respect but that it still felt there would be constant misunderstanding and ground for these same difficulties until agreement could be reached upon the wider aspects of German policy which they hoped could be achieved during the forthcoming London talks. The Ambassador then inquired whether there had been any developments in this respect and whether these talks would take place as envisaged in London and in the French note of December 22.3

I explained that the British Government only two days ago had suggested to me that these talks might be scheduled for February 2 in London.4 I said I was equally anxious that they should be held but thought they might have to be somewhat delayed because Mr. Douglas, who was to return to London for them, was at present very much occupied, as M. Bonnet was aware, with matters before Congress. I also said that General Clay was coming home to assist in the reparations problem before Congress. Whereas, I did not preclude the possibility that the talks might begin February 2, I thought they might have to be postponed somewhat longer until—say about February 10. It all depended upon the progress of the recovery program in the Congressional Committees. For these reasons I had not yet replied to the British request to set the date.

M. Bonnet then showed some concern lest the British and American Governments might reach decisions prior to this meeting which could then be presented to the French as a fait accompli. I told him we had had no preliminary discussions with the British in regard to the agenda, in fact, none had been set for the meeting.

I then told the Ambassador that I appreciated that press reports created difficulties for M. Bidault but that if I were affected by every press report it would be impossible for me to fight the very real battle which I was putting up. M. Bidault must realize the importance of this battle not only to France but to all of us. I must expect that he will help me.

In so far as keeping the French informed of developments in Germany was concerned, I said the Ambassador would realize that once the French zone was joined with ours they would participate fully in all discussions but pending that time they must appreciate that as soon as discussions about forthcoming developments are concluded the press gets an idea of them. This usually occurs as questions are asked immediately after the meetings, before it is possible to inform the French representatives. If at the end of meetings our representatives waited to inform the press until they had told the French, an impossible situation would be created and the press would clamor that they were being left out. In other words, it was impossible for us always to withhold information until France had had a chance to comment. M. Bonnet said he appreciated this difficulty but expressed the hope that in so far as possible the French be informed of pending decisions before they are finally concluded and announced.

With respect to the substance of the Frankfurt discussions the French Government, according to M. Bonnet, was concerned that they went too far in the direction of centralization. They would for example prefer that the veto power of the Upper House be strengthened, that the appointment of the Council be made by the Upper House and confirmed by the Lower and that the budget be based upon appropriate allocations from the different Laender rather than upon general taxes.

The Ambassador then said he had one other matter to raise with me and referred to the importance which his Government attached to its proposals for the devaluation of the franc.5 In view of the political significance of this matter, M. Bidault had asked him to tell me how vital it was for the future of the French Government that its proposals be at least supported by the United States before the Monetary Fund. He said he had explained the views of his government to Mr. Thorp but that he wished to bring their political importance to my attention. I replied that I would have to be guided by the decision of the National Advisory Council in this matter but that I was sure it was being given most careful consideration. I could not comment further at this time.

[Source text not signed]

1 This memorandum was drafted by Samuel Reber, Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs.

2 See the Secretary of State’s note of January 17 to Ambassador Bonnet, p. 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 17], and footnote 2 thereto.

3  Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 829.

4 See Ambassador Inverchapel’s communication of January 17, supra.

5 Additional documentation regarding the concern of the United States over the devaluation of the French franc is printed in volume iii .

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2248: Telegram

[Document 20]

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger)1 to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, January 22, 1948—8 p. m.

190. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. Remytel 178, January 21.2 St. Hardouin sent Seydoux to see me late today respecting text of bizonal reorganization plan. After thanking me for text given them yesterday, Seydoux stated that he was not authorized to give any official reaction of his government at this time, but text is being transmitted to Paris for study and the French authorities here may later have some observations to make in Berlin.

Seydoux then questioned me on procedure which was envisaged to put the proposed reorganization plan into effect and seemed to be far more interested in this than in the substance of the text. I replied to this question in a general way and stated that the text is still tentative and is today being discussed with Germans. I told him that only subsequent to these discussions would final approval be given. He was very much interested to know whether after discussing it with the Germans the document would be submitted to Washington, and London for final governmental approval. I replied this would no doubt depend upon the nature of the changes and particularly whether the German representatives suggested anything that might constitute a departure from the overall instructions given Clay and Robertson. I continued in stating that, as he no doubt would recall from the reply given in Washington on January 17 to the French protest on bizonal reorganization, we are endeavoring to carry out in Berlin the promises set forth in our note. (Re Deptel 90, January 17, paragraph 53 )

Seydoux then made a few observations on the substance of the plan, constantly reiterating that they were his personal observations and not those of his government. His objections in brief related to powers of the Economic Council re inland waterways, re revenues, particularly income, wage, and corporation taxes, re the proposed bizonal courts, and re the authority to override a Laenderrat veto. He also made some general observations to the effect that the powers granted to the Economic Council appeared to go beyond our ideas on the separation of Laender from federal powers as expressed at Moscow. He concluded in stating that he would inform me later whether the French Government should submit its observations on the plan in Berlin or at some other place.

Sent Department as 190, repeated London as 26, Paris as 36.

Riddleberger

1 Between January 20 and 27, Ambassador Murphy was in Washington for consultation.

2 Not printed. It reported that the text of the bizonal reorganization plan was given to St. Hardouin on January 21. The plan was in the form of a draft proclamation by the U.S. Military Government rather than in the form of an American-British agreement. It was expected that in the course of the coming week the plan would be approved by British authorities, discussed with German representatives in Frankfurt, and receive final approval by the Bipartite Board (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2148). For the text of the U.S. Military Government Proclamation on bizonal reorganization as eventually issued on February 9, 1948, see Germany 1947–1949, pp, 466–479.

3 Not printed; it transmitted the text of the Secretary of State’s note of January 17 to Ambassador Bonnet, p. 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 17].

The British Ambassador (Inverchapel) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/1–2348

[Document 21]

The British Ambassador (Inverchapel) to the Secretary of State 1

secret Washington, 23 January, 1948.

Dear Mr. Secretary: Mr. Bevin wishes me to thank you for your reply to his message,2 in which you expressed your wish that Mr. Douglas should lead the United States delegation to the proposed three-power talks on Germany. Mr. Bevin welcomes the nomination of Mr. Douglas and realises that he cannot be spared until the 15th of February.

I am accordingly instructed to invite you to send a delegation to begin preliminary talks in London on the 16th of February, with a view to opening the three-power talks with representatives of the French Government on the 19th of February. Mr. Bevin would be glad to know the names of the other members of the United States delegation as soon as possible. He is particularly glad to hear that you agree that General Clay should be present.

Mr. Bevin has informed the French Ambassador in London that he has agreed that the talks should begin in London on or about the 18th of February and has warned him that there may be preliminary discussions between United States and British representatives on bizonal and other matters. Mr. Bevin assured the French Ambassador that these preliminary talks would not in any way prejudge the issues to be discussed on a three-power basis or prejudice the position of the French delegation.

I hope shortly to be able to convey to you Mr. Bevin’s suggestions as to the subjects which should be discussed.

Yours sincerely,

Inverchapel

1 In acknowledging this letter on January 29, the Secretary expressed his willingness to send to London a delegation headed by Ambassador Douglas to begin preliminary talks with the British on February 16 in advance of the opening of the Three-Power talks on February 19. The Secretary expected that General Clay and Ambassador Murphy would also join the American Delegation in London (740.00119 Council/1–2948). Subsequently the Department requested and the British Foreign Office agreed to a postponement of the American-British discussions until February 19 and the opening of the Three-Power talks until February 23. The postponement was made necessary due to Ambassador Douglas involvement in Congressional hearings in Washington.

2 The reference here is to Inverchapel’s communication of January 17 to the Secretary of State, p. 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], and the Secretary’s oral reply, footnote 2, p. 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18].

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2448: Telegram

[Document 22]

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, January 24, 1948—3 p. m.

206. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. In a conversation last night with St. Hardouin and Noiret, I got the strong impression that the French in Berlin are not particularly interested in continuing, at least at this time, conversations either on the Saar or on the reorganization of Bizonia. As reported in mytel 202, January 24,1 there is no text that was agreed to here on withdrawal scale Saar coal and all of the French delegation have now departed for Paris.

The discussions by the experts on the question of Saar reparations here also inconclusive. However, we feel impasse has been reached. Rather careful calculations indicate that reparations adjustment for Saar would absorb complete French shares IARA. French indicated this highly undesirable and were going to refer matter to Paris. That would imply that some method of calculation could be found which would not wipe out their total IARA share.

St. Hardouin asked me when I could give him a copy of the draft proposal on the bizonal court2 and I replied that I hoped to be able to do so within a few days. Neither Noiret nor St. Hardouin were disposed to discuss the substance of the bizonal economic reorganization and Noiret hinted very strongly that all these matters were now of great political import and would have to be discussed at the “forthcoming meeting in London”. St. Hardouin said that the French Government thought that this meeting would convene about the middle of February.

Insofar as the French are concerned, merely wish to advise that there are no talks consequence on either the Saar or Bizonia that are now going on with them in Berlin and they show no disposition at present to resume such discussions.

Sent Department as 206, repeated London as 27, Paris as 4.

Riddleberger

1 Not printed.

2 Regarding the February 9, 1948 Military Government Proclamation providing for the establishment of a Bizonal German High Court, see the editorial note, p. 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36].

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2648

[Document 23]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

secret

Aide-Mémoire

His Majesty’s Government would be grateful for the views of the United States Government on the scope of the forthcoming three-power talks about Germany in London before putting any detailed proposals to the French Government.

Mr. Bevin suggests that the aim of these talks should be to reach agreement in principle on the main issues and that any outstanding details could then be worked out at separate meetings either in Berlin or London.

Mr. Bevin proposes that the subjects to be discussed should include: (a) Trizonal fusion, including the political and constitutional structure of Western Germany;

(b) Security against Germany;

(c) Control of the Ruhr;

(d) Frontiers and internal administrative boundaries;

(e) Reparations deliveries;

(f) Association of Benelux countries in policy in Western Germany;

(g) Maintenance of four-power machinery in Berlin.

The talks might also cover any outstanding issues not settled by the discussions in Berlin about the Saar, financial reform and other technical questions.

The above list of subjects does not necessarily represent the order of discussion which can be decided at the first meeting. Mr. Bevin suggests that an attempt should be made to settle the problem of the Saar before opening any new questions and that it should be made clear to the French representatives from the start that these talks are concerned primarily with the single problem of the future co-operation of the three governments in Germany and that all the problems involved should be dealt with in that context and not in isolation.

His Majesty’s Embassy would be grateful for the views of the United States Government on these proposals as soon as possible so that the French Government may be informed.

Washington, 26 January, 1948.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2848: Telegram

[Document 24]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, January 28, 1948—2 p. m.

225. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson Eyes Only. Department’s 136, January 261 and London’s 314, January 27.2 I discussed with Clay on return trip text of French note dated January 23 copy of which handed me by Jake Beam on departure. I have also informed him of content of London’s telegram. Thus far Clay has not been in contact with Robertson and Steel is in Frankfurt working on plan for reorganization of German bizonal agencies.

I have made it very clear to Clay that what is desired is gesture to French before final approval of plan with minor concession on one or two points. This would serve purpose of avoiding accusation of facing them with a fait accompli.

Clay is telegraphing Draper he fails to understand the situation and that his instructions are to proceed to effect western German reorganization as promptly and efficiently as possible. In absence of further instructions from Department of Army he would continue along these lines. In that connection he has read both Department’s 136 of January 26 and London’s 314 of January 27.

I have been in contact with St. Hardouin this morning and are to meet this afternoon. Undoubtedly, Robertson will be in touch with General Clay during course of day. I shall hope to telegraph further re French counterproposals.

Murphy

1  Not printed; it summarized the formal French comments on the bizonal economic reforms presented in a memorandum delivered to the Department of State on January 23 (see footnote 2 to the Secretary of State’s note of January 31 to Ambassador Bonnet, p. 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 31]). The telegram concluded with the following observations: “Dept desires Ambassador Murphy suggest to General Clay that he discuss French counter-proposals with General Robertson and cable joint views earliest so that reply may be made to French Govt before entry into force of Frankfurt decisions. Views will be transmitted immediately to French upon receipt and you would be notified.

“Without derogating our support of Frankfurt decisions, it might be useful if accomodation could be given to French on some point not detrimental to effectiveness of new bizonal plan.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2648)

2 Not printed; it reported that the British Foreign Office had instructed General Robertson to discuss the French observations with General Clay and to make concession to French on some nonessential points (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2748).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2848: Telegram

[Document 25]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, January 28, 1948—5 p. m.

227. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. Eyes Only. On return trip I discussed with Clay, Jake Beam’s outline of agenda for London meeting.1 Clay’s reaction was particularly vigorous on item five re Wuerttemberg-Baden. This suggestion was made on theory that French might bring up reconstitution of old states of Wuerttemberg and Baden and that it could be point upon which we could stand in return for French agreement to join in Trizonia. It was intimated that we might cede north Baden. I informed Jake Beam before departure I thought this would meet with violent opposition on part of Army.

Clay has telegraphed Draper personally to effect that while it is desirable for Baden to become whole state this can well await peace treaty when allied supervision of states’ governments may be expected to cease and occupational areas can then be re-determined as presumably token forces only would be left. Clay’s reasons for opposing any concession now re north Baden are as follows: 1. Heidelberg is to become CINCEUR headquarters and move is under way to free Frankfurt for bizonal activities.

2. Troops in area are billeted in casernes repaired at great expense. No space available elsewhere without new requisitioning. We have stopped new requisitioning and to start again would be serious blow to German morale.

3. It is important that US maintain access area to Rhine in event defense measures become necessary.

4. Heidelberg is cultural city important to our objectives. North Baden would be opposed to transfer as much as Germans desire restoration of Baden as state.

5. North Baden is important industrial area and essential to recovery program. Even if French join trizonal arrangement they can not be expected to push economic recovery and to get them to do so will require constant effort.

6. French political objectives are different than ours and any action relating to north Baden should await decision on western German government rather than economic fusion.

7. We are financing western Germany at great cost. It would be difficult for Congress to understand why we reduce our area of direct influence while we are paying bill. Our loss of prestige in Germany would be great and our part in control of Germany would be reduced. Also resultant reduction in our commitments might be worthwhile but such transfer would neither lessen our financial burden nor the number of troops now needed in Germany. In Clay’s opinion price of transfer is far too great to warrant it as inducement to France for entering trizonal arrangement.

I agree with foregoing. I do not agree this is moment to diminish prestige of US Army in Europe and the concession indicated certainly would not enhance our prestige in German eyes or for that matter in European eyes. It occurs to me, however, that compromise solution might be possible. Leaving occupational area as it now stands it might be feasible to organize joint military government administration of states of Wuerttemberg and Baden as separate units. With inauguration of civilian control of military government it might be possible to work out some plan of Franco-American integrated organization in each of states of Baden and Wuerttemberg. I think this should be explored. I know that on the French side, many months ago similar idea was entertained.

Agenda outline by Beam seems to cover principal points for discussion at London. I must admit to certain reservation re suggestion that French be “induced” to join fusion at an early date. I think it should be made abundantly clear that French are exceedingly welcome and invitation to join is open to them. It seems to me there is difference between such a line and one which would create atmosphere of inducement inform of concessions. As Department is aware, in our recent conversations with French at Berlin re Saar and trade with truncated French zone we made important concessions to French which translated into money involve millions of dollars additional expense to us. French have expressed themselves as pleased and General Koenig and Saint Hardouin particularly have shown great enthusiasm for our position. On basis of what I heard last week from several members Senate and House Appropriations Committees, as well as from members House Foreign Affairs Committee, further concessions at our expense would seem unwise as they are unjustified.

Murphy

1 The outline of the agenda for the forthcoming London conference prepared by Beam has not been found.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2848: Telegram

[Document 26]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, January 28, 1948—10 p. m.

234. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. Eyes Only. With further reference to French note of January 23 regarding reorganization German bizonal economic agencies,1 Riddleberger, Steel and Litchfield are in Frankfurt today discussing plan with German representatives. After this discussion report and recommendation will be telegraphed you regarding form of reply we feel should be made to French note. In meantime I pass to you for your confidential information preliminary comment on French counter proposals made by Clay:

“An examination of French protest indicates that they believe proposed bizonal organization to be too centralized, that it will fail to work because it will not receive support of Laender and finally, that it turns too much responsibility over to Germans. Substantially this French position same as taken in Moscow. It indicates clearly once again that French are visualizing confederation of states and not federal structure in any sense of true meaning of federalization.

I find it difficult to understand French reference to an agreement reached at Moscow as I did not understand that any tripartite agreement had been reached in Moscow. It is true that originally it was contemplated that each German administration would be directed by committee composed of representatives of several Laender. However, this type of governmental structure as exemplified by Laenderrat in American zone, is no longer adequate to meet responsibilities now facing bizonal area.

Specifically in reply to five French questions: A. There was no disposition on our part not to have equal powers for Economic Council and Laenderrat as proposed for bizonal area. Laenderrat was established to represent states. However, determination of its powers was left largely in hands of Germans. I may point out present power given to Laenderrat is much in excess of that believed desirable by British. It has power to initiate legislation, to amend legislation, and to veto legislation unless overridden by Council by absolute majority. Perhaps it might be well to advise French of this requirement of absolute majority as compared to simple majority: former meaning at least one vote more than fifty percent of authorized membership Economic Council. These powers as given to Laenderrat were recommended by Germans and accepted by myself and Robertson.

B. No central organization worthy of its name can exist without some powers of taxation. One of reasons why bizonal administration to date has been ineffective has been its dependence upon Laender for revenue. No federal state in world today exists which depends upon its member states to contribute supporting revenue. However, we were most careful to limit powers of Economic Council to customs and excise taxes and to such a percentage of income tax as proved necessary to carry out authorized expenditure programs. Moreover these expenditure programs must be approved by occupying powers. Collection of taxes is left to Laender which is contrary our own practice federal government collection.

C. It was originally my proposal that chairman Executive Committee be selected by Laenderrat and confirmed by Economic Council. Obviously this represents much smaller popular basis. Robertson was insistent selection be in hands of Economic Council and this I accepted, requiring him to give up his desire for chairman to be parliamentarily responsible to Economic Council rather than independent executive elected for specified term office. It is clear French desire weaken power of executive and to permit each of several department heads to operate largely on his own discretion. We had found that much greater coordination must be effected among several agencies if economic recovery is to be expected to progress rapidly, and that we cannot secure effective chairman unless he is given power to do normal job of executive in democratic state.

D. Administration of departments in conjunction with committees composed of representatives from several states would result in topheavy structure which would make impossible effective bizonal administration in economic and finance fields. French view of government is that matters pertaining to bizonal area must be resolved as they arise by mutual agreement of states. On contrary, we propose give to central administrations certain specific responsibilities which will be exercised by bizonal administration and will no longer be responsibilities of several states. This is in full accord with our policy of central government with limited powers clearly specified and with all other powers reserved to Laender.

E. Appointment of Supreme Court Justice for each Laender perhaps could be accomplished although it is inconsistent with impartial judiciary which will weigh interest of state against federal government in impartial manner. If we could visualize Supreme Court at home being composed of Justices from each of states, hearing cases in panels, I think we would realize that a court so composed could never have served to maintain balance in government which our Supreme Court has maintained. I do not know what German view would be as to this change, as Germans have accepted charter of Court without this provision.

I would like to point out that our proposals, acting under our instructions, have been presented to Germans and of course to French. Any substantial change at this late date would be most damaging. Moreover, French concept of loose confederation would not be resolved as it is our understanding economic and finance setup at Frankfurt is only prelude to government, at least of British and American zones, to be made effective at early date if quadripartite agreement for unified Germany fails to materialize. We are at critical position in Germany and we must either move forward to give Germans increased responsibility in bizonal area to insure their proper contribution to European recovery or else we must move backward to increase our own forces to run more colonial type government. We have been in Germany three years now and have progressed very little beyond state level in devolving responsibility upon German officials. I am quite sure most thinking people at home will find that our bizonal organization does not go far enough in this direction and its weaknesses largely come from our desire to meet what we know would be French views, as much as possible consistent with effective administration. Unless we are willing to establish working organization in which Germans are given real responsibility we would have to expand our own organization many times to take care of additional export trade which we fully hope will materialize in coming months. Delay now will prove most expensive in months to come. If State Department desires we delay in effecting this organization or has any specific [suggestions?] in mind, I would appreciate receipt appropriate instructions through Department of Army as matter of urgency”.

I hope you will defer reply to French note until there has been opportunity for further discussion of foregoing here as well as opportunity to coordinate our views with British. I am proceeding to Frankfurt and will telegraph again Friday upon my return to Berlin.

Sent Department as 234, repeated Paris, personal for Caffery, as 49 and to London, personal for Gallman, as 32.

Murphy

1 Not printed, but see footnote 2 to the note of January 31 from the Secretary of State to Bonnet, p. 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 31].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Netherlands 740.00119 Council/1–1948: Telegram

[Document 27]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Netherlands

confidential Washington, January 29, 1948—2 p. m.

33. Following representations Neth, Belg and Lux Govts concerning their desire participate in discussions re Germany,1 notes have been transmitted these Govts stating following (reurtel 41 Jan 192 ).

US aware essential interest three Govts in future Germany and valuable contributions which three Govts can make by reason experience and knowledge Germany; attentive study already given by US to earlier suggestions made by three Govts; US will keep in mind desire three Govts for representation in future international discussions re Germany and expects take up shortly with France and Brit questions relating to conduct such discussions, including best means satisfying desire of three Govts.3

Sent The Hague as 33; repeated Brussels as 139; Luxembourg as 5.

Marshall

1 Regarding the representations under reference here, see the memorandum of conversation by Conklin, January 12, p. 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], and footnote 1 thereto.

2 Not printed; it reported having been informed by the Belgian Foreign Ministry that the approaches made by the Belgian, Netherlands, and Luxembourg representatives in London, Paris, and Washington regarding participation in the consultations on German affairs had resulted in generally favorable responses (740.00119 Council/1–1948).

3 The notes, the substance of which is given in this paragraph, were transmitted to the Belgian, Netherlands, and Luxembourg Embassies on January 24, none printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1448).

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2848: Telegram

[Document 28]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

secret Washington, January 29, 1948—7 p. m.

165. Personal for the Ambassador. Army Dept has telegraphed Clay as follows re first subject mentioned your 227, Jan 28:1

“Idea of rearranging zonal boundaries Wuerttemberg–Baden was set forth in purely personal memorandum anticipating probable French desires and assessing bargaining position in the event that a high level decision (which appears unlikely) should be taken here to press French to join trizonal fusion. Suggestion was therefore based on merely hypothetical assumption. It has long been recognized that the French particularly wish this reorganization and that ultimately it would be desirable to reconstitute the former states of Wuerttemberg and Baden. State and Army appreciate your reasons against transfer under present circumstances. At all events, it is agreed here that no decision of this kind will be taken without first consulting you and weighing military and strategic considerations.”

Marshall

1  Ante, p. 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 25].

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Inverchapel) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2648

[Document 29]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Inverchapel)

Washington, January 30, 1948.

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the British Ambassador and expresses appreciation of the views contained in His Excellency’s Aide-Mémoire of January 26, 19481 regarding the scope of the forthcoming tripartite talks in London about Germany. The United States Government is in broad agreement with Mr. Bevin’s suggestions, but has the following comments to offer.

While the United States Government naturally considers trizonal fusion desirable, this might well best be achieved by an evolutionary procedure in the course of which practices in the three zones would be brought into greater uniformity. The United States Government would consequently prefer a more general title for point (a) in His Excellency’s Aide-Mémoire, such as “Evolution of the political and economic organization of the three western zones”. The United States Government agrees with Mr. Bevin that the aim of the talks in London should be to explore the future policies of the three governments toward Germany and to reach the broadest possible agreement on common principles. A full explanation is thought desirable, even though it may not be possible at this stage to obtain a settlement of all the issues.

The United States Government is happy to note that the British Government advocates considering associating the Benelux countries in the formulation of policy respecting western Germany and assumes this refers to problems of long-term import. It is believed that this step should be taken at the earliest feasible date and possibly by inviting Benelux representatives to attend one of the meetings of the tripartite conference at which they could be furnished with a report and given an opportunity to present their views on subjects of particular concern to them. The United States Government suggests that the procedure for consulting the Benelux countries might be considered by the tripartite conference at the start, since this would enable the Benelux representatives to make necessary preparations.

It has occurred to the United States Government that, quite distinct from the technical problems now under discussion, consideration might be given to some of the long-range aspects of the Saar settlement, such as the political and constitutional status of the territory, the nationality of its citizens, et cetera. It is thought that these questions as well as those envisaged under heading (d) in His Excellency’s Aide-Mémoire might be dealt with under the general title: “Provisional territorial arrangements”.

It is the United States Government’s view that the question of the maintenance of Four-Power machinery in Berlin should not be formally discussed, since it can be assumed that the three western governments fully intend to continue their participation in the Allied Control Authority in Berlin. Unless the British Government has strong objections, it is recommended that this item be omitted.

The United States Government suggests that the relationship of western Germany to the European Recovery Program might appropriately be considered by the conference and it would like to see this subject included in the list of topics.

It is recognized that there should be a certain latitude in the order of discussion of the items on the agenda. For the convenience of the conference, however, the United States Government suggests that consideration might be given to the following tentative order of presentation: (a) Association of Benelux countries in long-term policy regarding western Germany;

(b) Relationship of western Germany to the European Recovery Program;

(c) Control of the Ruhr;

(d) Security against Germany;

(e) Reparations deliveries;

(f) Evolution of the political and economic organization of the three western zones;

(g) Provisional territorial arrangements.

The United States Government concurs with Mr. Bevin’s concluding remarks Aide-Mémoire and avails itself of his reference to the Saar to express the hope that the technical talks in Berlin will have achieved substantial success by the time the conference opens in London. The United States Government believes that the conference in London should endeavor to avoid discussion of technical questions which are being dealt with in Berlin and which can best be settled there.

1  Ante, p. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23].

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–3048: Telegram

[Document 30]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent Berlin, January 30, 1948—8 p. m.

256. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. Eyes Only. Lengthy meeting was held Frankfurt January 28 between representatives US/UK military governments and German Ministers President and German representatives Economic Council re draft proclamation on bizonal reorganization. Discussion was detailed and comprehensive with Germans submitting many suggestions and proposals on proposed plans.

There was substantial difference of opinion with German committee on almost every subject. The issues most emphasized were those of Laenderrat authorities versus Economic Council, taxation powers, the veto and the method of overriding it, and the appointment and powers of the chairman of the executive committee. It may be said that in general the SPD Ministers President were willing to weaken the position of the Laenderrat, while the southern Germans, led by Ehard, were highly vocal and emphatic in desiring to strengthen the position of the Laender. The Economic Council representatives inclined, in general, to approve the project as presented.

After further consultation between US and UK authorities in Berlin, it is planned to present the following issues to Generals Clay and Robertson for decision within the next two days: (a) The Germans ask that uniformity be obtained in the two zones; on the question of whether a person enjoying civil service status may sit as a member of the Economic Council. In the British zone a civil servant is not permitted to sit in a legislative body, while it is possible in the American zone.

(b) The Germans wish to know whether a member of a Landtag may sit as a member of the Economic Council.

(c) The Ministers President asked that the borrowing power be restricted to cases of extraordinary need and for productive purposes only.

(d) The Germans suggested that the paragraph authorizing the establishment of lower bizonal courts be deleted in any case, this provision will be coordinated with the charter for the high court which is still under discussion.

(e) The German representatives desired that a Minister President he permitted to instruct the other land representatives and also be permitted to be represented by a deputy.

(f) The Germans discussed at great length the powers and method of selection of the chairman of the Executive Committee and the Executive Committee members. There was no unanimity of view on their part, but they raised the following questions: (1) May the chairman be a minister without portfolio;

(2) Shall the chairman have powers of direction and coordination or shall he be only “primus inter pares”;

(3) Shall the chairman be selected by the Executive Committee or by the Economic Council;

(4) Shall the members of the Executive Committee be selected by the Economic Council instead of appointed by the chairman;

(5) Shall the Laenderrat participate in the appointment of the Executive Committee members; and

(6) Shall the Laenderrat continue to participate in the removal process.

In addition to the foregoing, the Germans laid great stress on the Council power to override a Laenderrat veto and made several proposals which would extend the time, or which would eliminate overriding a veto in some types of legislation, such as finance bills. Furthermore, several Ministers President were strongly opposed to the powers granted to Economic Council to establish field reporting, inspecting and enforcing agencies on the grounds that this would cut across the jurisdiction of the Laender. There were also protests over the power given to Economic Council to take a percentage of the Lander revenue from income, wage and corporation taxes. However, I understand that these issues are regarded as largely settled and wil not be presented to Generals Clay and Robertson.

When final decision on these issues is taken we shall hope to inform Dept promptly in order that appropriate reply may be made to the French note.

Murphy

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Bonnet) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1148

[Document 31]

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Bonnet)1

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the French Ambassador and has the honor to reply to His Excellency’s note and aide-mémoire presenting the views of the French Government regarding the plans for the reorganization of the bizonal economic administration in Germany.2

The views of the French Government have been carefully considered by the United States Government and the United States military authorities in Germany. They will be given continued consideration in the evolution of the bizonal administration. The French Government may be assured that this administration is provisional in fact and is not designed to be a pattern for future government in Germany. The actions of this administration are subject to the approval of the occupying authorities. Accordingly, if the actions of the bizonal administration prove the apprehensions of the French Government to be well founded, the occupying powers remain in a position to take prompt remedial action. The basis upon which approval has been given to the bizonal reorganization is that experience has shown that the degree of responsibility now to be accorded to the German administration is an essential minimum to enable it to deal with the many obstacles to be overcome if the bizonal area is to contribute its share to European recovery.

In its aide-mémoire the French Government raised certain specific questions respecting the bizonal reorganization. The following is submitted by way of clarification and reply: (a) Although the Economic Council and the Council of States do not have equal powers, the latter does have power to initiate, to amend and to veto legislation in accordance with veto powers which are subject to being overridden by an absolute majority of the Economic Council. This absolute majority is distinct from a simple majority and requires one more vote than 50 percent of the authorized membership of the Economic Council. It is believed that the powers given to the Council of States, which represents the several States, are in fact sufficient to protect the interests of the individual States.

(b) The powers of taxation given to the bizonal administration are definitely limited to customs and excise taxes and to that percentage of income tax essential to meet expenditure programs approved by the bizonal occupying authorities. The collection of taxes is left to the States. Experience over the past year has shown that a bizonal administration without sufficient powers of taxation to meet its approved expenditure programs is almost helpless.

(c) The provision that the Chairman of the Executive Committee be selected without being subject to removal by the Economic Council was designed to assure a certain continuity of office under the present emergency conditions. It was believed undesirable, moreover, to prejudge the responsibilities of the executive as these may be later defined in a future German government, since it was felt that the choice between an independent executive or one responsible to parliamentary authority should be left open for later decision.

(d) The administration of departments in conjunction with representatives from the several States would result in a top-heavy structure which would make impossible a coordinated and effective bizonal economic administration. The bizonal departments have been given certain specific responsibilities which will no longer be the responsibilities of the several States. The States, however, retain all of the responsibilities not given to the bizonal administration, and this principle which is being asserted in the field of economic administration, is in full accord with the principles of federal government which reserve to the States composing that government all powers not specifically yielded to the central government.

(e) The appointment of justices for the high court representing the several States would not be consistent with the creation of an impartial court which is to weigh the interests of the respective States against the bizonal administration in an impartial manner. The proposed court is not a supreme court and in the absence of a constitution must be guided by the decisions of the occupying powers.

In conclusion the United States Government wishes again to emphasize that the new bizonal arrangements are not intended to prejudge the future German constitutional structure in the development-of which the French Government’s contribution will be welcomed. The United States Government requests understanding of the provisional measures which it has been found necessary to take in the present emergency.3

Washington, January 31, 1948.

1 Telegram 184, January 31, to Berlin, not printed, reported that comments submitted by General Clay served as the basis for this note (740.00119 Control (Germany/1–3148).

2 In an undated memorandum transmitted to the Secretary of State by Ambassador Bonnet under cover of a note of January 23, neither printed, the French Government presented detailed observations on what it felt were the excessive centralizing aspects of the bizonal (American-British) economic reforms. The memorandum concluded with five questions the nature of which are implicit in the formal responses presented in the note printed here and in the observations reported in telegram 234, January 28, from Berlin, p. 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2348)

3 In a note of February 5, not printed, Ambassador Bonnet informed Secretary of State Marshall that the French Government had taken note of the assurances: contained in the note printed here and understood the purposes and urgency of the proposed economic measures for the American-British bizonal area of Germany. The French Government nevertheless felt that the only way to avoid having-such measures prejudge the definitive political organization for Germany was; to agree as soon as possible on the nature of that long-term organization. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–548)

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.60/2–148: Telegram

[Document 32]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, February 1, 1948—3 p. m.

259. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson: Re last paragraph Department’s telegram 185, January 31.1

Present status Berlin conversations on Saar and technical questions thereto summarized below. Should be recalled in considering summary that to date UK has been unwilling in Berlin to make specific concessions on these Saar questions (with exception of notification to ECE on coal) until complete Saar settlement is effected.

(1) Three governments have notified ECE on Saar coal.2

(2) Saar trade with Bizonia: question was to fix date for establishing Saar-Bizonia trade on dollar basis. French wanted date retroactive to November 20 which was time of introduction of new currency into Saar. US/UK refused this, stating trade would go on dollar basis as of date to be mutually agreed upon. Otherwise, there would have to be most complicated renegotiation of contracts which neither US nor UK prepared to undertake. DeCarbonnel was to discuss this point in Paris.

(3) Bizonia-French zone trade: French stated not prepared to discuss this matter and wanted limit talks to Saar-Bizonia trade and technical arrangements therefor. However, Clay offered French delegation here to allow French zone pay for Ruhr coal in reichsmarks. If Bizonia had deficit in trade between it and French zone this deficit would be charged against Ruhr coal. Therefore, in effect no dollar deficit could arise against Bizonia. UK strongly opposed this offer and has not changed position yet. British instructions were that Ruhr coal must be included in Bizonia-French zone trade and any deficit against French zone must be covered in dollars or in some other manner acceptable to US/UK. As this was best joint US/UK offer it was communicated to French. US statistics showed that Saar was big moneymaker for French zone and when eliminated French zone exports to Bizonia did not look too good to US. French then returned to Paris to consider Clay offer. However, it must be recalled that UK position was that even joint offer described above was not final until Saar reparation question was settled.

(4) Reparations. French presented estimate of Saar reparations at two percent or 20,000,000 reichsmarks of German total. US–UK held this ridiculous and proposed that total value of French share would be 150,000,000 reichsmarks or about value of steel industry in Saar. This figure would practically eliminate any further French reparation claims. In a working party meeting yesterday French recognized justice of this figure in principle but proposed that it should be reduced by half because actual value of a plant is about twice what is declared to IARA. OMGUS believes that we could probably defend this French proposal and it may be that OMGUS can settle with French somewhere between 70 and 75 million reichsmarks. France would then still have other reparation claims on which it can receive something. OMGUS feels negotiations here may therefore wind up at about 70,000,000 reichsmarks as Saar deduction for overall French reparation claims.3

Just informed by French PolAd here that it is not certain whether DeCarbonnel will return this week or not although working party is continuing its discussions.

My recommendation is that if Department desires this whole Saar settlement to be included in Berlin it will have to bring pressure on UK to change its position as indicated in paragraphs 3 and 4 above. Otherwise it looks as if entire question would have to be taken up in London which indeed may be UK desire. However, I have not received any intimations from British here that they desire to postpone Saar settlement in order to use it as bargaining weapon in connection with Ruhr and other London discussions.

Murphy

1 Not printed; it transmitted the text of the note of January 30 from the Secretary of State to the British Ambassador, p. 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]. The telegram also asked for a report on the status of the tripartite conversations on the Saar. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–3148)

2  As a result of discussions during the tripartite Berlin conversations on the Saar, agreement was reached for American, British, and French representatives to the Economic Commission for Europe to present the following communication: “I have the honor to inform you that the Governments of the United States, Great Britain and France have agreed to consider henceforth the coal production of the Saar and France as a common resource.

“Consequently the French Government will in the future present to the Coal Commission of the Economic Commission for Europe requirements and avail: abilities of France and the Saar inclusive, and it will be for the committee to take account of this new situation.

“Therefore, the said Governments have agreed on a plan of delivery of Saar coal to the combined US-UK Zones of Germany and the French Zone including the Saar, which will allow to the other participants of German coal exports an adequate period of time of transition between the old plan of allocation and the new situation mentioned above.” (See telegram 179, January 21, from Berlin: 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2148.)

A slightly different version of this communication was sent to the Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Europe on January 26, 1948, by the United Kingdom Delegation to the Commission. This latter text was included as Appendix A to the Economic Agreement between the United States, the United Kingdom and France, signed at Berlin, February 20, p. 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46].

3 Telegram 179, January 21, from Berlin, not printed, reporting on the tripartite Berlin discussions regarding the Saar, indicated that the question of the Saar frontiers had been raised briefly only to be laid aside. The United States representatives stated that the United States considered the Saar prewar frontiers should be maintained but was prepared to accept the current frontiers subject to a final decision by the peace conference. Inasmuch as the British were not authorized to press the matter of the boundaries and since both the United States and British representatives were authorized to proceed without any new agreement on the matter, the Saar boundaries would not be discussed further during the Berlin discussions. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2148)

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.00/2–448: Telegram

[Document 33]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent Berlin, February 4, 1948—noon.

277. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. Eyes Only. Re bizonal reorganization. Last night General Robertson, in agreement with General Clay, offered the French here to make a modification in the method of selection of the Executive Committee. Robertson told Noiret that he and Clay would agree to the election of the chairman of the Executive Committee by the Economic Council and subject to the confirmation of the Laenderrat. Furthermore, they would agree to the election of the members of the Executive Committee by the Economic Council. The members, apart from the chairman, would not be subject to confirmation by the Laenderrat. This proposal is in contrast to the original idea of appointment by the chairman of the other members of the Executive Committee who will be directors of the bizonal departments.

Robertson asked the French whether this suggested diminution of the powers of the chairman of the Executive Committee would give them some satisfaction or at least would not be disagreeable to them. Noiret replied that while the French were disappointed that the powers of the Laenderrat vis-à-vis the Economic Council had not been strengthened in accordance with French desires, he nevertheless thought that given the overall decisions that the proposal would give a certain satisfaction to his government. However, he pointed out that in effect this new proposal, while it reduced the powers of the chairman of the Executive Committee in one sense, increased the power of the Economic Council. Noiret then asked for time to consult Paris. Robertson said he was glad to grant such time, but he hoped that an answer would be forthcoming from Paris today. Robertson then stated that according to his information Massigli had suggested in London that the powers of the chairman be reduced and, consequently, he and Clay agreed to make the offer outlined above. Noiret then inquired when the proclamation would be issued. Robertson replied he and Clay hoped to do it within two or three days.

Repeated Paris as 52 and London as 33.

Murphy

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) 862.00/1–648: Telegram

[Document 34]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

secret Washington, February 6, 1948—6 p. m.

227. Personal for the Ambassador. Reurtel 259, Feb 1.1 Anxious to have whole Saar settlement concluded in Berlin if possible before opening London discussion and Dept accordingly prepared to press UK to change its position.

Original Clay position that dollar loss resulting from integration of Saar into Fr economy should not be offset by insistence on dollar settlement of entire balance Bizonia-Fr zone trade rested on sound premise that US/UK should be prepared to accept financial consequences of decision on Saar and that any attempt to require France to settle interzonal trade balance in dollars would sooner or later necessitate corresponding increase in US assistance to France. Moreover, Brit insistence on dollar settlement interzonal trade until trizonal fusion constitutes in fact pressure on Fr to subscribe to trizonal fusion despite understanding reached in London last Dec that no pressure wld be put on French. If Gen Clay concurs we shall therefore seek to persuade Brit to accept proposal that trade between Bizonia and Fr zone remain on Reiehsmark basis (except for settlement of any balance due Bizonia on trade account exclusive of coal), but that we shall be prepared to reconsider matter at end six months in light development such trade and degree of cooperativeness displayed by Fr in Germany. Fr wld simply be advised that we reserve right to reopen issue at end specified period. In order to discuss this with Brit here request you supply us with best estimate on loss of dollars Saar settlement likely to cause JEIA in 1948 and on extent to which such loss likely to affect Brit obligation to convert JEIA sterling assets. Latter estimate shd be based on anticipated expenditure JEIA dollars for balance of year, assuming availability of ERP funds for financing Taw material imports.

Proposed compromise on amount of Saar reparation adjustment appears acceptable on assumption reasonably plausible justification of amount can be made in IARA. Pls clarify whether Brit oppose compromise, and if so, on what grounds. Believe Fr can be persuaded to accept compromise if pointed out that failure to agree may throw whole issue into IARA where they are likely to obtain much less favorable settlement.

Marshall

1  Ante, p. 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 32].

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State 862.00/2–848: Telegram

[Document 35]

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent Berlin, February 8, 1948—2 p. m.

311. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson Eyes Only. General Clay concurs that we should seek to persuade UK to settle Saar question along the lines indicated in Deptel 227 of February 6.1 We accordingly approached the British here with the additional suggestion that we would be prepared to reconsider the matter at the end of six months in the light of trade developments and cooperation displayed by French. There is however no indication of any change in British position on Bizonia French zone trade as reported in ourtel 259,2 although they promised to report our suggestions to London.

British had firm instructions that 70 million RM is minimum acceptable figure as reparations value of Saar. They do not feel lower figure could be defended to IARA. French have indicated 60 million as their top figure. We believe reasonably plausible justification can be made to IARA for either figure, but obviously higher amount would be easier to defend.

Working Party still attempting reach general agreement on probable magnitude of deficit in French zone bizonal area trade. Present range is wide with French indicating loss to JEIA (Joint Export Import Agency) at 45 million dollars and British claiming 75 to 100 million dollars. Working Party hopes to narrow these deficits considerably by eleventh February. Almost entire loss will be in dollars, since it arises from decreased coal exports. Therefore it will remove that much of a cushion from our sterling balances and make sterling conversion relatively more difficult to avoid. JEIA not yet in position forecast dollar requirements against prospective dollar availability, but assuming nine-fifteenths of 320 million dollars ERP funds are available, it should be possible avoid converting beyond 40 million dollar limit which we agreed to try to observe.

Must emphasize that attempt to reach entire Saar settlement in Berlin prior to London will be most difficult unless British instructions are changed within the next few days. Robertson and principal British negotiators are now in UK zone for meeting and will not return to Berlin before February 10. Clay will also approach Robertson directly but is not sanguine that Robertson can agree unless his instructions from London are modified. Clay and Robertson must both be in Frankfurt February 14 for bipartite board meeting, Clay also has appointments in Frankfurt February 15 after which OMGUS party will leave for London discussions. Clay believes however that we could conclude entire Saar settlement in Berlin in 24 hours if London would instruct Robertson in the general sense of Deptel 227.

Riddleberger

1  Supra.

2 February 1, p. 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 32].

Editorial Note [Document 36]

Editorial Note

On February 9, 1948 the United States and British Military Governors for Germany promulgated legislation providing for the revision of the Bizonal (U.S.–U.K.) German Economic Administration and the creation of a Bizonal German High Court. This legislation was published in the United States Zone of Occupation as Military Government Proclamations Numbers 7 and 8 (see Germany 1947–1949, pages 466–479) and in the British Zone of Occupation as Military Government Ordinances Numbers 126 and 127 (see Ruhm von Oppen, Documents on Germany, pages 268–279). Proclamation Number 7 (Ordinance Number 126) doubled the size of the German Economic Council, created a new chamber of sixteen members to be known as the Laenderrat, and reorganized the German Executive Committee to consist of a Chairman without portfolio and five department heads, who would be political appointees Proclamation Number 8 (Ordinance Number 127) created a German High Court to serve as a court of adjudication in disputes between the Laender or in disputes between the Economic Council and an individual Land.

On February 14 the United States and British Military Governors promulgated legislation creating a Central Bank to be known as the Bank Deutscher Laender. This legislation was published in the United States Zone as Military Government Law Number 60 and in the British Zone as Military Government Ordinance Number 129. To supervise this Bank, the U.S.–U.K. Bipartite Board created an Allied Bank Commission consisting of representatives of the U.S. and British Military Government (see Germany 1947–1949 page 466).

A chart of the reorganized Bizonal German Economic Administration appears facing page 466 of Germany 1947–1949.

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President 740.00119 Council/2–1148

[Document 37]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

top secret [Washington,] February 11, 1948.

Subject: Security Against Germany

I am attaching a paper which states our position regarding security against Germany. This subject is on the agenda for the three power conversations on Germany to be held in London on February 19.

In view of the importance of this matter I believe that you may wish to read the entire paper. In brief our position is that the four-power disarmament and demilitarization treaty previously proposed by us is unworkable in the absence of four-power agreement and does not provide a basis for tri-partite discussion. Although we maintain an active interest in this subject we do not contemplate further specific proposals at this time.

Please let me know whether you approve this position.1

G. C. Marshall

[Annex]

Department of State Policy Paper 2

top secret [Washington, undated.]

Security Against Germany

Background:

On April 29, 1946 Mr. Byrnes submitted to the CFM in Paris the draft of a four-power treaty for the disarmament and demilitarization of Germany.3 This draft was again submitted to the CFM in Moscow on April 14, 1947 at which time the British and French Delegations expressed substantial approval.4 The Soviet Delegation proposed a redraft which would have so broadened the scope of the treaty as to represent a virtual rejection of the proposal in as much as their redraft introduced a variety of other subjects on which there had been continued disagreement and which were more fitting for incorporation into the general terms of the peace settlement. In brief these were a special regime for the Ruhr, denazification, democratization, land reform, liquidation of industrial war potential, and fulfillment by Germany of its obligations to the Allies. No discussion of the proposed treaty or of the security question took place during the last meeting of the CFM in London.

On January 22, 1948 the British Foreign Secretary announced in the House of Commons that the British Government was looking toward the closer consolidation and economic development of Europe and of the Western states in particular, in which Germany must have its place.5 He indicated at that time that as a first step toward the realization of this project Great Britain and France should invite the Benelux countries to join with them in a pact along the lines of the Treaty of Dunkirk, signed March 4, 1947,6 which provided for defense against a revival of German aggression. Mr. Bevin further indicated that once this important nucleus in Western Europe was established consideration would have to be given to the question of associating other European states including the “New Italy” in this conception. It is understood that the Benelux countries are now considering the Anglo-French offer made in pursuance of Mr. Bavin’s announcement.

At the same time the British Government has made a secret approach to us suggesting that the US might consider entering with Great Britain into a general commitment to go to war with an aggressor, thereby reinforcing the defense proposals envisaged for Western Europe.7

We have stated in reply that European initiative in this matter is of the first importance and the injection of the US before agreement under Mr. Bevin’s proposal has been further developed would seem premature.

Discussion:

It is clear that the original US proposals for the disarmament and demilitarization of Germany no longer correspond to the realities of the present situation. This concept was based upon the assumption of an agreement of the four powers occupying Germany and contains restrictive proposals which must embrace the four zones of Germany. There have been indications that the French are thinking of redrafting the Byrnes proposals as a three-power agreement, but, in our opinion, it would be futile to accept these restrictions and bind only one part of Germany leaving the Eastern zone free to develop its military establishment and war potential without any restriction except those imposed unilaterally by the Soviets as the occupying power. It is clear that other means must be found to provide security against any possible revival of German aggression. In seeking these the US should be prepared to play its part and to accept the same general responsibility in this respect in any new arrangement as it had previously agreed to in the four-power proposal. At the same time if the peoples of Europe are prepared to develop a concept of spiritual and material unity and to make this work, there will be no real question as the long-term relationship of the US to it and to any defense arrangements included therein whether directed against aggression from Germany or other sources. In the elaboration of this concept if it should be felt in Western Europe that the direct participation of the US in a defense arrangement established in full harmony with the Charter of the United Nations would be necessary to its success this country should be prepared very carefully and sympathetically to consider this question, but the initiative must be taken by the European countries. As this concept is developed and as there is evidence of unity with a firm determination on the part of the European nations to act in concert to defend themselves, consideration of the role to be played by the U.S. will be facilitated.

The Dunkirk model which might serve as the framework of a pact against Germany is however illusory unless intended as a screen for further defense measures. Any adequate regional defense system for Western Europe should undoubtedly envisage defense measures to be taken in the event of aggression or attack from any source. As Mr. Bevin’s concept of a Western Union eventually envisages the participation of Germany, there is no doubt that general adoption of a mutual assistance pact based solely on defense against that country would militate its eventual entry into the concept.

Recommendation:

During any consideration in London of the question of providing security against Germany the US Delegation should take the position that the four-power disarmament and demilitarization treaty is unworkable in the absence of four-power agreement and therefore does not provide a real basis for tri-partite discussion. This does not indicate however the US is receding from its agreement to take part in defense measures against Germany but will continue its efforts to seek, in association with the UK and the French Governments, appropriate means to this end. No specific proposal however is being made at this stage since further study and development of the Western Union concept will be required in this connection.

1 The President’s response to this memorandum, if any, has not been found.

2 This paper was drafted by Samuel Reber, Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs, and was approved by John Hickerson, the Director of that office. The source text bears the Secretary of State’s handwritten notation: “OK G.C.M.”

3 For the text of the draft treaty under reference here, see document CFM (46) 21, April 30, 1946, Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. ii, p. 190.

4 For documentation on the discussion at the Fourth Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers in Moscow, March 10–April 24, 1947, regarding a treaty for the disarmament and demilitarization of Germany, see index entry in Foreign Relations, 1947, volume ii .

5 Regarding the speech under reference here, see footnote 1 to the Secretary of State’s note of January 13 to Inverchapel, p. 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12].

6 For the text of the Treaty of Alliance and Mutual Assistance between the United Kingdom and France, signed at Dunkirk, March 4, 1947, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 194–197.

7 For additional documentation regarding the British approach under reference here, see volume iii .

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs (Achilles) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–1348

[Document 38]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs (Achilles)

secret [Washington,] February 13, 1948.

Participants: M. Bérard, Minister, French Embassy

Mr. Achilles, WE

Mr. Wallner, WE

M. Bérard called at his request. He stated that he had been previously advised by Mr. Reber that we no longer considered the Byrnes draft four-power treaty on German demilitarization applicable.1 This had caused his Government some concern and the Embassy had been instructed to obtain a further indication of our views prior to the London talks.

He was advised that the draft was obviously no longer applicable and that we were accordingly reviewing our whole thinking on the subject, that we had not progressed very far, and that we did not expect to produce any startling proposals on this subject at the London talks. He was also advised that we were waiting to see what developed in the current conversations between the British, French and Benelux countries, and that, incidentally, we did not think a treaty directed like the Dunkirk treaty exclusively against Germany was the; best approach.

Bérard mentioned several provisions of the draft treaty such as the prohibition upon any German armed forces or para-military forces or a general staff or the manufacture or importation into Germany of arms and munitions, etc. He wondered whether we would be prepared to enter a three-power treaty containing such stipulations. He was advised that the policy in Germany of the three occupying powers on these matters had not changed but that we regarded the draft as a dead duck.2

He indicated that his Government attached considerable importance to the imposition of such restrictions on Germany. The French Government regarded the establishment of a trizonia, which would be a logical and desirable outcome of the London talks, as dependent-upon preliminary agreement on the Ruhr and security. He indicated that if no satisfactory agreement were reached on military security, his Government would attach correspondingly more importance to the economic security guarantees inherent in an agreement on the Ruhr.

He was advised that since we considered the draft a dead issue we had not recently given any particular thought to the question he raised but that we felt the whole question of Western European security should be dealt with primarily by European initiative and that our representatives at the London talks would be open-minded.

In connection with a treaty directed exclusively against Germany, he was asked if his Government excluded any possibility of the eventual participation of Western Germany in security measures. He replied that such participation would imply reestablishment of the German army, which his Government would definitely not favor. However, if the British were full participants in such an arrangement the reestablishment of some German armed forces would be a less serious problem since the combined British, French and Benelux, forces would presumably outnumber them.

[ Theodore C. Achilles ]

1  The reference here is to a conversation on February 12 between Bérard and Jacob Beam, Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs. According to Beam’s memorandum, not printed, the conversation also touched on the Ruhr question in the following terms: “Mr. Bérard stated his view that trizonal fusion would depend upon satisfaction of French wishes regarding the Ruhr. He referred to the discussions of last October between the Secretary, Mr. Bonnet, Mr. Thorp, and members of the French Delegation. He asserted that the memorandum [see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 684] given us following these talks outlined in effect points of agreement between the U.S. and France respecting Ruhr control. I pointed out that the French memorandum went rather far, particularly in the proposal for internationalization of Ruhr properties and of management of the Ruhr industries, and I referred to the Secretary’s Chicago speech of November 18. Mr. Bérard maintained that these requirements were still an essential part of French policy. I pointed out that it could be maintained that the two questions of the Ruhr and trizonia were on a different footing in point of time, since trizonal cooperation was a question for the near future, whereas a Ruhr settlement pertained to the period after the withdrawal of occupation forces.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–1248)

2  In connection with this conversation, telegram 850, February 16, from Ambassador Caffery in Paris, reported as follows: “Bidault told me this morning that his Embassy at Washington had been informed by the Department that the Department does not consider discussions of the Byrnes draft disarmament treaty practical at this time. Bidault said: ‘very well, I understand that, but I hope that we will be able to talk at London about something that will take its place.’ When I asked ‘what’, it was clear that he had no concrete ideas on the subject yet formulated.” (740.00119 Council/2–1648)

The Chargé in Belgium (Millard) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–1448: Telegram

[Document 39]

The Chargé in Belgium (Millard) to the Secretary of State

confidential Brussels, February 14, 1948—6 p. m.

331. Remytel 285, February 9 regarding McNeil’s “invitation” Benelux take part London meeting regarding Germany1 Loridan said situation unclear nothing further received since McNeil left. Loridan stated if powers contemplate merely informing Benelux their view policy regarding Germany which had been done in past this would not be enough. Benelux wishes be consulted formation both economic and political policy regarding Germany. He said McNeil told Spaak that first point agenda on proposed forthcoming London talks was question how to meet Benelux repeated requests be consulted on Germany. As nothing received Loridan said he had no idea what was present status of this matter except it was clear that McNeil’s suggestions had not been followed up and he had no idea what if any next step would be.

Asked to what extent Benelux would insist on being consulted in policy regarding Germany Loridan said he could not give adequate answer to so large and important question but he understood Benelux would expect be included in formation economic and political policy; execution policy being in hands occupying powers.

Sent Department 331, repeated London 25, Paris 23, Hague 15.

Millard

1 During the first week of February 1948, British Minister of State Hector McNeil visited Brussels. Telegram 273, February 7, from Brussels, not printed, reported that McNeil had mentioned to Belgian Prime Minister Spaak and Luxembourg Foreign Minister Been that the Benelux countries would be invited to the London Conference on Germany. No formal invitation was, however, extended (840.00/–748). Telegram £85, February 9, from Brussels, not printed, reported that Belgian authorities had heard nothing further regarding an invitation to London (840.00/2–948).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 840.00/2–1648: Telegram

[Document 40]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, February 16, 1948—6 p. m.

274. For Reber.1 Belgian Ambassador2 states Spaak has telegraphed Ambassador London he had heard from Paris Benelux might be allowed merely present views during forthcoming talks and not participate in discussion, that such procedure would be ridiculous and Belgium would not participate on such basis and that if this represented Bevin’s idea of Western Union3 it was poor start. Ambassador anticipated difficulties with French in view similarity between Benelux and US positions.

He was advised we favor direct Benelux participation in discussion, as distinct from presentation of views, at early stage of conference on long range questions though naturally not on operational ones or in any agreements reached on operational matters within functions of occupying powers.

Sent London as 517, repeated Paris 477, Berlin 274, Brussels 230.

Marshall

1  Reber was serving as a member of the United States Delegation to the London Conference on Germany.

2  Baron Silvercruys. A memorandum of conversation between Theodore Achilles and Ambassador Suvercruys on February 14 is filed separately under 740.00119 Council/2–1448.

3 For documentation on the attitude of the United States toward the establishment of a Western European Union, see volume iii .

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State 862.50/2–1648: Telegram

[Document 41]

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, February 16, 1948—2 p. m.

372. Taglische Rundschau and other Soviet-licensed papers February 13 feature SMA order No. 321 providing for reorganization Soviet zonal economic commission (original establishment this commission in June 1946 covered by telegram number 1474, June 182 ).

This new Sokolovski order emphasizes aim of having German democratic organs in Soviet Zone participate more actively in reconstruction and development peacetime industry. Economic commission now given permanent chairman and definite field of duties. Commission will now consist of: chairman, two deputies, three FDGB (Free German Trade Union League) representatives, two VDGB representatives, representative from each Land in Soviet Zone, and presidents of following ministries: Finance, Industry, Transport, Interzonal and Foreign Trade, Post and Telegraph, Fuel and Energy, Trade and Supply, Agriculture and Forestry, Labor and Social Welfare, Resettlers, Statistical Office, and Commission for Sequestration and Confiscation—(Comment: i.e., practically every existent central ministry for Soviet Zone).

Commissions new future duties, as specified by Order 32, are: study of question of restoration and development of peace time industry, as well as coordination activities of the various central ministries; and supervising execution, reparations, deliveries and of meeting requirements of Soviet zone occupation forces. Commission empowered authorize all necessary instructions and orders realize these objectives. Finally, Order 32 provides for establishment permanent commission office, consisting of chairman, his deputy, FDGB and VDGB chairman, and presidents of Ministries for finance, industry, agriculture and forestry, and trade and supply—(comment: composition of permanent office evidently about same as composition of original commission—compare telegram 1474).

Comment: manner in which commission thus enlarged and given increased powers will presumably not change general situation greatly as effective domination Laender governments in Soviet Zone economic commission and central ministries has rather clearly been established for some time. Timing of this new announcement, as in case of establishment original economic commission, suggests action taken as a positive reply to the last Bizonal reorganization, and against general background failure London CFM. New economic commission, composition of which is clearly undemocratic as compared with new Bizonal administration, evidently has considerable powers rather comparable with those of its Bizonal rival. At the same time, Soviets will endeavor give impression that it in no way constitutes a zonal government as such an admission would weaken their continuing bitter propaganda, supported by German Communism, against Bizonia—(comment: compare last paragraph this mission’s telegram 3540, November 83 ).

Though not yet known who commission’s new chairman or his deputies will be, it is presumed that Bruno Leuschner, Communist specialist on economics who has evidently been associated day to day management commission hitherto, will continue play leading role. Addition of representatives from each Land Soviet Zone presumably effected in order provide better coordination between zonal and Laender authorities, and in order meet Laender opposition to their de facto loss of authority hitherto. Finally, role which SED played in order 32 is suggested by statement made February 11–12 meeting SED central committee by Walter Ulbricht: “Successful execution 1948 economic plan requires coordination activities of Laender economic ministries and of economic central ministries under an enlarged economic commission for Soviet Zone.”

Sent Department as 372, pouch copies Moscow, London and Paris.

Riddleberger

1 For the text of Soviet Military Administration Order No. 32, see Ruhm von Oppen, Documents on Germany, p. 279.

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00119 Council/2–1748

[Document 42]

The British Embassy to the Department of State 1

Aide-Mémoire

Mr. Bevin has been giving consideration to the forthcoming three-power talks in London about Germany and has taken into account the views of the Department of State as expressed to the British Embassy. Mr. Bevin feels that, in view of the difficulties which have been experienced in implementing the Potsdam Agreement and of the disappointing results of the last Meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers, it is undesirable to continue the state of uncertainty and indecision which has existed for the last three years in Western Germany. He considers that active decisions are required if confidence is to be restored and Western Germany established on democratic lines.

2. On the other hand, the interests of France and the Benelux Union cannot be disregarded during the forthcoming talks. Mr. Bevin considers that the discussion with the French representatives must be designed to reach clear-cut conclusions. He therefore hopes that the talks will provide a first opportunity of facing squarely the differences between the policies of the three governments towards Germany and that they will result in a frank interchange of views over the whole field.

3. It is often said by the Germans that only the Russians have a plan for Germany. But the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom have recently taken the first steps towards carrying out their own plan by establishing a new economic administration at Frankfurt. The initiative lies with the Western powers and the Soviet authorities have been compelled to follow this lead by establishing in the Soviet zone of Germany an imitation of the new bizonal organisation.

4. Subject to the foregoing considerations, Mr. Bevin agrees that the forthcoming meeting should be as informal as possible. He understands the reasons for which the Department of State wish to make it clear that the three-power talks are not expected to reach final decisions on all the items of the agenda. For example, no final conclusions can be expected immediately on Item B (Relationship of Western Germany to the European Recovery Programme), Item C (Control of the Ruhr) or Item D (Security against Germany).2 Nevertheless, Mr. Bevin hopes that the United States delegation will come to the talks prepared to reach agreement, if not final decisions, over as wide a field as possible on these items.

5. Mr. Bevin considers that it is essential to reach firm conclusions on Item F (Evolution of the political and economic organisations of the three Western zones). Progress must be made with the plans for the development of political institutions in Western Germany, if possible on a three-power basis, or, if not, on a two-power basis. If Western Germany is to make her proper contribution to the European Recovery Programme, as it is vital that she should, there must be clear agreement between the three Western powers on the political and economic organisation of Western Germany. Failure to reach agreement on this question will not only have a most serious effect on the success of the European Recovery Programme, but will, in Mr. Bevin’s view, increase the risks arising from the present state of uncertainty.

6. As regards future discussions, Mr. Bevin is unwilling to commit His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom to participate in a series of consultations between the three Western powers until he sees how the forthcoming talks develop. In any event he considers it undesirable to appear to give any undertaking, particularly to the French Government, that policy in the combined zones will be determined by a series of international conferences at governmental level. Such a series of conferences would in his views involve too great a danger of postponing decisions on the vital and urgent issues now demanding solution in the bizonal area.

7. Mr. Bevin wishes Mr. Marshall to be informed of his preoccupation that the forthcoming talks should not result in failure to reach agreed conclusions wherever this is possible in the matters to be discussed.

Washington, 17 February, 1948.

1 Telegram 536, February 17, to London, personal for Ambassador Douglas, not printed, commented as follows regarding this aide-mémoire: “In reply to informal explanation given Brit Emb on your views re tripartite London discussions on Germany, Dept has received aide-mémoire which FonOff is being requested to bring to your attention. It is believed this question can best be discussed by you and FonOff and should not be taken up in Secretary’s press conference, Feb. 18.” (740.00119 Council/2–1748)

2 The items under reference here are the agenda items set forth in Secretary Marshall’s note of January 30 to Ambassador Inverchapel, p. 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) 740.00119 Council/2–1748

[Document 43]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

secret [Washington,] February 17, 1948.

Ambassador Bonnet called to reiterate the importance which his Government attached to reaching agreement at London on (1) international control of Ruhr production, and (2) the future political organization of Germany on a federal basis. He had the impression that we did not expect agreement on these points to be achieved at London and that we hoped merely to secure French agreement to establishing a trizonia. He repeated over and over again that his government would not agree to establishing a trizonia unless and until a substantial measure of agreement had been reached on the other two.

I suggested to him that it would be unwise to overestimate the importance we attached to trizonia and told him that we sincerely hoped it would be possible to reach substantial agreement on all three questions but that they were all of great importance and it might not be possible to reach definitive agreement in one conference. I said I would let our representatives at the London talks know of his démarche.1

[ Robert A. Lovett ]

1 This conversation was reported upon in telegram 537, February 17, to London, not printed. The telegram added that Ambassador Bonnet, on leaving the Department, told reporters that he had stressed the two points enumerated in this memorandum, and he hoped that the forthcoming London talks would definitely determine the future political organization of Germany (740.00119 Council/2–1748).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 751.00/2–1948: Telegram

[Document 44]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

secret Washington, February 19, 1948—10 a. m.

516. We are gratified at Schuman’s attitude toward Lond talks as indicated 812 Feb 13.1

Prior to and during Lond talks we would appreciate your talking to him, Bidault and others on following lines:

French preoccupation with Germany as major threat at this time seems to us outmoded and unrealistic. Germany might possibly become threat in distant future but in meantime real threat to France seems to us to be another power which will undoubtedly seek to utilize substantial segment of German economy if unable to get control of Germany. In our opinion French security for many years to come will depend on integration of Western Europe including western German economy. Unless western Germany during coming year is effectively associated with Western European nations, first through economic arrangements, and ultimately perhaps in some political way, there is a real danger that whole of Germany will be drawn into eastern orbit, with obvious dire consequences for all of us.

Sent Paris; reptd Lond for Reber as 553 and Berlin as 297.

Marshall

1  The telegram under reference reported on a conversation between Harry Woodring, former Secretary of War, and French Premier Robert Schuman. The conversation dealt largely with the French economy and the Marshall Plan, but it touched on Germany as follows: “With respect to Germany, the Prime Minister said that instructions had been given to the French delegates attending the London conferences next week to modify the French position so as to permit a cordial modus Vivendi between Great Britain, the United States, and France. He added the French Government considered present West German situation ‘unsatisfactory’, and that French Government had decided to take necessary steps so as to arrive at a rapid and realistic solution satisfactory to all concerned.” (840.50 Recovery/2–1348)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/2–2048: Telegram

[Document 45]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

secret
urgent Washington, February 20, 1948—7 p. m.

597. Gerdel. Following views transmitted you for your general background and guidance with respect tripartite talks on German problems. These views are not necessarily to be used in open formal discussion, but probably would serve better for informal private conversations with Brit and Fr delegates and with leading officials Brit Govt. They supplement and give general framework for position papers on specific problems which you have at hand: (1) As a result of total military defeat and extensive urban devastation, Germany has been practically in a state of prostration since end of hostilities. Effective measures to disband German army and to disarm and demilitarize Germany have been taken throughout whole country. Germany, itself, cannot be in immediate future a threat to security of its neighbors. As long as Germany is occupied, it will not be able to develop prerequisites of military power.

(2) In view of new power configuration which has emerged as a result of the war, Germany in the foreseeable future will hardly be able to play an independent role in same sense in which it has in past. Germany will only play a significant role through alignment with other powers. Its internal constitution, as well as its external position, is likely to be determined by direction of its alignment.

(3) At present Eastern Zone of Germany under Soviet occupation is being reshaped in a totalitarian pattern, both economically and politically, along lines similar to developments in Eastern European satellite countries. Economy of Eastern Germany is being reorientated to fit into Eastern European economic system developing under Soviet aegis. Accordingly, Western Powers have no alternative except to undertake to integrate both economy and political life of Western Germany with Western Europe. Unless Western Germany is effectively associated with Western European powers, through economic arrangements and, ultimately perhaps, through mutual political understanding, Western Germany too may be at some time in future drawn into Eastern orbit with all obvious consequences which such an eventuality would entail.

(4) US Govt has by no means abandoned hope of eventual establishment of economic and political unity of Germany. It recognizes that division of Germany is not desirable and may not even be a tenable solution of Central European problems. It would seek to avoid all steps which might work to preclude establishment of German unity, but it has long since decided, in collaboration with Brit Govt, that desire for an undivided Germany cannot be made excuse for inaction in Western Germany, detrimental to recovery of Western Europe as a whole. This Govt is determined, however, not to permit reestablishment of German economic and political unity under conditions which are likely to bring about effective domination of all Germany by Soviets. It would regard such an eventuality as the greatest threat to security of all Western Nations, including US. We do not ignore residual possibility of an eventual overall agreement with Soviets regarding a peace settlement for all Germany which would be satisfactory to all parties concerned, but regard this possibility as remote at present.

(5) In given situation, it is important to proceed at once with economic integration of Western Germany into economy of Western Europe. In accomplishment of this, Western Germany will, of course, not be given any priority over Western European countries, which have suffered so grievously at German hands. Rather, Western German economy should be rehabilitated, within framework of the program for general economic recovery of Europe, in such a way as would insure a maximum contribution of Western German economy to European recovery. Equitable economic arrrangements should enable conditions in Western Germany to improve along with economic progress of Western Europe generally.

(6) Conception of a Western European Union as proposed by Mr. Bevin has a place for a Germany which has been reshaped politically along democratic lines. The necessary restrictions on German control of Ruhr which may result from an international agreement with respect to control of Ruhr resources would be much more acceptable to Germans if it embodies a contribution on their part to a larger Western European Union, to realization of which other Western European countries will also be making substantial contributions of one kind or another.

(7) Solution of German problem, at least in so far as Western Germany is concerned, has a two-fold aspect: (a) economic and political reorientation of Germans, fostered by common policies of Western occupation powers; and

(b) integration of Western Germany into Western European community.

A development along these lines is best guarantee of security.

Sent London as 597; Repeated to Paris as 550.

Marshall

1 This telegram was repeated to Paris as 550 with the following additional sentence: “Paris please use above as guidance for continued discussions with Schuman, Bidault and others on question of Allied policy toward Germany.”

Economic Agreement Between the United States, the United Kingdom, and France Regarding the Saar CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 125: File—Tripartite Agreement Regarding the Saar

[Document 46]

Economic Agreement Between the United States, the United Kingdom, and France Regarding the Saar

secret

In January and February 1948, US, French and British experts met in Berlin to settle technical problems resulting from the economic attachment of the Saar to France. The following agreement was signed in Berlin on 20 February 1948:

I. Saar Coal

Agreement was reached that the coal produced in the Saar Territory shall be considered as a common resource with the coal produced in France. A letter has been sent by the three governments (American, French and British) to the Economic Commission for Europe to notify it of the agreement reached on this subject (see Appendix A1 ). The agreement foresees a period of transition between the old and the new regime. During this period the Saar is pledged to deliver to the Combined British and US Zones of Germany and the French Zone of Germany the following quarterly tonnages of hard coal: second quarter, 1948, 825,250 tons; third quarter, 1948, 577,750 tons; fourth quarter, 1948, 330,250 tons; first quarter, 1949, 82,500 tons; second quarter, 1949, nil. The distribution of coal in Germany and the adaptation of the sliding scale as agreed at Moscow will be effected in accordance with Appendix B.2

II. Saar Separations

It has been agreed that the total sum to be deducted from reparations of capital equipment due to France, on account of the separation of the Saar Territory from the German Economy, should be 70 million Reichsmarks. This sum is calculated according to the same principles as govern the valuation of reparations plant. An agreed letter (as shown in Appendix C3 ) will be addressed to IARA by the three governments to notify it of the agreement thus reached.

It has been further agreed that the American and British Governments will give to their representatives at the IARA the necessary instructions so that these representatives will accord a favorable reception to the French Government’s request that the above mentioned debit to the French reparations account should be spread over a period of time.

III. Exchange of Trade

The following agreement was reached: (1) Trade between the Bizone and the Saar will be put on a Foreign Trade basis as from 1 April 1948. All payments resulting from trade will be made through the mechanism established between the Franc Area and the Combined Zone (US/UK) of Germany. This arrangement, however, will not apply to such deliveries of Saar Coal to the Bizone as will still be made under the agreed plan for the withdrawal of Saar coal from the German pool. Coal prices in Reichsmark will be based on the equivalent Ruhr prices.

(2) The Germans will be instructed to draw up a Bizone/French Zone Trade Agreement for the period April/December, 1948, with definite delivery quotas either side, which gives a surplus of deliveries from the French Zone to the Bizone of 50 million Reichsmarks. Coal deliveries from the Bizone to the French Zone will not be included in the trade agreement. Coal will be charged to customers at prevailing Ruhr Reichsmark prices. The commodities exchanged should not merely meet the specified money totals but should also, as far as possible, be of comparable economic value.

(3) Mixed committees, Allied and German, shall be established to watch this trade and to adjust deliveries in order to ensure the requisite surplus of deliveries from the French Zone to the Bizone. The French Military Government and the Military Governments (US/UK) will consult together to ensure that the necessary adjustments are made in the trade agreement if it appears that the agreed delivery quotas cannot be fulfilled and that the requisite surplus of deliveries from the French Zone, to the Bizone will not be achieved.

(4) This arrangement will remain in force until the end of 1948. Discussions will be initiated not later than September 30, 1948, to determine the arrangements to apply after the end of 1948.

(5) Any proposal from either side for supplies of coal in excess of those shown in Appendix B shall be subject to fresh agreement for such supplies.

IV. Transferring to Foreign Trade Basis

Agreement was also reached on the technical methods to be employed in transferring trade between the Bizonal Area and the Saar from ah Interzonal Trade basis to a Foreign Trade basis.

20 February 1948. L. Wilkinson

Cecil M. Weir

Paul Lerot Beauueu

1 Appendix A is not here printed; it was the text of a letter of January 26, 1948, from the United Kingdom Delegation to the Economic Commission for Europe to the Executive Secretary of the Commission. Regarding the letter, see footnote 2 to telegram 259, February 1, from Berlin, p. 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 32].

2 Appendix B is not here printed. On April 19, 1947, during the Fourth Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers, held at Moscow, Secretary of State Marshall, British foreign Secretary Bevin, and French Foreign Minister Bidault agreed on a sliding scale of coal exports from the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany. For the texts of the exchange of communications between Secretary Marshall and Foreign Minister Bidault constituting this “Moscow Sliding Scale Agreement”, see Foreign Relations, 1947; vol. ii, pp. 486–488.

3  The agreed draft letter to be addressed to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency by the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, and France read as follows: “We have the honor to inform you that the American, British and French Commanders in Chief have agreed to fix at RM 70 million the total amount which should be deducted from reparations of capital equipment due to France, on account of the economic separation of the Saar from Western Germany. This sum has been determined according to the same principles that govern the valuation of reparations plant. It has been calculated to include:— (a) Industrial equipment in the Saar that would have been removed as reparations if the Saar had remained an integral part of the German economy.

(b) Industrial equipment additionally retained in Western Germany in order to maintain the German economy at the permitted level despite the loss of the Saar.

We shall be obliged if you will communicate the contents of this letter to the Member Nations.” (CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 125: File—Saar Documents)

B. The London Conference on Germany, First Part, February 23–March 6, 1948B. The London Conference on Germany, First Part, February 23–March 6, 1948

[47] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, February 20, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2048: Telegram

[48] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, February 21, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2148: Telegram

[49] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, February 22, 1948—11 a. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2248: Telegram

[50] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, February 23, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2348: Telegram

[51] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, February 23, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2348: Telegram

[52] The British Permanent Under-Secretary of State (Strang) to the Netherlands Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Michiels van Verduynen)

London, 23 February, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 2172: Benelux Documents

[53] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, February 24, 1948—1 p. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2448: Telegram

[54] Editorial Note

[55] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, February 25, 1948—noon.

740.00119 Council/2–2548: Telegram

[56] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, February 25, 1948—noon.

740.00119 Council/2–2548: Telegram

[57] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, February 25, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 EW/2–2548: Telegram

[58] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, February 26, 1948—6 p. m.

862.60/2–2548: Telegram

[59] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, February 26, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2648: Telegram

[60] The Ambassador inthe United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, February 26, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2648: Telegram

[61] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, February 26, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2648: Telegram

[62] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, February 26, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2648: Telegram

[63] The Chargé in Belgium (Millard) to the Secretary of State

Brussels, February 26, 1948—midnight.

862.00/2–2648: Telegram

[64] Memorandum by Mr. Edwin M. Martin Division of Occupied Areas Economic Affairs, to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas)

[London,] February 27, 1948.

London Embassy Files: 1948: File–850 Reparations

[65] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, February 27, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2748: Telegram

[66] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, February 28, 1948—11 a. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2848: Telegram

[67] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, February 28, 1948—1 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–2848: Telegram

[68] The Ambassador hi the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, February 28, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2848: Telegram

[69] Statement by the Netherlands, Belgian, and Luxembourg Representatives to the London Conference on Germany

London, February 28, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 2172: Benelux Documents

[70] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, February 29, 1948—noon.

740.00119 Council/2–2948: Telegram

[71] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 1, 1948—3 p. m.

840.50 Recovery/3–148: Telegram

[72] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 1, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Council/3–148: Telegram

[73] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 2, 1948—11 a. m.

740.00119 Council/3–248: Telegram

[74] Memorandum of Trans-Atlantic Telephone Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Beam)

[Washington,] March 2, 1948.

840.50 Recovery/3–248

[75] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, March 2, 1948—6 p. m.

840.50 Recovery/3–148: Telegram

[76] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 2, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Council/3–248: Telegram

[77] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 2, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Council/3–248: Telegram

[78] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 3, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 EW/3–348–Telegram

[79] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 3, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 EW/3–348: Telegram

[80] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 3, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 EW/3–348: Telegram

[81] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, March 4, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 EW/3–448: Telegram

[82] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, March 4, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Council/3–248: Telegram

[83] TJie Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 4, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Council/3–448: Telegram

[84] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 4, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Council/3–448: Telegram

[85] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 4, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Council/3–448: Telegram

[86] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 5, 1948—8 a. m.

740.00119 Council/3–548: Telegram

[87] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, March 5, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Council/3–448: Telegram

[88] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 5, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Council/3–548: Telegram

[89] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 5, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Council/3–548: Telegram

[90] Report of the Working Party on the Ruhr of the London Conference on Germany

London, 5 March, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 2172: TRI Documents

[91] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 6, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/S–648: Telegram

[92] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 6, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 EW/3–648: Telegram

[93] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 6, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Council/3–648: Telegram

[94] Communiqué Issued at the Recess of the London Conference on Germany

London, March 6, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 2173: London Meeting Press Releases

[95] Text of Communication From the United States, United Kingdom, and French Delegations at the London Conference on Germany to the Belgian, Netherlands, and Luxembourg Representatives

London, March 6, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 2172: Benelux Documents

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/2–2048: Telegram

[Document 47]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, February 20, 1948—11 p. m.

663. Delsec 1561. US and UK held their first informal preliminary meeting today in India Office to discuss three power talks on Germany.1 Sir William Strang chaired. Agreed that minimum of publicity desired for informal exploratory talks. If publicity desirable at any point conferees will agree on careful limits on it, but let each delegation talk within these limits. Strang indicated French Concurrence in this approach.

Discussed agenda2 in respect to French request for changes in regard to the understanding of points for discussion.

Under first item French, suggest deletion “long term” as being unduly restrictive to Benelux. Under item F French suggest substitute “Germany” for “three western zones”. Agreed that these changes did not make any real difference.

Purpose these preliminary meetings explained to be to: 1) establish plan of procedure prior to three power meeting, 2) emphasize joint responsibility, and experience in Germany, 3) create joint plans for common program, 4) discuss bizonal matters, and 5) determine differences of opinion in agenda items.

The purpose of trizonal talks described by Strang as to undertake informal exploration and not to reach final agreement on items. Aim is have thorough discussion with French, it being first of such/opportunities may attempt agreement on all items, but immediate importance attaches to agreement as item F. New factor emphasizes role Germany must play in European economic recovery. Having responsibility for seeing; that governmental machinery of right kind for this purpose is established.

Douglas replied that valid reasons exist for not arriving at final decisions and agreed with plan for complete exploration airing of views. Emphasized importance opportunity exchange of views with Benelux countries.

Group agreed soonest to meet With Benelux arid A to be first item for consideration. Two points were considered concerning procedure this item: 1) procedure for talks, and 2) kind of continuing arrangement for the future. Agreed to meet with French prior to Monday to consider communication to Benelux inviting them to be prepared to participate in discussions starting Tuesday or Wednesday. Tentatively agreed to have them participate in discussion of all items except B and E and trizonal fusion since these relate to zonal operative problems. Agreed to consider further their role on these questions.

On second point Strang proposed monthly meetings with Benelux representatives at Frankfurt to exchange information and views but with no power to intervene or delay. Douglas expressed doubts as to practicability of this proposal but asked time to consider it.

Item B passed over pending receipt of Washington paper.3

Item C broken down by Strang into two phases, short term and long term. Long term he recommended not to be discussed very much. Short term interested him more. He recommended associating Benelux in some sort of immediate control. Tentative proposal was for immediate establishment of heavy industry inspectorate for bizonal area, to be participated in by Benelux. Agreed that during occupation security did not make this kind of operation urgent. He added that Bevin has viewed idea of three tier approach to long term problem: 1) German management or the cutting out of international management; 2) German public ownership; 3) international control involving in this stage the three powers and the Benelux but no international ownership or international management but German-owned and German-managed.

UK not yet clear as to exact scope international control. Incidentally indicated UK considering desirability of military occupation of Ruhr and Rhineland by Western European powers for indefinite period, certainly something like 40 year period proposed for D and D treaty.4

Douglas stated US position, emphasizing belief no steps required in occupation period. Critical nature of sanctions problem respect to, control of allocations and other security measures discussed at length.

In response to Douglas restatement US views on public ownership Robertson suggested; highly desirable agree here if possible on joint statement on this issue which would for present push it to the background in German party discussions. Cited it as issued leading SPD to members to join forces with CP.

It was tentatively understood that entire agenda should be reviewed after discussions with Benelux.

Discussion to continue Friday, February 20.

Douglas

1 On February 19, 20, and 21, 1948, United States and British Delegations held three informal meetings at the India Office of the British Foreign Office. These informal American-British meetings were preliminary to the American-British-French meetings on Germany which began, on February 23. The United States Delegation members present at these three meetings were: Ambassador Lewis W. Douglas (the Delegation head), Samuel Reber, Edwin M. Martin, John C. de Wilde, and Lt. Col. Theodore W. Parker. Present on the British side were: Sir William Strang (the British Delegation head), Deputy Under-Secretary of State Sir Edmund L. Hall-Patch, Lt Gen. Sir Brian Robertson, Deputy Under-Secretary of State Sir Ivone Kirkpatrick, Christopher E. Steel, Deputy Under-Secretary of State Roger M. Makins, Roger B, Stevens, Patrick Dean, and John W. Nicholls. The United States Delegation Minutes and the British Delegation Records of these meetings are included in the Department of State files, Lot M–88, CFM Files, Box 118.

2 The proposed agenda for the American-British-French meetings on Germany was set forth in note of January 30 from the Secretary of State to the British Ambassador, p. 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29].

3 The paper under reference here is not printed.

4 The reference here is presumably to the draft treaty for German disarmament and demilitarization first proposed by the United States in April 1946.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/2–2148: Telegram

[Document 48]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, February 21, 1948—5 p. m.

672. Delsec 1562. Following is résumé Anglo-American discussions yesterday: 1. Further discussion of Benelux question resulted in agreement that, subject to check with governments, French agreement would be sought to full participation by one representative of Benelux countries, assisted by advisors, in discussion of all items on agenda except those of operational character including reparation, ERP and trizonal fusion.

2. US position on reparations deliveries as approved Cabinet1 was presented. UK expressed appreciation US problem and promised careful study. Robertson expressed preliminary view that any considerable delay in dismantling would require him to reconsider his assurance to his government that the program could be carried through without disorder in the British zone. Also disturbed by substitution concept since Germans have been assured that all plants not now listed would be retained in Germany and have made business plans accordingly. Strang expressed puzzlement about arguments which could be used to persuade Soviets to agree to the proposed revision in the reciprocal delivery provisions of Potsdam.

3. On the security question it was agreed that US and UK views were amorphous and would be desirable to let France take initiative. UK representatives thought French would want three power D and D treaty and UK offhand saw no objections to agreeing to this. US felt, however, such a treaty in existing circumstances was unrealistic. UK also expected French to propose military occupation of Ruhr for quite long period. Made no comment indicative of UK views of this idea. General concern expressed about what Kirkpatrick termed “Maginot Line” defensive approach of French to problem of security. Piling up of paper restrictions and commitments no value without will to act. Kirkpatrick felt French would insist on security guarantees against Germany as prerequisite agreement on Western Union and not be influenced by prospect of Western Union to relax her fears of Germany. For various reasons, partly involving positions taken in other connections, appears both UK and French are hesitant to consider security commitments against aggression by any powers other than Germany.

4. In discussing relationship of Western Germany to ERP US indicated very tentatively this government had in mind (a) full partnership of western zones in ERP, including participation in any continuing CEEC organization, particular efforts at economic cooperation within ERP area such as study of possibilities of customs union, in multilateral clearing arrangements etc., (b) creation, in absence of bizonal economic fusion, some machinery for consultation and coordination between bizonia and French zone which would, among other purposes, serve as means for reviewing ERP targets for western zones and rate of progress in achieving these targets and for determining measures of mutual assistance in carrying out this program; (c) promotion of German exports within framework of ERP under which heading we might wish to consider extension of most-favored-nation treatment to German exports, temporary continuation of German exports under old trademarks, and relaxation of restrictions on German business travel abroad; and (d) financing of participating countries trade deficit with Germany. British expressed general agreement this range of subjects, expressing interest particularly in (d). Possible use of offshore procurement fund for purchase German exports briefly explained to them. British also questioned whether bilateral aid agreement contemplated with bizonia as well as French zone, USDel indicating matter still undecided (any exposition of Department’s latest thinking this subject would be appreciated). US and UK agreed German authorities should be given increasing role in ERP programming and implementation in Germany.

5. Preliminary discussion of evolution of political and economic organization of Germany revealed agreement on political desirability trizonal economic fusion but uncertainty as to whether achievement this goal should be pressed. British stressed importance of early convening of Constituent Assembly to establish provisional Western German government, expressing belief such step could be taken without possibility of MG shouldering onus for division of Germany, but US side expressed some skepticism. British, with US side generally concurring, pointed out necessity of giving French some assurances regarding final form of German government, since only in this way could French be dissuaded from believing any interim steps on bizonal or trizonal basis would prejudge future political structure of Germany.

Sent Department 672; repeated USPolAd Berlin 22, Paris 60.

Douglas

1 The position under reference here was set forth in telegram 535, February 17, to London, p. 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/2–2248: Telegram

[Document 49]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, February 22, 1948—11 a. m.

675. Delsec 1566. Last two items agenda tripartite German talks discussed in further Anglo-American meeting yesterday.1 Under item political and economic evolution of Germany considered (a) future constitutional structure of Germany and (b) terms of possible trigonal fusion. Re (a) British contended that British document put before CFM 2 contained appropriate solution constitutional question und that new bizonal set-up consistent with principles this document at least respecting degree decentralization. Compromise with French views considered in light French objections against revision bizonal structure, but generally agreed compromise difficult as long as French rejected in essence federalism and espoused simply loose confederation of Laender. Consensus reached that French should be asked to explain their views and to demonstrate how their conception of constitutional structure would secure the economic unity of western Germany and permit an effective German contribution to ERP.

In discussing timing of establishment of provisional German Government either on bizonal or trizonal level British pressed strongly for convening constituent assembly this fall because important to keep initiative, vis-à-vis Soviets and to end division of authority between MG and Germans enabling latter to escape responsibility. US reserved its position this point.

Re (b) no extensive discussion on substance took place, but British indicated that under this heading they thought it appropriate to examine such questions as (1) French contribution consonant with French resources and comparable with UK contribution, (2) import-export policy, including agreement on procurement most economical sources of supply, use of export proceeds for purchase category B goods, first-charge principle (no concealed reparation), temporary use old German trademarks and trademark and patent protection, (3) trizonal level of industry (French removal program too large in relation to level retained in bizonal), and (4) acceptance of terms of reference and mode of work of existing bipartite MG control organs.

Concerning territorial arrangements British expressed view Belgian claims generally well-founded but extensive Netherlands and Luxembourg claims to territory and extra-territorial economic concessions much more open to doubt. In discussion agreement reached that Benelux claims should be heard but no action likely to set up body or bodies to examine claims in view of unfortunate repercussions such action on German people and on USSR. Respecting Saar, US concurred with UK that no agreement to regularize present situation by international statute should be made, but obtained consent of UK to close questioning of French regarding their plans for Saar.

Meeting also agreed that Benelux should preferably be represented at discussions by one representative and that Benelux should participate fully in discussion all items except reparation and ERP. Expected that after informal clearance with French over weekend, first session of conference will reach prompt agreement on formal invitation to Benelux.

Sent to Department as 675, and repeated to AmEmbassy Paris as 61, and to USPolAd Berlin as 23.

Douglas

1 This was the third of the three informal American-British meetings held prior to the opening of the formal American-British-French conference on German problems.

2 Tinder reference here is “Supplementary Principles to Govern the Treatment of Germany”, a British paper circulated first as document CFM (47) (M) 89, March 31, 1947 at the Fourth Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers at Moscow and circulated again at the Fifth Session of the Council at London as document CFM (47) (L) 7, November 27, 1947. The text of the paper is printed in Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, pp. 453–462.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/2–2348: Telegram

[Document 50]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent London, February 23, 1948—7 p. m.

681. Delsec 1567. Re Secdel 607, February 21,1 desire review US position re timing negotiations with Soviets on reparations deliveries and of quadripartite allocations.

1. Our impression is that you interpret Cabinet decision to call for negotiations with Soviets on basis delivery 15 percent in return for firm schedule of reciprocal deliveries and withholding 10 percent pending general German settlement, and that plants in the three zones would be submitted for quadripartite allocation only after the Soviets had agreed to such proposal.

2. Alternative would be to propose plants in three zones for quadripartite allocation with statement that allocation could not be accompanied by any commitment now as to the exact timing or conditions of delivery. If Soviets willing go ahead allocations on this basis, as General Clay thinks likely, we would preserve quadripartite allocation procedures and secure aid of Soviets in dividing plants between those to be delivered to IARA and to the Soviets. Allocations would be followed by attempt to secure Soviet agreement our proposal respect reciprocal deliveries.

3. If procedure described paragraph 1 is followed and Soviets reject it as expected here, procedure of paragraph 2 no longer available and no choice but clear abandonment quadripartite reparations procedures by making necessary allocations of 75 percent for IARA on a tripartite basis, exercising our own judgment as to which plants we would reserve for Soviets.

4. Appreciate here that procedure of paragraph 2 may be unsatisfactory politically due to further delay involved before determining policy on deliveries to Soviets and would almost surely result leak to Soviets of our intentions prior to completion of allocations, which may take some time, in a way which would be embarrassing.

Would appreciate your review this situation and urgent statement governmental position.

Douglas

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/2–2348: Telegram

[Document 51]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, February 23, 1948—9 p. m.

684. Delsec 1569. First meeting three power talks on Germany opened today in India Office, Foreign Office, with Strang, Massigli and Douglas present. It was agreed that the chairmanship of the London session would remain with Strang in the chair.

Agreed minimum of publicity desired and if publicity desirable at any point, conferees will agree on careful limits on it letting each delegation talk within these limits. Agreed press be informed invitation to Benelux countries has been sent. US proposed to give background and agenda to press.

Following agenda adopted after slight discussion: (a) Association of Benelux countries in policy regarding Germany.

(b) Relationship of western Germany under the occuping powers to the European recovery program.

(c) Role of the Germany economy in the European economy and control of the Ruhr.

(d) Security against Germany.

(e) Reparations.

(f) Evolution of the political and economic organization of Germany.

(g) Provisional territorial arrangements.

Agreed to issue invitation1 with agenda attached to Benelux countries to take part in discussions at close today’s meeting and for Strang to personally approach Benelux with explanation that matters involving items b, e and part of f (trizonal fusion) involved zonal operation and therefore not subject to discussion at this stage.

Strang proposed setting up of mechanism in Germany where Benelux countries could be in close touch with military government to receive information first-hand. French and US expressed some hesitation and consideration of proposal postponed. Meeting adjourned until tomorrow with item two [b] to be firstly discussed.

Douglas

1 The text of the invitation to the Belgian, Netherlands, and Luxembourg representatives, document USD/G/L/48/2, February 23, 1948, is printed infra.

The British Permanent Under-Secretary of State (Strang) to the Netherlands Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Michiels van Verduynen) CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 2172: Benelux Documents

[Document 52]

The British Permanent Under-Secretary of State (Strang) to the Netherlands Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Michiels van Verduynen)1

secret London, 23 February, 1948.

USD/G/L/48/2

Your Excellency: As Your Excellency is aware, representatives of the Governments of the United States, France and the United Kingdom are holding meetings in London beginning on February 23rd, to discuss certain problems concerning Germany. I enclose herewith the agenda2 which has been drafted for these meetings. Any consideration of these problems must be undertaken in the light of the long-term policies to be followed in respect of the future of Germany.

The representatives of the above-named three Governments are convinced that it would be most helpful if a representative of the Netherlands Government could be associated in the conversations now being held.

Your Excellency will understand from the agenda that some of the questions which it is the intention of the representatives of the three Governments to discuss are the concern of the representatives of those powers only which share responsibility for the control and administration of German territory. But so far as the other items are concerned, the representatives of the three Governments hope that the Netherlands Government will take part in the discussions.

I am, accordingly, instructed on behalf of the three Delegations now assembled in London to invite the Netherlands Government to send a representative to take part in the conversations on these problems. It would be convenient if your representative could arrive in time to take part in meetings to be held from February 25th. A similar invitation is being sent to the Belgian and Luxembourg Representatives in London.

I have [etc.]

[ William Strang ]

1 This text was agreed upon at the First Meeting of the London Conference on Germany, February 23, 1948; see the report on that meeting, telegram 684, Delsec 1569, February 23, from London, supra. In the British conference documentation, this document was designated TRI/2. Identical communications, mutatis mutandis, were addressed to the Belgian Chargé and the Luxembourg Minister in London. Strang presented the communications to the Benelux representatives on February 23. He told them that the talks were to be regarded as informal and secret, and he explained to them the press arrangements which had been agreed upon at the First Meeting of the London Conference. The Benelux representatives accepted the terms of the invitation and provisionally agreed that there would be one spokesman for the three countries.

2 The agenda referred to here is described in telegram 684, Delsec 1569, February 23, from London, supra.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/2–2448: Telegram

[Document 53]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, February 24, 1948—1 p. m.

710. Delsec 1574. In session Tripartite Conference today1 USDel presented reparation proposals calling for tripartite agreement in (1) temporary suspension of dismantling of plants that will be reviewed by special cabinet group for possible retention in Germany and in interest of maximizing their contribution to ERP, and British and French cooperation such review and (2) cessation of plant deliveries to Soviet Union except in return for commodities. British stated proposal raised serious question concerning Potsdam agreement and effect in Germany of suspension of dismantling arid particularly of possible action substituting new plants for those retained in Germany. (Re latter question USDel urges Department authorize it to abandon if necessary proposal for substitution in view strong British opposition and General Clay’s conviction shared by USDel that earmarking as reparation of plants which Germans previously assured would be retained would have extremely unfortunate repercussions in Germany) agreement reached to establish small working party to examine scope and clarify first part of US proposal. Any necessary clarification of second part US proposal will take place in informal talks among heads delegations.

Sent Department as 710, repeated USPolAd Berlin 27, Paris 63, Moscow 30, The Hague 9, Brussels 18, Luxembourg 2, Oslo 4, Copenhagen 9, Stockholm 13 and Rome 29.

Douglas

1 This was the Second Meeting of the London Conference on Germany; for a report on the other proceedings of that meeting, see telegram 712, Delsec 1573, February 25, from London, p. 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56].

Editorial Note [Document 54]

Editorial Note

Between February 23 and March 6, 1948, representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg held twelve meetings on German problems. The meetings were held in the Old India Office—the quarters of the German Department of the British Foreign Office. Members of the various delegations included the following:

United States

Lewis W. Douglas, Ambassador in the United Kingdom

General Lucius D. Clay, Military Governor for Germany

Robert D. Murphy, Political Adviser for Germany

Charles E. Saltzman, Assistant Secretary of State

Samuel Reber, Deputy Director, Office of European Affairs, Department of State

James W. Riddleberger, Counselor of the Mission in Berlin

Edwin M. Martin, Acting Chief, Division of Occupied Areas Economic Affairs, Department of State Edward Litchfield, Director, Civil Affairs Division, Office of Military Government for Germany (US)

United Kingdom

Sir William Strang, Permanent Under-Secretary of State for the German Section, Foreign Office General Sir Brian Robertson, Commander-in-Chief in Germany

Sir Edmund Hall-Patch, Deputy Under-Secretary of State, Foreign Office

Sir Ivone Kirkpatrick, Assistant Under-Secretary of State, Foreign Office

Christopher E. Steel, Political Adviser to the Commander-in-Chief in Germany

Patrick H. Dean, Head of the German Political Department, Foreign Office

John W. Nicholls, Head of the German Commercial Relations and Industry Department, Foreign Office

France

René Massigli, Ambassador in the United Kingdom

General Pierre Koenig, Commander-in-Chief for Germany

Maurice Couve de Murville, Director General for Political Affairs, Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Hervé Alphand, Director General for Economic, Financial, and Technical Affairs, Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Jacques Tarbé de Saint-Hardouin, Political Adviser to the Commander-in-Chief in Germany

Pierre de Leusse, Deputy Director, Office of Central European Affairs, Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Jacques-Camille Paris, Minister Counselor of the Embassy in the United Kingdom

François Valery, Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Belgium

Baron Hervé de Gruben, Secretary General of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Vicomte Alain Obert de Thieusies, Ambassador in the United Kingdom

Netherlands

Jonkeer Edgar Michiels van Verduynen, Ambassador in the United Kingdom

Dr. H. R. Hirschfeld, Commissioner for German Affairs, Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Luxembourg

André Clasen, Minister in the United Kingdom

Colonel Albert Wehrer, Chief of the Military Mission at Berlin

The documentation that follows comprises a selection of materials on the proceedings of the London Conference and certain related and supplementary papers. Telegraphic reports from the United States Delegation and instructions to the Delegation are included in the central numerical files of the Department of State. The complete United States Delegation minutes of regular Conference meetings, the texts of formal Conference documents, and a variety of Delegation position papers, drafts, and correspondence are included in CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 118. Other special files which include important files on the Conference are cited in annotations at the appropriate; places.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/2–2548: Telegram

[Document 55]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret   niact Washington, February 25, 1948—noon.

640. Re Delsec 1567, Feb 23.1 Dept inclined agree alternative suggestion outlined para 2, urtel, provided this contemplates British and French agreement basic US position (a) that deliveries to Soviets will involve only 15% and will be made only against current exchange at equal value of commodities, and (b) and also US proposal for reexamination of dismantling lists. This alternative favored especially in view General Clay’s opinion that Soviets might be willing agree allocations on this basis. This position considered consistent with Cabinet discussions, it being understood that no final Cabinet decision will be taken pending outcome current tripartite discussions. Dept has preferred leave procedural questions for later consideration, feeling they could be readily resolved if basic agreement achieved.

Meaning para 4 urtel not clear. Dept understands that following tripartite agreement on new basis making deliveries to Soviets, three Western Zone Commanders wld attempt obtain Soviet agreement, and during course these negotiations Sovs would be fully apprized intention withhold 10% equipment.

Marshall

1  Ante, p. 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/2–2548: Telegram

[Document 56]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, February 25, 1948—noon.

712. Delsec 1573. At second meeting of German problems February 24 Agenda items A, B and E discussed. Chairman reported letter invitation to Benelux representatives delivered and probability they will appoint delegation with single spokesman.1

It was decided if question participation in future discussions raised, including possibility consultations in Germany itself, effort should be made to avoid commitment. Reply should be that this was matter for governments rather than present conference members to decide.

Douglas introduced item B against broad background of problems faced today deriving from chances in European matrix, viz changes in nature scope and character of Germany itself, destructive influence of Soviet attitude and action and constructive influence of initiation measures assist recovery Western Europe. He indicated that while US Government had not abandoned hope of four power agreement on eventual economic and political unity of Germany there was no indication this would happen in near future. We have paid high price through delaying steps place Germany on selfsupporting basis. We are anxious avoid freezing division of Germany but must proceed take provisional measures. Germany is now different than Germany of past: stripped of territories, smaller population, must export more if to be economically self contained, actually impotent and will remain so except as instrumentality of some other power.

After mentioning other changes in European picture, i.e. Soviet policies on one hand and efforts aid recovery Western Europe on other, Douglas discussed Western Germany’s role in ERP (Item B). He stated it is essential Western zones be united as Western Germany’s participation ERP essential for political and economic stability of Western Europe. He expressed strong hope there can be consultation and coordination of policies between Bizone and French zone, specifically on such matters as bank, reformation of monetary system and foreign trade. During interim period he believed relation French zone to ERP should be same as between Bizone and ERP. Western Germany’s relation to ERP would be simplified and improved if could look forward to approximate date when merger expected. Under present circumstances with two areas in Western Germany it was US understanding that each area would become party to bilateral agreement with US and to multilateral agreement referred to in Paris report and each area also be represented on continuing organization to be set up in our ERP. Bizone area representative on continuing organization should be appropriate one and in accordance with US–UK fusion agreement. Representatives of two areas in continuing organization would be in full partnership. It was hoped arrangements could be made for temporary use old German trademarks, for protection German patents and reduction of restrictions on travel of German businessmen. By following program of this order truncated Western Germany may be invited [riveted] into structure of Western Europe.

Strang, after commenting along same lines regarding broad context of problems and urgency of taking action, indicated his general sympathy with purport Douglas views on coordination Bizone and French zone and ERP but stated his delegation would want to study details.

Massigli said his delegation would examine Douglas proposals in friendly fashion and believed agree merge [agreement] could be reached. With respect broad problems he stated his government was preoccupied with three elements: reconstruction, security and question of kind of Germany. His government wanted Germany become useful member European community in which it must be integrated but problem required caution, as, experience under Hitler showed necessity bringing Germany into Europe rather than building Europe around Germany. Since, [hence], important to know what sort of Germany we will have he agreed Germany has changed but stressed it is still in flux and uncertain now how it will crystallize. Security measures therefore vital. As for reconstruction Germany must not have priority over Europe as whole.

Referring to examples of detailed measures which Douglas mentioned as necessary to assist recovery of Western Germany, Massigli states French would have to consider carefully matter of trademarks.; Travel of businessmen he felt raised priority question in order make sure allied businessmen taken care of in Germany.

He assumed question of fusion would be taken up under Item F but at moment he said French approached problem in spirit of traveler entering thick forest full of unknown hazards. Fusion would not be difficult if knew more about kind of Germany contemplated.

Douglas assured Massigli we do not advocate priority for reconstruction of Germany. He indicated security in traditional sense may no longer be wholly appropriate and must be examined in terms changed context. He stressed huge price paid for deals [delays] in German recovery, particularly by US which could not long bear such burden. Price costly not only in terms dollars but also in economic revival of Western Europe. Can not be clear now as to precise form of future Germany but must take steps so that truncated Western Germany play its appropriate role.

It was agreed appoint working party consisting of Martin, Nicholls and Valery to examine Douglas proposal on relation Bizone and French zone to ERP.

Other points raised by Douglas would be discussed in connection agenda Items C, D and F.

Sent Department 712, repeated Berlin 28, Paris 64, Moscow 81, The Hague 10, Brussels 19 (Brussels pass Luxembourg 3), Oslo 5, Copenhagen 10, Stockholm 14, Rome 30.

Douglas

1 For the text of the invitation to the Benelux representatives, document USD/G/L/48/2, February 23, see p. 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/2–2548: Telegram

[Document 57]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent London, February 25, 1948—8 p. m.

727. For Wisner from Douglas. At a meeting this afternoon with Sir William Strang and General Robertson, representing the British, and Clay, Murphy and myself representing US, we discussed Cabinet proposals in regard to: (A) Temporary suspension of dismantling certain specific, categories of plants in Germany; and

(B) Indefinite suspension of delivery of reparations to Soviet.

As to (A) above, the British thought that they might be able to agree with us, if they knew the categories of plants which were subject to review by US special group. Without making commitment they indicated this might be possible, for them to agree to in view of probability that dismantling of plants in doubtful categories in British Zone has not been commenced, and therefore accommodation to our view would mean but a temporary adjustment of their procedure. It is urgently necessary, however, that We here be given as promptly as possible the categories of plants on which we suggest suspension of dismantling pending review.

As to (B) above, Strang repeated the previous reluctance of Bevin to agree to an indefinite suspension of deliveries to Soviet; first, on grounds that it would be a breach of Potsdam; secondly, on the grounds that Bevin looked upon the reparations provisions of Potsdam as a separate arrangement to be carried out irrespective of Soviet default under other provisions of Potsdam; and thirdly, because Bevin was reluctant to stretch further the already attenuated relations between HMG and the Soviet.

I explained to Strang that in our view Bevin’s reasons were of very doubtful validity, if, in fact, they were valid at all. He indicated that he would express our position to Bevin. I shall do so also, and am not without hope that Bevin will change his position. In this connection, while discussing the Czechoslovakian situation1 with Bevin this afternoon, he said that he had never known the House of Commons to be so violently anti-Soviet.

Douglas

1 The reference here is no doubt to the Czechoslovak government crisis and the resultant establishment of a Communist regime; for documentation regarding the concern of the United States over the events in Czechoslovakia, see volume iv .

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 862.60/2–2548: Telegram

[Document 58]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

confidential
urgent
niact Washington, February 26, 1948—6 p. m.

653. For Douglas. Re Deptek 535, Feb. 17,1 and 607, Feb. 21.2 Has now become apparent that substitution of plants was not fully understood in Cabinet and is being (questioned by certain Cabinet members who fed that the plant to be selected shld represent net additions to August 1947 level of industry. Altho Dept taking firm stand that there shld be no general re-examination levels of industry themselves, this issue will probably not be resolved for several days or more. Meanwhile request you tear this in mind and explore probable Brit and French reaction to elimination attempt finding substitutes for plants recommended for removal from list. Any info you can give us soon re results anticipated with regard to both re-examination plant list and deliveries to past will be most helpful here.

In connection with question substitution of plants for any which might be recommended for retention, Dept fully aware that substitution may not be feasible in many instances but feels that major controversy with Brit, French and, other recipient countries wld be abided if principle substitution included and effort made find substitute plants which wld be acceptable.

Marshall

1  Post, p. 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435].

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/2–2648: Telegram

[Document 59]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, February 26, 1948—7 p. m.

665. For Reber. During recent call at Dept Ital Amb referred to Benelux participation Londonconversations re Germany, pointed out Ital interest German economy owing importance German market for Ital exports, andasked that Ital position be taken into consideration. He added Ital Govt would greatly appreciate opportunity submit its views this matter.1

Dept is of opinion it would be helpful, as timely evidence Western support of present moderate Ital Govt, if US, UK and France were to invite Itals present their views re German economic problems of especial interest to them. Pls discuss this matter with UK and French reps and propose concerted action to this end at early date. It would probably be impracticable to hive Itals participate in present London meetings which have already begun and initial action might be confined to inviting Ital Govt to submit to the three Govts its views in writing concerning German questions of interest.

Marshall

1 A record of the call under reference here has not been found. The Italian position summarized here was set forth in a memorandum from the Italian Embassy to the Department of State, dated February 12, 1948 and in a letter of February 25, 1948 from Italian Ambassador Alberto Tarchiani to Assistant Secretary of State Willard L. Thorp, neither printed (740.00119 Control: (Germany)/2–1248 and 740.00119 Couneil/2–2548).

The Ambassador inthe United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/2–2648: Telegram

[Document 60]

The Ambassador inthe United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, February 26, 1948—10 p. m.

745. Delsec 1581. At third meeting on German problems February 26 Strang Welcomed Benelux representatives consisting of single delegation headed by Netherlands Ambassador Van Verduynen, assisted by Belgian Ambassador, Luxembourg Minister and one high ranking officer from each Foreign Office.

Before proceeding with agenda it was agreed on Strang’s suggestion to set up committee experts to furnish information on present political and economic organization of Bizone and French zone for use later in considering Item F.

Douglas cited recent press leak and urged cooperation adhering closely to agreement on secrecy of meetings.

Agenda Item A was then discussed. Benelux representatives hoped favorable decision be made in due course to permit further consultation with Benelux governments on German problems. Strang in reply stressed necessity consider relations with fourth partner in Germany before giving formal character to association with Benelux. Massigli also felt it was better to leave situation fluid for time being without formalizing arrangements. Douglas agreed stating we should avoid creating embarrassing situation. Benelux representative recognized importance keeping door open for fourth occupation power but asked whether Benelux governments could receive formal assurance that if Four Power cooperation failed materialize Benelux governments would be permitted participate further conferences on Germany with three western powers. Other representatives agreed consider this question and to furnish reply later.

Sent Department 745, repeated to USPolAd, Berlin 31, Paris 71, Moscow 34, The Hague 15, Brussels 24, pass to Luxembourg; Oslo 8, Copenhagen 13, Stockholm 17 and Rome 34.

Douglas

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/2–2648: Telegram

[Document 61]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, February 26, 1948—10 p. m.

744. Delsec 1582. On Item C of agenda of tripartite meeting February 261 Massigli in opening statement expressed agreement view Western Germany as center.2 . Both political and economic precautions were necessary and to this end international control of Ruhr vital. Recalled French views expressed in memorandum February 19473 and in conversations in US September 1947.4 France had abandoned insistence on separation of Ruhr, but still insisted on international control of management, of distribution of products for internal use and of portion of output exported. There must be prompt agreement not only on system of control but on its inauguration as soon as possible. Latter necessary in view of progressive surrender of power by occupying authorities to Germans.

De Gruben (Belgium) said guarantees must be sought not in excessive reduction German economic power, since Germany needed to be reasonably prosperous, but rather in continued disarmament of Germany as originally proposed by Secretary Byrnes, in continued military occupation of western part of Germany, in establishment of federal form of government and in international control of Ruhr. Regarding latter control must ensure that Ruhr products not used for aggressive purposes and that distribution of output is such as to promote interest of Europe as whole which might mean favoring some branches of enterprise over others. Opposed international management and ownership and favored supervision over production such as that exercised by US/UK control group over German coal management. Participants in international control would be Benelux and three Western occupying powers.

Hirschfeld (Netherlands) added Ruhr problem should be solved in light general economic equilibrium that would need to be established in Germany, raising question whether Germany could export enough to pay for its imports without expanding exports from its restricted industries. Also raised question as to how Western Europe’s unfavorable trade balance with Western Germany was to be financed and as to whether German coal production could ever achieve necessary pre-war levels without making up present arrears in investments.

Douglas, while stressing US prepared to consider all proposals sympathetically, explained at length US views that these problems must be viewed and solved in light radical change in European environment. It was in light this change and existing struggle between East and West that US had conceived and launched ERP. We must keep in mind constantly absent fourth power and possibility westward extension this influences illustrated by events last few days. Too rigid international control may entail loss of Germany to West. Must remember also that decision on establishment international control at this time would expose US to risk of Soviet demand for participation in event later quadripartite agreement. In response to Benelux and French intimations that such decision would not necessarily prejudge situation in favor ultimate Soviet participation and that Soviet participation on control of economy of Western Germany would be contingent on extension of Western influence eastward, Douglas deprecated reality of any ultimate Western control over eastern areas such as Silesia and reminded delegations of danger inherent in westward extension of Soviet influence, particularly in light of its hostility to Western European recovery.

Strang in outlining British thinking tentatively said impossible now to envisage detailed scheme for long-run control of Germany heavy industry. Negatively British opposed to separation of Ruhr and to international management or ownership. Favored German public ownership of selected heavy industries, some system of international Control of Ruhr and long-term military occupation certain areas. Scope control could not be determined this time, because dependent on entire content peace treaty. The manufacture of certain products would undoubtedly be prohibited. There might be restrictions on certain industries and economic activities other than manufacturing. There would need to be inspectorate to enforce restrictions, and such controls would be particularly necessary in areas of industrial concentration such as Ruhr. Agreed three Western occupying powers and Benelux should participate in any system Ruhr control. Turning to short-term problem of control during period occupation, stressed that was primarily responsibility of occupying authorities from which they could not divert themselves. Moreover development of German heavy industry as had been projected over next four years in outline or ERP and relationship that development to development similar industries in other participating countries would come under review by continuing European organization for ERP. His government was prepared, however, to consider possibility of starting even now beginnings of international control, with Benelux countries acting as observers or represented on some sort of advisory council to occupying powers in matters pertaining to Ruhr.

Further discussion Item C taking place next meeting.

Sent Department as 744, repeated USPolAd Berlin as 30, Paris as 70, Moscow as 33, The Hague as 14, Oslo as 7, Copenhagen as 12, Stockholm as 16, Rome as 33, Brussels as 23, Brussels pass to Luxembourg.

Douglas

1 This was the Third Meeting of the London Conference on Germany. The report on the earlier portion of the meeting was contained in telegram 745, Delsec 1581, February from London, supra.

2  Telegram 753, Delsec 1584, February 27, from London, transmitted the following corrected reading of this sentence: “On Item C of agehda of tripartite meeting of February 26 Massigli in opening statement expressed agreement view Western Germany should be integrated into Europe but not in manner to reconstruct Europe with Germany as centre.” (740.00119 Council/2–2748)

3 Regarding the memorandum under reference, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 154 and 156.

4 See the memorandum of conversation by the Secretary of State, September 18, 1947, ibid., p. 680.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/2–2648: Telegram

[Document 62]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent London, February 26, 1948—10 p. m.

746. Delsec 1583. It seems most likely that if any progress whatsoever is to be made toward a greater measure of understanding concerning; Germany some assurances in regard to security against Germany must be put forward. As we have not yet discussed this subject with the French we do not yet know their requirements in this, respect but it is clear that without some understanding on this phase of the problem the security aspect will be injected into the consideration of every other issue. The Benelux in today’s meeting1 brought out the importance of the demilitarization guarantee. Whereas we agree that a three power disarmament and demilitarization treaty against Germany is unrealistic and does not correspond to the present requirements of the situation, might we be authorized, however, to put forward this idea as a suggestion to the French to be developed if we find it would give them any real satisfaction at this stage? In spite of the fact that no control could be exercised over areas under Soviet domination, this limited measure of reassurance against the possibility of western German aggression and its demilitarization provisions might prove helpful to the French and the others. If we do not discuss demilitarization and disarmament on a three-power basis there is at present no contribution we can make toward the solution of the security question. It will be appreciated that the limited time left at our disposal makes this matter more urgent and we would appreciate an early indication of your views.

Douglas

1 For reports on the 3rd meeting of the London Conference, February 26, see telegrams 745, Delsec 1581, and 744, Delsec 1582, February 26, from London, pp. 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61].

The Chargé in Belgium (Millard) to the Secretary of State 862.00/2–2648: Telegram

[Document 63]

The Chargé in Belgium (Millard) to the Secretary of State

secret Brussels, February 26, 1948—midnight.

420. Have just communicated to Spaak substance Department’s 272, February 24.1 He seemed fully in agreement with Department’s views and described it as policy which is precise and clear and the only one which is now practicable. Asked how he thought such policy should be put into effect, he said we must not move too quickly lest French be frightened since it means most fundamental change for them. Above all, we must endeavor not to give ammunition to French Communists who will, of course, say we are reviving German menace. Steps must be well thought out and supple. First step extend ERP to west Germany but it should be made clear, as Department pointed out, that our primary concern is rehabilitation of Western Europe and that rehabilitation of western Germany was secondary. He stressed that it should be made clear to French that there would be no relaxation of control. He added there was also technical difficulty resulting from absence of German Government with which to deal. He thought international control Ruhr was feasible and scheme could be worked without much difficulty.

In concluding, he remarked although basic policy re Germany was right, practical application was difficult and delicate.2 Asked whether he felt a Four-Power settlement on Germany was out of the question, he dodged question, saying he did not feel he could give a considered opinion as he was not sufficiently informed. I requested that he give Department’s views searching consideration and let me know as soon as he had any further observations to make. Sent Department 420; repeated Hague 27, Paris 35, London 12.

Millard

1 Not printed; it authorized Chargé Millard and Ambassador Baruch at The Hague to talk with Belgian and Dutch officials along the lines set forth in telegram 516, February 19, to Paris (p. 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]) and telegram 597, February 20, to London (p. 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]) (862.00/2–2648).

2 In telegram 416, February 26, from Brussels, not printed, Chargé Millard reported as follows on Spaak’s views: “Re London talks re Germany, Spaak said he had instructed Belgians to listen and not raise too many questions. He was a little afraid, however, Dutch want to push too hard and too soon.” (740,00119 Council/2–2648)

Memorandum by Mr. Edwin M. Martin Division of Occupied Areas Economic Affairs, to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) London Embassy Files: 1948: File–850 Reparations

[Document 64]

Memorandum by Mr. Edwin M. Martin 1 Division of Occupied Areas Economic Affairs, to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas)

secret [London,] February 27, 1948.

Subject: Telecon with Washington on Reparations2

The information received from the Department in the Telecon of February 25, is as follows: 1. The Department opposes proceeding with allocations prior to negotiating with the Soviets the U.S. proposal respecting reciprocal deliveries. The risk of destroying the quadripartite allocation procedure must, in Department’s view, be taken.

2. By “current exchange” in Deptel 640,3 the Department means a currently agreed schedule of reciprocal deliveries.

3. Department is supporting substitution concept against strong opposition in belief it is essential to U.K. and French concurrence. Are now aware of U.K. position, but are quite anxious to know what French view is.

4. Clay suggestion for negotiated substitution, with German veto, will require further study by Department.

5. Cabinet sub-committee not set up pending interdepartmental agreement on its terms of reference and on substitution concept, which was not discussed by Cabinet. Hope to get started within week. Could give no estimate of how long, once set up, it would take to secure agreed list of industries or plants to be reviewed.

6. Pressed on the importance to negotiations here of more precise data on this latter point, Department could only repeat list of industries drawn up some weeks ago as probable examples: large diameter pipe, steel sheets and plates, mining machinery, agricultural machinery, petroleum equipment, and electrical generating equipment.

7. Cabinet decision has not been discussed with Congressional leaders yet.

1  Martin was serving as a member of the United States Delegation to the London Conference on Germany.

2 The text of the trans-Atlantic telecommunications conference summarized here is included in EUR Files, Lot 55 D 374, File–Reparations G–400.

3 February 25, p. 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/2–2748: Telegram

[Document 65]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, February 27, 1948—9 p. m.

772. Delsec 1589. Following is unofficial translation text proposal by French Delegation regarding Ruhr.1

“(1) An international regime shall be set up for the Ruhr mining and steel industries. “The question of the international ownership of the Ruhr mining and steel industries is reserved.

“The net profits of the operation of mines and steel works shall be turned over to German authorities or bodies according to terms to be determined.

“(2) The mining industry or steelworks of the Ruhr shall be operated under an international authority including representatives from the United States, the United Kingdom, France and Benelux as well as German representatives.

“(3) The functions and responsibilities of the international authority shall be those of a board of directors and include: “(a) Appointment of, general managers and heads of departments in the mines and steelworks.

“(b) Approval of general plans of production, programs of investment and financial policy of the industries.

“(c) Powers generally concerning communication, verification and investigation.

“(4) The international authority shall be responsible for the distribution of coal and coke production as between German domestic consumption and exports. In this respect the authority shall insure the observance of existing and future allocation agreements. The international authority shall insure the enforcement in the Ruhr area of the provisions concerning prohibited and limited industries.

“(5) Should its powers prove inadequate, the international authority may seek assistance from the allied bodies controlling the armed forces stationed in German territory in order to guaranty the enforcement of its decisions.

“(6) During the current period of occupation the international authority shall he under the control of the commanders in chief in charge and the regime shall be modified accordingly.”

Douglas

1 The text that follows was circulated by the French Delegation at the Fourth Meeting of the London Conference, February 27; for the report on that meeting, see telegram 774, February 28, from London, infra.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/2–2848: Telegram

[Document 66]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, February 28, 1948—11 a. m.

774. Delsec 1587. February 27 meeting German conference1 continued discussion Item C of agenda. Frenchncirculated proposal on Ruhr transmitted in cable to follow.2 Massigli in replying to Douglas’ remarks yesterday stated France, while conscious need adopting solution to current realities, has drawn certain lessons from history which differ from conclusions drawn by US. Soviet and German problems not two problems solution of which involves reconciliation but part of single problem for which single solution must be found. Admitted Germany by itself not threat for long time, but could become so immediately if allied with Soviet. Any German regime regardless of whether or not it is Communist might ally itself with Soviet if advantageous. For very purpose of guarding against this danger France does not wish to fix now terminal date for occupation of Germany, wants to consolidate position of Laender and federal pattern of Germany. Only then would it be possible to counter centralist and Soviet influence emanating from Berlin. Partly for same reason France advocates control of Ruhr which would be means for keeping Soviet influence out. In this connection recalled existence of Communist cell in Ruhr which played important role in past and still strong. Discounted danger of ultimate Soviet participation in Ruhr in event quadripartite agreement, for assumed that in such event Soviet policy would have undergone radical change. In any event deprecated attempts to win German people by favors, which was not way to stop German aggression. Can never prevent Soviet from setting itself up as champion of German unity because only by espousing German unity can Soviet obtain means of extending its influence throughout Germany. History shows that when Slavs press westward, Germans do likewise. Germany’s western neighbors must be constantly cognizant this danger.

Douglas declared he intended only to give background against which German problem should be examined. US feared certain French proposals would produce very consequences designed to guard against. Commenting on Strang’s remarks yesterday, agreed broadly except that US reluctant to see International Ruhr regime during occupation period. Conceded that pattern set now might constitute precedent but suggested necessary safeguards might be provided either in eventual peace treaty or in terms under which provisional German government would be allowed to exercise its authority. As to British proposal for advisory group, with Benelux participation, in occupation period, US would want to examine specific terms of reference and functions and could hardly contemplate encumbering military government with elaborate advisory machinery that would make discharge of manifold tasks of military government more difficult. As to public ownership, German people within such Germany as might be reconstituted would ultimately have to decide this question free of restraint even though, according his personal view, there might be danger in concentrating ownership of such important industries in hands of German government.

Turning to specific problem of international control Ruhr, Douglas stressed US sympathy with principle access to Ruhr products should not be exclusively controlled by Germany and readiness consider proposals for long-term control Ruhr in post-occupation period. Would hope, however, such control would be of such nature that Western Germany and Western Europe would be effectively integrated and would not be punitive so as to create conditions in Germany which we all desire to avoid and which would increase bargaining power of Soviet in Germany. While realizing international control would have to set at rest fear of Germany’s western neighbors, also important that it have effect of making German people feel part of Western Europe instead of turning them to east. US attached very great importance to economic integration Western Europe. Therefore very tentatively and very informally, he wanted to suggest that international regime might look toward inclusion not only Ruhr but also similar industrial regions of Western Europe. Recognized the functions of any such international regime would have to change with circumstances, that in initial period of scarcity it would have to deal primarily with equitable distribution of products of major importance, that in later stage of abundance its function might largely be to prevent frustration of natural economic forces, of natural flow of trade. Recalled in this connection that Germany able to build up its war potential before last war only behind barrier of artificial restrictions on trade. Acknowledged his suggestion might be too ambitious and might look too far into future, but felt it worthy of examination.

Benelux spokesman3 generally endorsed French views, stressing particularly need to guard against German mentality which had often expressed itself in aggressive forms. Welcomed American suggestion for consideration, but felt it important to establish bases for international control of Ruhr now lest psychological moment for such establishment will have passed. After further exchange of opinions between Douglas and Benelux spokesman, Douglas stated he saw possibility of laying basis now for international control which might be applied in future.

Strang agreed US diagnosis of elements of situation which should color our thinking in problem, but also agreed with France that Germany could easily become danger again. Recalled UK suggestions made yesterday and elaborated somewhat UK suggestion for some preliminary control system with Benelux participation. UK had in mind establishment inspectorate for three western zones which would ensure there would be no reactivation of prohibited industries and war research or any violation of other security restrictions. Such inspectorate with which Benelux representatives would be associated as observers or advisers, would operate under allied commanders without impairing latter’s authority. While conceding probably no need such inspectorate at present, thought it wise to make start. Returning to question ownership Ruhr industries, deemed it important question be promptly decided in order avoid danger German Socialists would be driven into arms of Communists. Suggested that pending such decision by democratic methods mines should be turned over to German trustees who would hold them in trust for German people. Interests of foreign owners would of course have to be protected.

After further exchange in which Massigli agreed Douglas’ suggestion merited serious consideration, conference agreed to establish working party to consider and report on the problem of establishment of international regime for Ruhr mining and steel industries.

Conference also decided to permit Benelux to circulate papers elaborating additional problems it wanted to raise under Item C such as currency, foreign trade, transport and food problems so that conference might decide whether such problems could appropriately be discussed in light already heavy agenda and US/UK views operational matters problems should not be considered.

Sent Department 774, repeated Berlin 35, Paris 73, Moscow 36, Hague 17, Oslo 10, Copenhagen 15, Stockholm 19, Rome 36, Brussels 26, pass to Luxembourg.

Douglas

1 This was the Fourth Meeting of the London Conference on Germany.

2 See telegram 772, Delsec 1589, February 27, from London, supra. Unexplained difficulties in transmitting messages from the Embassy in London appear to have reversed the sequence in which telegrams 772 and 774 were sent to Washington.

3 Netherlands Ambassador Michiels van Verduynen.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–2848: Telegram

[Document 67]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret
urgent Washington, February 28, 1948—1 p. m.

691. US Govt remains firm in its determination to prevent a resurgence of German militarism but Dept agrees with you that a three-power disarmament and demilitarization treaty would be unrealistic since the question is of larger scope and the menace lies elsewhere than in Western Germany to which effective provisions of such a treaty would be limited (Delsec 15831 ). While we continue to believe it desirable that the French be requested to specify what measures they have in mind to meet the present situation, the following considerations could be put forward in exploring the ground.

The French are secure against Germany as long as occupation continues. The French are painfully aware of the disagreeable connotations of recent events in Czechoslovakia. In view of Communist integration of a third of Germany and the likelihood of continuing stringent economic conditions, a united Germany bereft of Western occupation forces would be an easy prey to Communist domination. As long as European Communism threatens US vital interests and national security we could ill afford to abandon our military position in Germany which can now likewise serve as morale element in a Europe disposed to depression by Czechoslovak submission. The logical conclusion is that three-power occupation may be of unforeseeable and indefinite duration, thus offering protracted security guarantees and establishing a firm community of interests. We have not yet thoroughly thought through all the implications but you are at liberty to present the above factors as an expression of your personal views.

With respect to post-occupation period, the various aspects of development of US association with Western Europe were outlined in Dept’s message to Paris, repeated to you as 673, Feb 27.2 US support of Bevin’s idea and US initiative in ERP are unmistakable evidence of an evolution responsive to French security requirements.

If you feel agreement on some specific step will be called for in the London discussions, Dept would appreciate your views concerning suggestion for the establishment of a military security board on which Benelux would also be represented. Dept envisages such board could be adjunct of eventual tripartite military government administration. A continuing supervision of German disarmament and demilitarization by joint inspection groups, acting under full authority of military government, might reassure the Western European countries at this time concerning the proper protection of their security interests.

Dept believes that pressure of events lends new cogency to immediate effective coordination three western occupation zones, leading to early French participation in Western German administration. Steps along these lines would serve to consolidate French present security needs and would facilitate integration of area concerned within general Western European recovery. Dept believes it would be most useful if agreement in principle on these purposes could be obtained for public announcement at end of talks. Details of arrangements for tripartite military government cooperation and coordination German administration could if necessary be worked out subsequently. Sent to London as 691, repeated to Paris as 627.

Marshall

1 Telegram 746, February 26, p. 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62].

2 The message under reference is printed in volume iii with the documentation on NATO.

The Ambassador hi the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/2–2848: Telegram

[Document 68]

The Ambassador hi the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, February 28, 1948—11 p. m.

781. Delsec 1591. From Reber. Proposal contained in Deptel 665 February 261 discussed with UK and French delegations today. Both were of the opinion that it was already too late in these meetings to suggest the presentation of the views of any other country. They fear that if Italy is authorized to make such a presentation others will legitimately request similar privilege. It also appeared doubtful to them whether any such presentation of views could in fact have any real value in influencing the trend in Italy or in strengthening the position of the present government. If the fact of such exchange of views was kept secret it would not be helpful in the elections and if it became known such other governments as Norway, Denmark might wish to be consulted as well. It was clear that the British also had the Dominions in mind.

It was agreed however, before the close of the present meeting to consider the question of informing Italy and a selected group of other governments of the results of the meeting and of suggesting that if they preferred they could inform the US, UK and French Governments of these views before the next session if one was agreed. Discussion on the matter would however depend upon the final outcome of the current talks. [Reber.]

Douglas

1  Ante, p. 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60].

Statement by the Netherlands, Belgian, and Luxembourg Representatives to the London Conference on Germany CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 2172: Benelux Documents

[Document 69]

Statement by the Netherlands, Belgian, and Luxembourg Representatives to the London Conference on Germany 1

secret London, February 28, 1948.

USDel/Bene/L/G/48/1

Association of Benelux Countries in Policy Regarding Germany

Having been invited to the meetings at present taking place in London between representatives of the British, American and French goverments, to discuss certain problems concerning Germany, the governments of the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg have noted the informal nature of these meetings and the limited scope of their agenda.

The Netherlands Ambassador spoke for all three governments when he expressed the desire that, in view of the fundamental interest of their countries in German problems—an interest they have expressed on many occasions—their participation should become permanent and as effective as possible.

They are not unmindful of the fact that under the declarations of 5th June 1945,2 the British, American, Soviet and French governments assumed supreme authority in Germany. These countries have, however, declared in the preamble to Declaration No. 1, that they are acting in the interests of the United Nations. They added in Declaration No. 4, that they intended to consult the governments of the other United Nations in the exercise of this authority.

By the Potsdam Declaration on the 2nd August 1945, the British, American and Soviet governments set up the Council of Foreign Ministers, to which they assigned, among other tasks, that of preparing the peace settlement with Germany. In this connection, they stated, that besides the permanent members, other States would be invited to take part in the proceedings when matters directly concerning them were under discussion.

The three governments have no wish to question any arrangements made between the Great Powers as regards the government of Germany and the peace settlement with that country. They consider, however, that the documents in question provided the basis for a procedure which would enable them to be given some say in the treatment of German problems. They are glad to note that the intentions implied in these documents have been brought to fruition in the present meeting; and they are confident that the collaboration thus happily established will be maintained.

If the preparatory survey of the peace settlement with Germany were to be reopened by the Council of Foreign Ministers, they count on the support of the British, American and French governments to ensure that their governments should participate in its work, in the same spirit of collaboration, and on the same equal footing as at the present meeting.

Furthermore, as regards the government of Germany and the implementing of decisions which, by nature of their extent, may have a decisive effect upon the future of that country, they desire that they should be consulted, according to the Declaration of the 5th June, 1945, and that suitable procedure should be drawn up to that end.

1 The source text is a translation prepared by the United Kingdom Delegation. In telegram 780, February 28, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas recommended acceptance of the thought expressed in the following proposed American-British-French position privately suggested by Strang: “The representatives of the Benelux Governments have asked about their future participation in inter-allied discussions relating to Western Germany. The US, UK, and French Governments in reply wish to state that it is their intention to invite the representatives of the Benelux Governments to participate in a similar way in any joint discussions on Western Germany which may be held [in] similar circumstances to the preset (862.00/2–2848)

Telegram 719, March 2, to London, not printed, concurred in Ambassador Douglas’ recommendation (862.00/2–2848).

This paper was subsequently discussed at the 8th Meeting of the London Conference, March 2; see telegram 829, Delsec 1599, March 2, from London, p. 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 76].

2 See Department of State Bulletin, June 10, 1945, p. 1052.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/2–2948: Telegram

[Document 70]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, February 29, 1948—noon.

783. Delsec 1592. Fifth meeting February 28 on German problems opened with discussion of agenda item D, Security Against Germany.

De Gruben, speaking for Benelux, indicated there were two types of security controls, external agreements and measures within Germany, such as disarmament measures, occupation controls and long-term control of Ruhr and industrial areas. He believed security system required organic structure and suggested this might be done through regional agreements under UN.

Massigli stated with respect to security measures under the occupation that there seemed to be agreement that there would be long-term occupation but no agreement whether certain areas (Rhineland, outlets of Ruhr) shall be occupied permanently as French proposed. Re disarmament he said situation unsatisfactory as agreement on prohibited industries1 not being implemented. These industries actually privileged industries are not being dismantled. Re outside guarantees Byrnes’ draft D and D treaty2 at one time provided satisfactory system but now not clear where we stand. He doubted Benelux proposal sound from legal point of view as regional agreements under UN Charter subject Security Council approval and veto.

De Gruben believed Articles 53 and 51 of Charter could be interpreted as authorizing regional agreements without requiring Security Council approval. He referred to Rio pacts3 as precedent. (Later in reply to Douglas’ questions he said regional agreements he contemplated would probably be discussed in Brussels in connection Bevin proposal.4 )

Strang referred to draft D and D treaty and wondered whether it could be adapted to present situation; said British willing consider this and that it mght be useful idea.

Re French views on prohibited industries Robertson replied for British that original agreement on this was Four-Power one and quite separate from quadripartite agreement on level of industry. Bizone level of industry covered restricted industries but not prohibited industries. British felt whole question of prohibited industries should be reviewed but up to present no agreement reached on extent of modifications.

Douglas was doubtful whether Four-Power D and D treaty as proposed by Byrnes would be appropriate under present changed circumstances or whether it could be modified to meet present circumstances. It was necessary to take new situation into account including Bevin’s proposal of last January in considering idea of pact.

Benelux representative stated two pillars on which security rested should be deconcentration of Germany’s economic power and decentralization of its political power.

Strang suggested these points be taken up under item F. As there was no further discussion on item D discussion item F followed immediately. It was understood security question was not disposed of and could be brought up again in subsequent meetings. Long discussion followed in which representatives three Benelux countries explained their views on decentralized political structure they had in mind for Germany or western Germany. They proposed loose confederation of sovereign states similar to North Rhine Confederation. States would delegate certain powers to central authority. These powers would include those necessary for economic viability. Powers to central authority would be temporary in that states, which held full powers, could by agreement always revise or withdraw powers temporarily delegated. Benelux representatives claimed they realized necessity having central direction of prices and wages, food, foreign trade, taxation, et cetera, but believed this possible under their proposal. In reply to Douglas’ question they indicated any peace treaty would have to be made with the individual sovereign states.

Douglas questioned whether central authority with limited temporary powers delegated by sovereign Laender could enforce decisions. Laender could always refuse abide by decisions of central authority; presumably could even secede. Benelux representatives unable give satisfactory reply; asserted Laender would abide by decisions their own central authority; occupying powers presumably would prevent secession and enforce mutual agreement of Laender. In reply to Strang’s question Benelux representative stated proposed system would be imposed by occupying powers.

Douglas asked whether system imposed by coercion was consistent with our understanding of democracy and how long occupying powers expected bear cost occupation.

Luxembourg Minister said coercion did not arise under occupation and would not arise at time of peace treaty as no treaty would be signed with German Government in which we did not have confidence. Occupation must go on until such German Government existed and until viable economy developed. It would take long time to develop democratic institutions in Germany. Douglas pointed out there was contradiction in view that no coercion was involved yet government to be enforced by occupation. He also raised question of consequences in Germany in event of threat from East under proposed separatist system.

De Gruben claimed Benelux proposal took into account German interests and that plan to give Germans reasonable prosperity and political activity was not incompatible with necessity to assure guarantees against Germany.

Douglas then gave brief outline US views on political structure for western Germany, emphasizing ITS had no desire for highly centralized government; favored federal state under constitution; all powers not specifically delegated to central government to remain with Laender, et cetera. He mentioned possibility more extensive powers might be given central government in truncated western Germany than would be required for unified Germany. He added it was necessary central government have sufficient powers if stable economy to be achieved.

Strang stated British subscribed to Douglas views.

Next meeting to be held March 1 will continue discussion item F.

Sent to Department as 783; Berlin as 36, Paris as 75, Moscow as 37, the Hague as 18, Brussels us 27, pass to Luxembourg; Oslo as 11, Copenhagen as 16, Stockholm as 20 and Rome as 37.

Douglas

1 The reference here is presumably to the plan, agreed upon by the Allied Control Council for Germany on March 28, 1946, regarding reparations and the level of industry for the post-war German economy; for the text of the agreed plan, see Ruhm von Oppen, Documents on Germany, p. 113. A portion of the plan was devoted to the prohibition of certain industries in Germany.

2 The reference here is to the Draft Treaty for the Disarmament and Demilitarization of Germany which was submitted to the Council of Foreign Ministers on April 30, 1946, by the then Secretary of State, James F. Byrnes. For the text of the treaty, see Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. ii, p. 190.

3 The reference here is presumably to the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, signed at Rio de Janeiro on September 2, 1947; for documentation regarding the negotiation of the treaty at the Inter-American Conference for the Maintenance of Continental Peace and Security, held in Petropolis, Brazil from August 15 to September 2, 1947, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. viii, pp. 1 ff.

4 The representatives of the United Kingdom, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg were scheduled to hold conversations in Brussels in March 1948 to consider proposals for a five-power security arrangement first suggested by Foreign Secretary Bevin in January 1948. The conversations eventuated in the signing, on March 17, 1948, of the so-called “Brussels Pact”. Documentation regarding these events is printed in volume iii .

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 840.50 Recovery/3–148: Telegram

[Document 71]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent London, March 1, 1948—3 p. m.

787. For Lovett from Douglas. Relative persuading the French promptly to take steps aimed at merging French zone with the combined zone, suggest that I be authorized firmly but tactfully to point out to French that amount of aid, if any, under ERP for the French zone, may depend upon their willingness to merge, and that the administrator may require a commitment of this sort under any bi-lateral agreement that may be made between the French occupying authorities and the US Govt.

At the moment the French feel, I suspect, that they can rely with complete assurance on ERP aid for the French zone. As long as this attitude prevails, it may be somewhat difficult to hasten French acquiescence to merging.

Douglas

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–148: Telegram

[Document 72]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, March 1, 1948—midnight.

803. Delsec 1594. Sixth meeting German problems March 1 continued discussion Item F political and economic organization.

Douglas gave further details US views stating central government would be based on constitution to be drafted by democratically elected Constituent Assembly and subject to approval by occupying powers and direct ratification by electorate of each Land (not by electorate as whole). Only general restrictions would be placed on framers of constitution. Douglas stressed method selection delegates Constituent Assembly should be one best suited to produce really federal state. He reiterated that central government would be assigned specific powers; all other powers reserved to states. States should be delegated maximum amount of administrative responsibility but not to extent of withholding from central government powers necessary to enforce own decrees in accordance with powers delegated to it by constitution. Central government must have adequate authority to deal successfully with political and economic problems of world today and to enable Western Germany play appropriate role in ERP.

Douglas suggested federal nature of system could be carried out by having two legislative houses: one representing governments or legislatures of respective states; another with representatives elected by electorate of each state.

Constitution should provide for complete independence of judiciary, both state and federal.

Constitution should also protect civil rights, personal liberties, possibly under a bill of rights.

Boundaries of Laender should be readjusted if necessary to achieve administrative efficiency under principle that no single Land be strong enough to dominate whole.

Laender should be free of central government domination in financial field. Central government should have authority to raise revenue necessary for conduct of responsibilities reposed in it under constitution but Laender should have exclusive control of vital sources of revenue.

Central control of police and security forces should be avoided and Laender should have full control over cultural, educational and religious matters.

Massigli agreed central authority should only have powers delegated to it. System favored by French was outlined in February 1947 memo1 which contemplated head of government elected by House representing Laender and working with Ministers appointed by him and responsible representative house. While memo called for unicameral system, French willing consider bicameral system if representatives one house chosen by Land Governments (executive) and second house by Laender Assemblies (legislative). (In reply to question Massigli later indicated representatives of second house could represent all parties of each Landtag, as in Bizone Economic Council, not majority party only.) Massigli believed US proposal for elections to second house was equivalent to election by people as whole, would be another Beisehstag, would dominate Laender Governments, give rise to another Hitler. (Douglas pointed out system in USA was similar to his proposal for Germany and provided ample safeguard for federal principle: Congressmen most skillful in upholding interests of states and Senate additional safeguard. Massigli argued German tradition was different, Reichstag deputies considered themselves representatives of Germany not states. Hence must find system to make deputy represent only his state. Douglas indicated US experience with Bizone Economic Council did not show that German representatives regarded themselves as primarily representatives of Germany or of party.)

Massigli stated system he proposed should be supplemented by Federal Supreme Court dealing with judiciary on federal level. He considered finance question very important. States must have tax power. Federal government could control customs but for rest would depend on allotments from states. To meet extraordinary expenses like occupation costs, federal government could impose demands on state but would not have right to collect taxes. (Douglas later cited experience US history to show that mere authority to assess taxes is inadequate.)

Massigli agreed with Douglas regarding police, justice and education; he added there should be no federal bureaucratic apparatus except for Foreign Affairs, Customs, perhaps railroads; in general civil service of states would assign personnel to federal agencies.

Regarding constitution he referred to US, British and French agreed position at Moscow CFM, including idea of German Advisory Council,2 as still useful. (Douglas reminded Massigli that Moscow position was based on agencies to be set up prior to establishing provisional or other central government.)

Strang felt that basic principles for deciding character German Government under present situation called for system politically sound enough to withstand Communism so that Western Germany could take its place with other Democracies and system economically sound enough to enable Western Germany play part in Western Europe and to furnish security safeguards required by present situation. In general Strang indicated British views were very near these outlined by Douglas.

In discussing matter of ratification constitution Massigli agreed constitution should be accepted by people of Laender. Douglas outlined various possible procedures for Laender ratification. Strang saw possibility difficulties if constitution made effective after approval by majority of Laender unless there was additional safeguard that majority of all people must also approve. (Douglas had suggested this as one possible method.)

De Gruben then offered Benelux comments. In order to meet realities of present situation he agreed it was necessary to secure agreement of German people and of allied states. He therefore agreed must reserve to central authority all necessary power to assure economic unity and foreign representation. He favored French proposal regarding legislative and executive organization. In his opinion federal law becomes law of state and is enacted by executive of state. He felt this would take care of enforcement. Regarding frontiers of states he pointed out necessity drawing them so as not to arouse protestation in future.

Van Verduynen suggested appointing group to analyze various views expressed.

Strang suggested there seemed to be agreement on several broad points; that (1) Western Germany should be welded into economy Western Europe and (2) provisional government must exercise adequate power to fulfill that objective. He suggested examination various views put forward to determine how they fulfilled above needs and consideration what should be done in view of situation in Europe to set up political institutions in Germany now.

It was agreed to consider Strang’s proposal at next meeting.

Sent Department 803, repeated Berlin 40, Paris 79, Moscow 38, The Hague 20, Brussels 29; pass to Luxembourg as 5, Oslo 12, Copenhagen 17, Stockholm 22, Rome 38.

Douglas

1 Regarding the memorandum under reference, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 154 and 156.

2 See document CFM (47) (M) 121, April 11, 1947, ibid., p. 436.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–248: Telegram

[Document 73]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent London, March 2, 1948—11 a. m.

807. Delsec 1595. Your 691, February 28.1 We understand the connotation of recent events in Czechoslovakia and elsewhere. We believe also that French representatives are conscious of the danger of the present trend. The stumbling block, however, lies in the deeply embedded French traditional fear of the German. Whenever we come to grips with practical aspects of the German problem that apprehension overshadows the discussion whether the subject matter be political, economic or financial. Security in its limited sense as related specifically to Germany, it seems to us, still governs French public opinion. It is apparent that the instructions of the French delegation at the present London talks are based on specific conditions attaching to Germany. The French at times find it difficult to look over their next door neighbor and at the larger problem. The question, therefore, is to absorb the French demand for security by some specific provision relieving this pressure which is exercised on every other political and economic question. If the French can be satisfied with some general guarantee of their security, they would be free of their present determination to inject security into all other items and demand comprehensive restrictions in industry, in political organization, in finance, etc., which throttle recovery.

With the foregoing in mind, it is our opinion (paragraph 3, Deptel 691, February 28) that it might be well to try out the suggestion for the establishment of a military security board as an adjunct of eventful tripartite military government administration. I am requesting the informal view of General Clay, the latter having returned to Berlin on Sunday. There is little doubt that if the French were assured of long-term United States defensive cooperation against German aggression, in other words, that we would fight on the Rhine in such an eventuality, the French would relax in their attitude regarding German industry and reconstruction. Commercial rivalry would remain a consideration, but one of a secondary nature.

At a lunch yesterday with Strang, Massigli, Hirschfeld and Clasen, I expressed, in accordance with Deptel 691, February 28, personal view that we might retain troops in Germany until Communist threat had come to an end. This was seized upon with alacrity and enthusiasm by all present. If, therefore, as an alternative to US defensive cooperation, we could give some assurances of this character, I believe French and Benelux will be at least partially satisfied.

We have discussed this question further with members of French delegation. They asked whether some formula could be devised, agreed and possibly made public to the effect that the US could agree to consult with France, UK, and possibly other allied governments as to steps which might be taken in the event of a threat of aggression by Germany, or in the event that the provisional German Government failed to conform to the restrictions placed upon it in the field of disarmament and demilitarization. In other words, they suggested a simple form of consultation on a tripartite basis, or even to include the Benelux countries, such as that contained in the Byrnes treaty.

Any one of the foregoing, or combination of the foregoing alternatives, of course, would contemplate a concurrent or prior satisfactory agreement with the French regarding the Ruhr, the political structure of western Germany and Trizonia.

Sent Dept 807; repeated Berlin personal for Clay 41.

Douglas

1  Ante, p. 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67].

Memorandum of Trans-Atlantic Telephone Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Beam) 840.50 Recovery/3–248

[Document 74]

Memorandum of Trans-Atlantic Telephone Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Beam)

secret [Washington,] March 2, 1948.

Subject: Telephone Conversation with London regarding German Discussions

Participants: The Under Secretary—Mr. Lovett [Washington]

Ambassador Douglas [London]

Present in Department: Mr. Wisner

Mr. Jackson

Mr. Beam

1. Reparations. Ambassador Douglas stated that the British did not like the principle of the substitution of plants in the present dismantling lists to meet the requirement of assuring production of commodities in short supply. The British seem to favor a raising of the total level of production to meet the needs of ERP. French views were not clear and there might be a difference of opinion between the British and French. Ambassador Douglas required information concerning specific categories of products in order to proceed with the discussions. Mr. Lovett authorized him to agree to raising the total production level in order to obtain British concurrence. Mr. Lovett asked Mr. Douglas to telegraph his request since the telephone connection was bad.1

2. Bizonia and ERP . We agreed in general to the principle that Bizonia should participate in forthcoming CEEC discussions. Ambassador Douglas was informed that we considered it undesirable that the US–UK bizonal administration be represented at the Foreign Minister level in CEEC and felt it preferable that US–UK bizonal representatives participate at the subordinate level, i.e., in the discussions of the CEEC working party. (See London’s telegram No. 788, March 12 ).

3. Trizonia and ERP . Mr. Lovett authorized Ambassador Douglas to indicate to the French that the United States was unprepared to undertake any commitments as to shipments to the French zone under ERP unless and until we obtain a clear idea as to the French position on German policy, in particular coordination of their zone with Bizonia. We would assume no commitments to the French unless wereceive offsetting commitments from them. (See London’s telegram No. 787, March 13 ).

4. Benelux Participation. We will agree to the association of Benelux representatives in future meetings of the kind now taking place in London.

5. Recess of London Discussions. Ambassador Douglas planned to return on Saturday, March 6, and the discussions at the Ambassadorial level would accordingly be recessed. In the meantime, working parties would continue in Berlin with examination of pending questions, including territorial arrangements, future economic and political organization, etc. Before adjourning, the Ambassadors will probably set the date for a future meeting.

[ Jacob D. Beam ]

1 This portion of the conversation is reported upon in greater detail in the memorandum by Wisner, March 2, not printed (740.00119 EW/3–248).

2 In telegram 788, March 1, from London, Ambassador, Douglas suggested that representatives from the combined US–UK zone of occupation of Germany and from the French zone of occupation be invited to the forthcoming meeting of the Council of European Economic Cooperation. The text of this message is printed in volume iii .

3  Ante, p. 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 840.50 Recovery/3–148: Telegram

[Document 75]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret
urgent Washington, March 2, 1948—6 p. m.

718. For Douglas from Lovett. Dept has followed with interest your comprehensive reports on London discussions and we consider you have presented US position most effectively. While important differences were to be expected from initial exchange of views, we hope that before recess other participants will be impressed with sense of urgency called for by present events. Coordination of policies in Western Germany would seem to be first immediate step required for furtherance Western European integration.

Confirming our telephone conversation1 we authorize you to indicate when occasion arises that US can undertake no commitments re French Zone under ERP until we obtain corresponding commitments re closer French association in US–UK organization of Western Germany (urtel 787 Mar 12 ). Respecting urtel 788 Mar 13 and Dept’s 696,4 we reiterate that bizonal participation should not be in the CEEC ministerial meeting but in the working group which will follow. [Lovett.]

Marshall

1 See memorandum by Beam, supra.

2  Ante, p. 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72].

3 See footnote 2, p. 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 74].

4 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–248: Telegram

[Document 76]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, March 2, 1948—midnight.

829. Delsec 1599. Seventh meeting German problems March 2 considered Strang’s proposal at end of last meeting.1 After some discussion it was agreed to appoint Working Party to weigh various theoretical considerations brought up under agenda Item F2 against realities of situation in Germany and against basic need to tie West Germany closely to Western Europe. Douglas expressed view Working Party unlikely complete task before end present conference and it might be desirable have it continue work after conference ended. He suggested conference not adjourn but recess, reconvening in month or 6 weeks actual date possibly depending on progress US Congress debate. Douglas made it clear US participation in Working Party did not imply US binding itself not to take any action in Germany necessitated by unforeseen developments. Massigli hoped any necessary emergency steps which might be taken in Germany would not set precedent inimical to future solutions. Questions regarding reconvening conference and continuing Working Party were left for later decision.

Item D. Security against Germany. There was no discussion Douglas indicating US searching for appropriate device taking into account various complicated considerations.

Item E. Reparations. Benelux representative was worried Benelux governments being excluded discussions on this subject on grounds it was of concern only to occupying powers. Strang explained only certain limited aspect to be discussed. Van Verduynen stated it was difficult imagine any aspects of this problem in which Benelux not interested. Douglas made point that discussions any aspects reparations matters affecting IAEA countries if discussed with Benelux and not other IARA countries would constitute discrimination. It was agreed that if communiqué at end present conference mentioned reparations it would take into account Benelux and IARA sensibilities and stress limited character discussions this subject.

Douglas suggested and it was agreed to appoint drafting committee to prepare conference communiqué.

After intermission, meeting continued as 8th meeting without Benelux representatives. Regarding Benelux concern reparations it was agreed Strang would inform Van Verduynen in general way nature of reparation subjects under discussion. It was hoped in this way quiet Benelux representatives [fears?]. It was agreed to discuss substantive reparations questions at small private meeting of US UK and French representatives later in evening.3

Regarding specific Benelux questions on their further association in policy on Germany which they raised February 26 and circulated in more detail in memo February 284 it was agreed to reply along following lines:

One. Participation future conferences: Three governments intend invite Benelux representatives participate in similar way on any joint discussions on West Germany which may be held in similar circumstances in future;

Two. Participation in any preparatory survey of peace settlement with Germany under CFM auspices: attempt would be made to find formula going far as possible to meet Benelux views, taking into account competence of three governments and previously expressed positions of three governments on question participation other powers in preparation peace treaty;

Three. Procedure for consultation in Germany: Benelux should be informed of readiness of three powers to submit full information on matters in which they were interested and to request military governors cooperate in furnishing such information through Benelux representatives in Germany. (There was some disagreement on question of consultation with Benelux representatives in Germany. Massigli favored consultation on grounds important psychological effect on Benelux. Strang, while not favoring consultation, had no objection holding periodic meetings with Benelux representatives in Germany. Douglas reluctant take this step which might delay administrative and executive action and imply commitment for consultation.)

Item B. Relationship West Germany to ERP. Working Party’s draft report (text being sent as separate telegram5 ) embodying suggestions previously made by Douglas at meeting February 24 was accepted. Regarding unclear detail in report it was agreed that two representatives from Germany would not be formally invited to forthcoming CEEC until invitation approved by present committee of 16 members. British and French will propose invitation at first meeting.6

Trizonal fusion was then discussed. Massigli stated French were ready discuss means creating greater uniformity between French zone and Bizonia. Question of fusion was essentially political problem decision depending on full information on many elements including technical details of present Bizonal organization (now being gathered by Working Party) and results of present conference discussions on Ruhr, security and political and economic organization.

Douglas stressed extreme urgency of fusion question especially in view of ERP developments expected this spring. He pointed out relationship French zone to ERP pending fusion was important and that status of French zone in ERP was not unrelated to measures to coordinate French zone and Bizonia. He welcomed Massigli’s willingness proceed at once with steps to harmonize relations with Bizone and outlined several specific and urgent questions requiring early consideration. In addition to monetary reform and free movement of goods and persons which Massigli had mentioned he indicated foreign trade customs guards and relations with JEIA. He suggested this examination should be done in Berlin and that every effort be made to complete task within 30 days.

It was agreed to recommend to three governments they instruct military governors to undertake this task and also to prepare studies and analyses of present Bizone administration (as suggested by Massigli).

Item G. Provisional Territorial Arrangements. It was agreed Strang would suggest to Benelux representatives external frontier questions be postponed until next conference and that he would explore Benelux ideas regarding internal boundaries. Strang understood Benelux not particularly interested latter subject.

Sent to Department as 829, repeated Berlin 44, Paris 81, Moscow 39, The Hague 21, Brussels 31 pass to Luxembourg as? repeated Oslo 16, Copenhagen 19, Stockholm 25, Rome 40.

Douglas

1 For the report of the Sixth Meeting of the London Conference on Germany, see telegram 803, March 1, from London, p. 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72].

2 Agenda Item F was the Evolution of the Political and Economic Organization of Germany.

3 For the report on the meeting under reference here, see telegram 849, March 3, from London, p. 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 78].

4  Ante, p. 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 69].

5 See telegram 832, March 2, from London, infra.

6 Telegram 853, March 3, from London (volume iii ), reported that Foreign Secretary Bevin, Ambassador Massigli, and Ambassador Douglas had agreed that at the forthcoming meeting of the Council of European Economic Cooperation on March 15, the U.S.–U.K. Bizonal area of Germany and the French zone of occupation of Germany, respectively, would not be invited to attend at the ministerial level but would be invited to participate in sub-committee which would make recommendations to a subsequent meeting of the CEEC.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–248: Telegram

[Document 77]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, March 2, 1948—midnight.

832. Delsec 1600. Following is text of Working Committee to consider relationship of Western Germany under the occupying powers to ERP (see Delsec 1599) which was today approved by US, UK and French representatives:1

For additional documentation regarding the role of representatives from the U.S.–U.K. bizonal area of Germany and from the French zone of occupation in the work of the Council of European Economic Cooperation, see volume iii .

The Committee had before them a summary of the statement made by the United States delegate at the Plenary Session on 24 February and took note of the statement therein that the United States government was not in a position to make definite commitments on the subject of the European recovery programme at the present stage. Subject to this, and subject to any decisions which may be taken under item (F) of the agenda affecting the present zonal organization of Western Germany, the members of the committee agree to recommend to their respective delegation that the following guiding principles should be agreed: (1) The Combined Zone (US/UK) and the French zone should each be treated as an independent participating area.

(2) Each of them should be signatories of the multilateral agreement and each of them should sign a bilateral agreement with the United States Government.

(3) The two areas should each participate fully in the activities of any continuing organization set up by the participants in the European Recovery Programme, including where appropriate the work of any committees, study groups, or other bodies which may be set up to implement the objects of the European Recovery Programme.

(4) Intergovernmental agreements relating to the European Recovery Programme should be signed in respect of each area by or on behalf of the occupation authorities in that area.

(5) Each of the two areas should be represented on intergovernmental bodies established for ERP purposes by appropriate allied officials representing the occupation authorities in such areas. The occupation authorities may be expected to use German advisors and experts in the various continuing joint activities of the participants in the European Recovery Programme.

(6) Close co-operation should be established among the governments of the occupying powers and among the occupation authorities in Western Germany in all matters arising out of the European Recovery Programme in relation to Western Germany. Such co-operation is essential if Western Germany is to make its full and proper contribution to European recovery.

Sent to Department as 832; repeated to USPolAd as 46, Paris as 82.

Douglas

1 The decision to create the Working Committee under reference here was made by the Conference at its 2nd Meeting, February 24; see telegram 712, February 25, from London, p. 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]. Members of the Committee were: for the United States—Edwin M. Martin; for the United Kingdom—John W. Nicholls; for France—François Valery. The Committee’s report was considered and approved by the Conference at its 8th Meeting, March 2; for the report of that meeting, see telegram 829, Delsec 1599, March 2, from London, p. 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 76].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/3–348–Telegram

[Document 78]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact London, March 3, 1948—8 p. m.

849. For Lovett from Douglas. Embtel 786 [Delsec 1593] March 1.1 Last evening Murphy and I discussed with Massigli, Alphand, and Strang the matter of reparations.

1. The discussion was divided into two parts: the first dealing with delivery of reparations to the USSR; the second with suspension of dismantling of a limited number of plants, their retention in Germany, and the substitution for dismantling and delivery of plants not now identified for this purpose, in lieu of any plants now identified for dismantling which may be retained.

2. As to the first, the French and the British took the view that not to inform the Soviet of our proposition prior to quadripartite allocation by the Control Council in Berlin would be a devious procedure to follow. If, on the other hand, the Soviet were informed prior to quadripartite allocation by the Control Council in Berlin, the Soviet would probably, by the exercise of the veto, prevent all allocations, and that as a result, quadripartite allocation for reparations would terminate and machinery for tripartite allocation would necessarily have to be substituted. In this event, Alphand and Massigli expressed anxiety that one or more of the satellite representatives in IARA would be able to exercise some form of veto and thus block allocations of the 75 percent portion of the capital equipment allocated to the west. We insisted that the Paris agreement of December, 1945, provided for a majority vote and also provided for arbitration procedure which would prevent Yugoslavia, for example, from exercising a veto over allocations to France. The French said that they would contact Bidault today on this question and if our view on IARA procedure is confirmed, they believe that they will be able to go along.

3. Strang, for the British, referred again to Mr. Bevin’s views regarding deliveries to the Soviet Union and stated that Mr. Bevin has not as yet indicated to him a change of opinion, that Mr. Bevin felt that if we fail to deliver we would be guilty of violation of the Potsdam protocol and that it was otherwise advisable to keep up the “trickle” to the east because it was uncertain in character and in doing so we might obviate complications (undefined) with the USSR.

4. In response to Strang, we made it clear that the Potsdam agreement should be considered in its entirety; that the Soviet have frustrated the honoring of its provisions for a period of more than two years; that we had postponed taking action long overdue in our zones with the consequent heavy cost for the US, and the UK and the recovery of Western Europe; and that there was, accordingly, no validity to the argument that if the UK, French, and US decide to stop delivery of reparations from Western Europe to the USSR except upon the terms of the cabinet proposal, we would be guilty of a violation of the Potsdam agreement. In this connection we made the point that we would deliver 60 percent of the 25 percent to the Soviet on condition that they agree to send us as a consideration commodities of value equal to the reparations to be sent, and that the 40 percent of the 25 percent would be held by us pending Soviet honoring of the Potsdam agreement. Moreover, we emphasized that regardless of what we do, the USSR through its propaganda media accuses the western powers daily of violations of Potsdam.

5. As to the second part of the reparations question, listed above in paragraph 1, Alphand repeatedly brought up the question of additional machine tool deliveries to the west, insisting that further examination be given to the retention in Germany of a stock of machine tools which the French consider unjustified under the present level of industry. We said that this question is not directly connected with the principal point involved in the present discussion, but that we would consider a request by the French for a review of the question. We recalled in that connection a discussion which took place in London last summer incident to the 1947 level of industry plan and referred to the difference in the method of calculation used by the French regarding machine tool obsolescence, etc. Alphand asked whether any of the plants, the dismantling of which might be terminated and which might be retained in Germany, had been notified to the Control Council for allocation. We replied that we thought none of them had been so notified to the Control Council, though probably the IARA countries had been informed.

Alphand and Massigli thought that substitution would make it easier for them to agree to our proposal.

6. For the British, Strang expressed considerable concern, indeed as much concern over the second part of the reparations question as over the first. He indicated that substitution of plants would have to be contingent upon agreement with the Germans, for they had already made commitments to the Germans that only those plants identified for dismantling would actually be dismantled.

7. Both the British and the French, but particularly the latter, emphasized the importance of making it clear, if our proposals were agreed to, that they did not mean the suspension of all reparations, but rather merely a minor modification in kind without any alteration in the total volume and amount. If this were not emphasized, they both felt, and again particularly the French, that the proposals would have an extraordinarily adverse political effect in all the IARA countries, including France. We attempted to make it clear that our proposals did not contemplate suspension of reparations to the IARA countries, or a modification of the total amount, if substitution were agreed to, and that probably the total number of plants which would be retained would not exceed 15 or 20.

8. I am seeing Bevin today and hope that I may be able to persuade him to modify his views.

Douglas

1 Not printed; it renewed the request, first made in telegram 710, February 24, from London, p. 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], for authorization to drop the insistence on substitutions for plants earmarked for reparation during negotiations with the British and French (740.00119 Council/3–148).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/3–348: Telegram

[Document 79]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   urgent
niact London, March 3, 1948—8 p. m.

850. For Lovett from Douglas. Embtel 849, March 3.1

1. I had a long conversation with Bevin today, and so to both the first and second parts of our reparations proposals, I advanced the same arguments which had been advanced last night to Strang et al.

2. I added that as to the first, that is to say delivery of reparations to the Soviet, Congress held such strong views that it might attach either in the European authorization act or in the appropriations, drastic limitations.

3. In regard to delivery of reparations to the Soviet in accordance with our proposals, he wondered whether this might lead to a termination of the quadripartite association in Berlin and to an effort on the part of the Soviet to drive us out.

4. I replied that I thought this most unlikely, for it would, in effect, constitute an openly hostile act which I thought the Soviet would be reluctant to take, and that moreover, we should not be too much hampered and fettered by apprehensions about Soviet retaliation.

5. Bevin promised to review the matter and discuss it with me again, probably tomorrow or the next day.

Douglas

1  Supra.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/3–348: Telegram

[Document 80]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact London, March 3, 1948—8 p. m.

851. For Lovett from Douglas. Enibtel 850, March 3.1

1. This afternoon, at a meeting with Strang and Robertson for the British; Massigli, Alphand and Koenig for the French; Murphy, Saltzman and myself for the US, we again reviewed the question of the matter of reparations, and particularly the second part of our proposals; namely, that part having to do with the suspension of dismantling of a limited number of plants.

2. Robertson again repeated his views about substitution, and stated that any substitution would be contingent upon German agreement which, in effect, meant that it could not be relied upon.

3. The French asserted the substitution would make the proposal much easier for them to accept. They raised the legal question, however, as to whether, in the event quadripartite allocation of reparations were terminated, the agreement of December of 1945 providing for the allocation of plants to the IARA countries within the specified total percentages to which each of the IARA countries was entitled, would be invalidated because of the reference contained in this agreement to the Potsdam agreement of 1945. This question is now under review.

4. It would be of inestimable assistance to us if, failing to give us a list of the categories of plants which are subject to re-examination with a view to determining the plants, if any, which should be retained in Germany in lieu of being dismantled and equipped for reparations, you could give us, very urgently, the maximum number of plants the dismantling of which might be discontinued and which would be retained in Germany.

5. Will advise you promptly as to further developments. Sorry I cannot at the moment comply with your request to give you a suggestion which you might put to the Cabinet. Hope will be able to do so tomorrow.

6. If you could give us some leeway as to substitution so that we would not have to push the British in one direction and the French in another it would, I think, be helpful.

Douglas

1  Supra.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 EW/3–448: Telegram

[Document 81]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   urgent
niact Washington, March 4, 1948—4 p. m.

749. For Douglas from Lovett. Difficulty your negotiations with British and French on basis list of categories given you is fully appreciated here.1 However this represents most restricted list we have been able obtain in lengthy negotiations with Cabinet Committee, members of which strongly favor broader list of categories. To obtain further modification of list would require reopening discussion in Cabinet following President’s return Washington.

Have you given full consideration to fact that this list is highly tentative and is intended solely for purpose of defining scope of examination? Suspension of dismantling of plants these categories would be temporary and for purpose of providing time for further study. As stated our telecon message today we do not expect that examination these plants will result in material reduction of plants listed for reparations. In any event understood that most of plants which would be affected are not being dismantled at present due to deliberate decision by British zonal authorities defer dismantling plants capable producing critical items. Thus agreement to temporary suspension would not in many cases result in any change or delay.

Regarding substitution principle concerning which you request latitude for negotiation, we will support any arrangement to which British and French will agree and which in your opinion is desirable. [Lovett.]

Marshall

1 Teletype conferences were apparently held between the Department of State and the Embassy in London on March 3 and March 4 on the subject of reparations. At one or both of these conferences, the Embassy was given a list of those categories of plants in Germany subject to reparations to be reviewed by a special investigating committee.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/3–248: Telegram

[Document 82]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   niact Washington, March 4, 1948—6 p. m.

762. Secdel 1565. US Govt has demonstrated great understanding for French security preoccupations and has supported French material interests in Germany, as evidenced by action on Saar. Surely trend of US association with western Europe cannot be lost upon the French. However, we are prepared to consider both the suggestions you propose in Delsec 15951 on understanding that their acceptance by us would be conditioned by French acceptance on a reasonable basis of the main aspects of our program to further the effective coordination of western Germany and achieve a settlement on the Ruhr.

1. Dept is willing to see endeavor made to devise formula for possible public announcement at some later date that US would agree to consult with France, UK and other Allied Governments concerning steps which might be taken in event of aggressive threat by Germany or in event provisional German Govt failed to respect disarmament and demilitarization restrictions. It would be our understanding that form of consultation would be that envisaged in Byrnes’ treaty and we would welcome Benelux participation if these countries desire it.

2. Dept also authorizes you to try out proposal for establishment during occupation period of a military security board. Such board would be consequence and adjunct of tripartite military govt and French should doubtless realize also that their participation in joint western German administration would strengthen their security interest in corresponding measure.

While we can give no formal assurances at this time respecting considerations mentioned in Deptel 691, Feb 28,2 which you laid before Strang, Massigli, and others, you may be able to reinforce with your personal authority the likely validity of these considerations which seem to represent the logical conclusion to be drawn from present events.

In view of early recess date of conference, we do not think you should try to negotiate or work out details of above arrangements at this time but believe you may find it useful before adjournment to put them forward in confidence as suggestions which may facilitate subsequent discussions.

Marshall

1 Telegram 807, Delsec 1595, March 2, from London, p. 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73].

2  Ante, p. 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67].

TJie Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–448: Telegram

[Document 83]

TJie Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 1

secret
urgent
niact London, March 4, 1948—midnight.

876. Delsec 1611. I. Wish to report status discussions Ruhr question.2 This message will cover points on which tentative agreement was reached at meeting of plenary session this afternoon.3 Should note that agreement in each case is subject to agreement on the whole and to satisfactory settlement of the security question vis-à-vis Germany. Separate message4 will discuss points still disagreed. Latter are to be subject of working party meeting tomorrow morning and of plenary session tomorrow afternoon at 3 p. m. Request that if you have any important comments on positions already agreed on, on US line on disagreed points, you communicate with us prior to 3 p. m. tomorrow, London time. Some changes are of course possible as result of tomorrow morning’s working party meeting.

II. The following are the agreed paragraphs, numbered in accordance with the report of the working party: “Preamble. Whereas the security and economic recovery of the free countries of Europe require that the economic resources of the Ruhr shall not again be used for the purposes of aggression and that access to the coal, coke and steel of the Ruhr should not be in the future, as it was in the past, subject to the exclusive control of Germany and that access to them for the benefit of the economic life of the entire area embracing the free countries and Germany shall be without discrimination, and

“Whereas it is essential for the political and economic well-being of the free countries of Europe and a democratic Germany that there be the closest association of their economic life, and

“Whereas it is important that trade between the European countries mentioned in the preceding paragraph should be facilitated by lowering trade barriers or by any other means.

“Therefore it is agreed that: (1). An international control shall be set up in the Ruhr as soon as possible and at least prior to the establishment of provisional German government or of an organization of a governmental character;

(2). The International Control Agency shall be composed of representatives of the US, UK, France, Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg and Germany;

(3). The International Control Agency shall take its decisions by a majority vote. The US, UK, France and Germany shall have three votes each and the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg one vote each;

(4). Until the occupying powers party to this agreement decide otherwise, the representative of Germany shall be designated and the vote for Germany exercised by those powers which share the responsibility for the economic administration of that part of Germany which includes the Ruhr, and in such a way as may be decided by those powers;

(6). The International Control Agency shall have the right “(A). To receive regular reports on production, distribution and consumption of Ruhr coal, coke and steel;

“(B). To demand relevant interim reports whenever necessary;

“(C). To verify the information at its disposal by visits on the spot or by the subpoena of witnesses.

(7). During the period of exercise of supreme authority by the allied powers the occupying authorities concerned will maintain the extent of control over management of the Ruhr coal and coke industry at present exercised by the US/UK control group.

(9). Should the German government not carry out the decisions of the International Control Agency, the International Control Agency may, by a majority vote of the allied representatives, find that the German government is in default on its obligations, and recommend the application of such enforcement measures as are necessary to ensure the attainment of the objectives set out in this agreement. During the period of the exercise of supreme authority by the allied powers the responsibility for the execution for such measures will lie with the occupation authority concerned. In the subsequent period enforcement of such measures shall be in accordance with the terms of any German settlement.

(11). This agreement represents a statement of principles which, if approved by the participating governments, shall be elaborated into a detailed charter for the International Control Agency.”

III. The US representative in connection with the last clause of paragraph 4 of the agreement placed in the record that any decision reached by the powers responsible for the economic administration of that part of Germany which includes the Ruhr must be in accordance with such agreements as may exist at the time, defining the respective responsibility in the area of the governments concerned.

IV. Paragraph 11 given above is not the precise agreed text since at this afternoon’s meeting there was only agreement in principle to the idea contained in the paragraph.

Sent Department 876; repeated USPolAd Berlin 48, Paris 87.

Douglas

1 The source text bears the following marginal notation: “J[acob] D B[eam] telephoned London 3/5/48 11:45 a. m. not to make any commitment on this and not to include in communiqué”

2 The London Conference on Germany first considered the question of the Ruhr (Item C of the Conference agenda) at its 3rd and 4th Meetings, February 26 and 27: for the reports on those meetings, see telegrams 744, Delsec 1582, February 26 and 774, Delsec 1587, February 27, both from London. At the conclusion of the 4th Meeting, it was decided to appoint a Working Party (consisting of Samuel Reber for the United States, Patrick Dean for the United Kingdom, and Hervé Alphand for France) to prepare a report on the problem of the establishment of an international regime for the mining and steel industries of the Ruhr. After holding six meetings, the Working Party prepared a preliminary report, designated TRI/5, March 4. It is this report which is under consideration in this and the next following telegram.

3 This was the 9th Meeting of the London Conference.

4 Telegram 875, Delsec 1612, infra.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–448: Telegram

[Document 84]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret   niact London, March 4, 1948—midnight.

875. Delsec 1612. 1. This is second message on status of Ruhr discussion.1 It deals with points which as of the close of today’s plenary session were disagreed. Paragraphs 5, 8 and 10 of the report of the working party are involved.

2. With respect to paragraph 5 the British at today’s plenary session submitted the following new text: “The functions of the international control agency shall, in the light of existing or future international agreements, be as follows: (A). To make allocations of coal, coke and steel from the Ruhr as between German consumption and export, in order to insure adequate access to supplies of these products for the free countries of Europe as well as for Germany; and, subject to the provisions of paragraph 8 below, to insure the fulfillment of the terms of such allocations.

(B). Subject to the provisions of paragraph 8 below, to prevent the German Govt or German management from instituting or carrying out artificial measures or practices in connection with the movement of these products in international trade.

(C) To exercise such controls as are provided for in paragraph 8 below.”

With respect to (A) the US proposed to amend the text by striking “make” and inserting “control the making of”, and by inserting after “German consumption and export”, “as may be necessary”. The French insist on the British language with respect to the first amendment; The British will accept either; Benelux prefer the British but will probably accept either. The clause starting “in order to” with or without the US amendment is objectionable to the French and probably to Benelux as representing a curtailment of the powers of the agency. It reflects a position taken strongly by the US and accepted by the UK that the agency shall not have the power to restrict the quantity of these products exported from the Ruhr.

With respect to (B) the US will propose to strike “in connection with the” and to substitute “which interfere with the normal”. This draft omits the last clause of the original US proposal reading “and to assure to the governments and nationals of other countries nondiscriminatory access to these products on terms of equality with German nationals or authorities”. We are disposed to accept the deletion. This arises out of a growing concern, which we shall want to express with respect to the paragraph as it now stands, with the unfavorable position in which these restrictions may place German management until nations which trade with Germany have agreed to apply the principles of the ITO or the GATT to Germany. Except for these US amendments we believe the paragraph is agreed although the UK may propose to strike it on the technical ground that the subject matter is covered in paragraph 8.

The US has a technical amendment to this paragraph (C) to which the UK has informally agreed which would make it read “to exercise such controls as are assigned to it in accordance with the terms in paragraph 8 below”.

3. In this afternoon’s meeting the British proposed the following text for paragraph 8: “During the same phase the commanders-in-chief concerned will maintain such control over the Ruhr coal, coke and steel industries as may be necessary to ensure (a) that the export commitments of Germany are carried out, (b) that the mandatory requirements of the occupying powers are met, (c) that the disarmament provisions of present agreements or of a future treaty are not infringed thereby, (d) that the German Government or German management do not institute or carry out artificial measures or practices in connection with the movement in international trade of coal, coke and steel from the Ruhr.

“The powers as under (a) and (d) shall at the end of the period in which the allied powers exercise supreme authority in Germany be transferred to the international control agency. The powers exercised by the occupying authorities under (c) shall at a time to be decided, be transferred to such authority, or authorities, as may be designated by international agreement to ensure the continued demilitarization and disarmament of Germany.”

The US will propose a technical amendment to strike in the first sentence “commanders-in-chief” and substitute “the occupying authorities”. The US will also propose to amend (a) by inserting after “Germany” the words “as determined by the International Control Agency”. Both these changes were agreed by the working party this morning and it is believed their omission in the British draft was accidental. The US will make the same proposals with respect to (d) as have been discussed under 5 (b).

Except for these comments it is believed that 8 is all agreed up to the last sentence. Herein lies the widest difference of opinion thus far. This language is a US proposal which is not acceptable to the French or to Benelux who wish the powers under (c) to be transferred to the International Control Agency.

This afternoon the UK proposed as a compromise to strike the last sentence and amend the first sentence to read “the powers as under (a), (c) and (d) shall, at the end of the period in which the allied powers exercise supreme authority in Germany, be transferred to the International Control Agency, except insofar as, especially in the case of (c), other arrangements for achieving these purposes may be laid down in the peace settlement or by other international agreement”. The US proposed that the last sentence be amended to read “The powers exercised by the occupying authorities under (c) shall be transferred to such authority as may by the terms of a peace settlement or other international agreement be designated for the purpose, provided that if no such authority is established the powers herein mentioned shall be transferred to the International Control Agency”. Neither proposal was accepted by the French or Benelux representatives but they were not rejected. Their desire to see this power lodged in this agreement in the agency derives from a fear that other arrangements may not be made and from a strong feeling that even if other arrangements are made the life expectancy of the International Control Agency is substantially better than that of any body set up for disarmament purposes for all of Germany.

4. Today the UK proposed and the US accepted a revised version of the original US draft on paragraph 10 reading as follows: “This agreement shall not prejudice the conclusion of subsequent arrangements for the better coordination of the Ruhr coal, coke and steel resources with those of other areas. Any such subsequent agreement would not invalidate so far as the Ruhr is concerned the provisions agreed to herein”.

The French and Benelux representatives requested time to consider this proposal. Heretofore they have agreed in principle but objected strongly to the inclusion in this agreement of a provision which suggests that the agency set up by it and considered by them permanent might be superseded.

Douglas

1 See telegram 876, Delsec 1611, supra.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–448: Telegram

[Document 85]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent London, March 4, 1948—midnight.

874. Delsec 1613. For Wisner from Douglas. This afternoon Bevin sent me, through Strang, an informal note in regard to reparations. It had been hastily dictated.

It represents his personal views which he intends to put forward to his Cabinet colleagues. I have paraphrased it as follows:

Two points regarding reparations have been raised by Douglas with Bevin. In considering them we must remember that the British Cabinet has already taken a decision that reparations to the Soviet Union were not [to] be discontinued. Therefore, a new Cabinet decision would be required if this is changed.

Referring to the first point, Bevin understands that we contemplate a revision of the list of plants to be allocated and dismantled, and that the revision would affect principally the British Zone. The idea of substitutions has been suggested by Douglas. Bevin is unable to accept the substitution idea, because British have agreed, in accordance with an arrangement made with US Government, that when the level of industry was fixed, a list would be published and the Germans assured that there would be no further change. British do not want to go back on this assurance, or to initiate discussion with the Germans regarding substitutions, thereby reopening reparations question. Bevin believes that if US presses the UK on this question, consideration must be given to an increase in the industry level and to the security question. Before a decision could be made it would be necessary to know what plants would be involved and whether British should agree unilaterally to what amounts to an increase in industry level. If Bevin believes the list of plants is reasonable, he will consult the French before making a decision on this point.

As to the second point Douglas has raised, regarding deliveries to the Soviet Union, Bevin says that he is subject to a definite pledge which was made after consultation with the US, and which cannot be confused with the rest of the Potsdam Agreement. In Moscow Bevin stated that the list of category I war plants would be completed, allocated and delivered regardless of anything else, and that when the industry level was settled the list of plants would be completed and delivered. He thinks we are on very bad ground to say that Soviets are in default respecting reciprocal deliveries.

The ten percent would represent a very small amount, particularly in view of the increase in the level of industry to which it is now proposed to add some additional plants. To suspend these deliveries endangers the quadripartite machinery which Bevin agreed in London not to jeopardize unduly when its importance was impressed upon him by Marshall who, with Douglas, urged the point strongly in connection with the currency reform. To stop these deliveries would endanger our position in Berlin and would furnish a propaganda point to the Soviets which would look to the rest of the world as if we were acting spitefully and not constructively.

Bevin hopes British will not have to operate under a threat affecting the European Recovery Program and believes that this would react badly against the US.

Foregoing points are made with due respect to our viewpoint, but reflecting Bevin’s European point of view. He believes, personally, that if British try to cooperate with US on first point and can find a reasonable arrangement, the second point, regarding deliveries, should not be pressed by US.

I shall try to see Bevin again before he puts forward his views to his Cabinet colleagues, in an attempt to persuade him to change his position at least in regard to delivery of reparations to the Soviet. In view, however, of what I sense to be a growing apprehension on the part of the British, French and Benelux countries that some action on our part might precipitate an open and complete break with the Soviets, I am doubtful that I will be able to influence Bevin to change his position at least before I leave here Saturday evening.

Douglas

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–548: Telegram

[Document 86]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent London, March 5, 1948—8 a. m.

880. Delsec 1610. Ninth meeting German problems March 4 was devoted to discussion working party’s report on international control of Ruhr. Text and review of portions taken today’s meeting subject separate telegrams.1

Before taking up report meeting considered supplementary proposal suggested by Benelux re safeguarding rights of existing foreign owners of coal mining and steel properties in Ruhr. After some discussion, it was agreed that three military governors in Germany, in consultation with delegation of three Benelux governments will study question. It developed in discussion that Benelux representatives had in mind examination of present management as affecting foreign owners’ rights. Douglas stated categorically he could not agree examination if present management was involved. He and Strang made clear study should be made in connection with plans for international control of Ruhr, i.e., it referred to future not present.

After long discussion of working party’s report at which large measure agreement reached, unresolved points referred back to working party.

Next meeting morning March 5 will discuss working party’s report on Item F political and economic organization and communiqué; afternoon meeting to resume Ruhr discussion.

Sent Department as 880; repeated USPolAd Berlin 49, Paris 89, Moscow 42, The Hague at 23, Oslo 18, Copenhagen 20, Stockholm 26, Rome 41, Brussels 35, Brussels keep Luxembourg informed.

Douglas

1 See telegrams 876, Delsec 1611 and 875, Delsec 1612, March 4, from London, pp. 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 83], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/3–448: Telegram

[Document 87]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret
urgent
niact Washington, March 5, 1948—5 p. m.

778. Secdel 1566. Dept approves endeavor to obtain agreement on Ruhr plan at delegation level (Delsec 1611 and 16121 ). We note that delegations would be prepared to recommend plan to Govts if agreement achieved at later meetings of the Ambassadors on points D and F. In view important issues involved and limited opportunity to consider them, we would have to treat Ruhr plan in meantime as working text, it being understood it may prove necessary to offer certain amendments at reconvened delegates’ meeting. Essential plan be kept secret and hope you will impress this tactfully but firmly on French.

Marshall

1 Telegrams 876 and 875, March 4, from London, pp. 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 83], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–548: Telegram

[Document 88]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, March 5, 1948—midnight.

894. Delsec 1616. Tenth meeting German problems morning March 5 approved with few slight amendments Working Party report on Agenda Item F—Political and Economic organization1 —and discussed draft communiqué. Copies of report as revised are being airmailed. Agreement reached many important points; it was recommended working party foe convened Berlin by three Military Governors to continue discussion disagreed points. Summary of paper follows:

(A) Form and scope future German govt:

Federal Legislative Bodies: It was agreed there should be two houses, Upper House composed equal number representatives each Land, nominated by Land govts, and Lower House with representation proportional to population of Laender.

No agreement reached on manner electing representatives to Lower House. US and UK favored direct elections by Laender populations under arrangements to be made by individual Laender which would choose own electoral systems. French and Benelux wanted individual Landtage to elect members lower house in proportion to strength of political parties in each Landtag.

Federal Executive Bodies: It was agreed that Federal Minister President should be chosen by two Federal Legislative houses in manner to be agreed by them.

No agreement on methods selecting Federal Ministers; whether they should be individually elected by both Houses, chosen by Minister President, or elected by Lower House. (Only British favored latter method.)

No agreement whether Ministers collectively or individually responsible to parliament. French and Benelux favored individual responsibility and US/UK favored collective responsibility, US being willing reverse its position if parliamentary responsibility of executive established as principle and in accordance German views. USDel requested further consideration be given to possibility of, (a) independent Executive, and (b) mixed term for independent or parliamentarily responsible Executive.

Chief of State: Opinion remained divided on advisability creating Chief of State.

Division of powers between federal houses: It was agreed two houses should have equal powers initiating legislation except that initiation money bills might be reserved to Lower House and certain powers connected with foreign affairs and confirmation of certain appointments might be reserved to Upper House.

UKDel considered Upper House should have power of suspensory veto only. Other delegations favored equal powers of legislation for two houses, subject reservations mentioned above.

Division of powers between Federal and Land Govts: Agreed Federal Govt should enjoy only powers expressly delegated under constitution. Detailed division of powers will be studied by Working Party in Berlin on understanding that following powers will not be delegated to Federal govt: education, public health, public welfare, police, cultural and religious affairs and local government.

Taxation: Agreed question specific allocation and methods collecting taxes as between Federal and Land govts will be considered further in Berlin; that Federal govt should have power dispose of monies only for purpose for which it set up; and that Federal govt should be empowered set rates for certain specified taxes. US/UK delegations believed Federal govt must enjoy power collect taxes in certain specified fields; French and Benelux held that cash collecting power should invariably rest with Laender except for customs duties.

Federal Judiciary: Agreed that there should be Federal Supreme Court with power to settle conflicts between Federal and Land authorities, and with appellate jurisdiction to protect civil rights of individuals against Federal govt acts and to insure application with due regard for uniformity of Federal law; that Germans should be instructed establish system insuring complete independence of judiciary. USDel wanted Germans encouraged to debate establishment of system of Federal courts. UK had no objection but French and Benelux opposed.

Civil Rights: Agreed that Federal constitution should provide adequate guarantees of civil rights of individual.

Execution of Federal Law: US/UK believed certain Federal administrative agencies, staffed by Federal personnel, required for execution Federal law at Land and local level. French and Benelux believed such agencies should be exceptional and to maximum possible extent staffed under arrangements made by Land authorities.

Citizenship: US, French and Benelux favored dual citizenship; UK opposed.

General Recommendations: Final statement of allied requirements in connection with constitution should be in terms of minimum requirements, leaving maximum scope to Germans.

B) Landtag Boundaries and German Constituent Assembly.

Land Boundaries: Agreed existing Laender boundaries in some cases inconsistent with tradition and otherwise anomalous; therefore necessary changes should be made before constituent assembly set up. (It was understood that for purpose studying question no consideration would be given to present location occupation troops.)

Constituent Assembly: Agreed it should be formed on basis to achieve compromise between principle of equal Land representation and principle of representation in proportion to Land population; that it is not essential have trizonal fusion before constitution comes into force; that constitution should be ratified at least by majority of votes in majority of Laender, and also by majority of total votes cast. Details will be worked out in Berlin.

No agreement whether constitutent Assembly should be composed of representatives of the Laender, from the Laender, or of the people of the Launder.

No agreement when Constituent Assembly should be summoned (US/UK strongly favored this be done before end of 1948. French and Benelux prepared give this serious consideration). End summary.

French indicated in reply to Douglas question they could not make decision on date convoking Assembly without consulting govt, but that they prepared recommend favorable action to govt.

Agenda Item G Provisional Territorial Arrangements: It was agreed leave this item over until next session.

Communiqué: Several suggestions made and draft referred back to Working Party. Discussion will continue afternoon meeting.

Sent Department 894, repeated Berlin 50, Paris 91, Moscow 43, Hague 25, Brussels 37 (please keep Luxembourg informed), Oslo 19, Copenhagen 21, Stockholm 27, Borne 42.

Douglas

1  At its’7th Meeting, March 2, the London Conference on Germany decided to establish a Working Party to consider and report to the Conference on the various problems related to a future German government; see telegram 829, Delsec 1599, March 2, from London, p. 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 76]. The principal members of this Working Party were: for the United States—Edward Litchfield; for the United Kingdom—Christopher Steel; for France—Maurice Couve de Murville; for Benelux—Col. Albert Wehrer. The agreed report of the Working Party was circulated to the Conference as document TRI/4, March 4, 1948, not printed.

Document TRI/8, March 5, 1948, recorded the following decisions of the London Conference on Germany with respect to the convening of a working party in Berlin:

The approved version of document TRI/4 included the following paragraph: “To recommend that a working party foe convened by the three Military Governors in Berlin to consider those points in the record below which require further study; and that the proceedings of the working party should be kept secret.”

The following additional decisions were also agreed upon:

“It was understood that the Military Governors would call in those other representatives in Berlin who have the best right to express their views.”

“It was understood that for the purpose of this study no consideration would be given to the convenience of the present occupation troops.”

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–548: Telegram

[Document 89]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, March 5, 1948—midnight.

896. Delsec 1617. Eleventh meeting German problems afternoon March 5 continued discuss draft communiqué. This was time-consuming task involving considerable redrafting. Paper was referred back to committee and will be given final review at last meeting prior to recess tomorrow morning March 6. USDel plans urge release to press be delayed until evening (London time) March 6. Text will be telegraphed Department and Berlin soon as approved around noon (London time).1

Besides communiqué, but also in connection with it, meeting considered Benelux objection to informal reply to their request to be consulted in Germany (see third point proposed reply Delsec 1599 March 22 ). Van Verduynen was most insistent, but US and UK delegates unable agree to any language implying consultation in Germany. It was agreed this part of reply to Benelux questions would not be mentioned in communiqué; Benelux representatives could give any explanations they wished to press if questions asked and could broach subject again when discussions resumed in April.

Working party’s second Ruhr report then discussed and approved with minor amendments (this subject separate telegram).3

Douglas stressed desirability clear understanding that all agreements reached were recommendations to governments which did not commit governments. This was agreed.

Sent Department 896; repeated Berlin 51, Paris 92, Moscow 44, Hague 26, Brussels 38 (please keep Luxembourg informed), Oslo 20, Copenhagen 22, Stockholm 28, Rome 43.

Douglas

1 For the text of the Conference Communiqué as released to the press on March 6, see p. 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94].

2  Ante, p. 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 76]. For the text of the agreed, reply to the Benelux representatives, see document TRI/10, March 6, p. 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 95].

3 For the text of the approved report by the Working Party on the Ruhr, see document TRI/7 (Final), March 5, infra.

Report of the Working Party on the Ruhr of the London Conference on Germany CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 2172: TRI Documents

[Document 90]

Report of the Working Party on the Ruhr of the London Conference on Germany 1

secret London, 5 March, 1948.

TRI/7 (Final)

International Control of the Ruhr

Whereas international security and general economic recovery require:

that the economic resources of the Ruhr shall not again be used for the purposes of aggression;

that access to the coal, coke and steel of the Ruhr should not in the future as it was in the past be subject to the exclusive control of Germany;

that access to them for the benefit of the economic life of an extensive area including Germany shall be without discrimination, and

Whereas it is essential for the political and economic well being of the countries of Western Europe and a democratic Germany that there be close association of their economic life, and

Whereas it is important that trade between the European countries mentioned in the preceding paragraph should be facilitated by lowering trade barriers and by any other means.

Therefore it is agreed that: 1. An international control shall be set up in the Ruhr as soon as possible and at least prior to the establishment of a provisional German Government.2

2. The International Control Agency shall be composed of representatives of United States, United Kingdom, France, Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg and Germany.

3. The International Control Agency shall take its decisions by majority vote. The U.S., U.K., France and Germany shall have three votes each and the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg one vote each.

4. Until the occupying powers party to this Agreement decide otherwise the representative of Germany shall be designated and the vote for Germany exercised by those powers which share the responsibility for the economic administration of that part of Germany which includes the Ruhr, and in such a way as may be decided by those powers.

5. The functions of the International Control Agency shall, in the light of existing or future international agreements, be as follows:— (a) to determine the allocation of coal, coke and steel from the Ruhr as between German consumption and export, in order to ensure adequate access to supplies of these products taking into account the needs of Germany; and, subject to the provisions of paragraph 8 below, to ensure the fulfilment of the terms of such allocations.

(b) subject to the provisions of paragraph 8 below, to prevent the German Government or German management from instituting or carrying out artificial measures or practices which would distort the movement of these products in international trade.3

(c) to exercise controls in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 8 below.

6. The International Control Agency shall have the right (a) to receive regular reports on production, distribution and consumption of Ruhr coal, coke and steel;

(b) to demand relevant interim reports whenever necessary;

(c) to verify the information at its disposal by visits on the spot or by the subpoena of witnesses.

7. During the period of exercise of supreme authority by the Allied Powers the occupying authorities concerned will maintain the extent of control over management of the Ruhr coal and coke industry at present exercised by the United States/United Kingdom Control Group.

8. During the same period the occupying authorities concerned will maintain such control over the Ruhr coal, coke and steel industries including the control of the allocation of these products for internal consumption and the implementation thereof as may be necessary to ensure (a) that the decisions of the International Control Agency with respect to the export of these products from Germany are carried out,

(b) that the mandatory requirements of the occupying powers are met,

(c) that the disarmament provisions of any present or future agreements or treaties are not infringed thereby,

(d) that the German Government or German management do not institute or carry out artificial measures or practices which would distort the movement in international trade of coal, coke and steel from the Ruhr.

The powers as under (a) and (d) shall, at the end of the period in which the Allied Powers exercise supreme authority in Germany, be transferred to the International Control Agency. The powers exercised by the occupying authorities under (c) shall be transferred to such authority as may by the terms of any international agreement or peace settlement be designated for that purpose, provided that if no such authority is established the powers herein mentioned shall be transferred to the International Control Agency.

9. Should the German Government not carry out the decisions of the International Control Agency, the International Control Agency may, by a majority vote of the allied representatives find that the German Government is in default on its obligations, and recommend the application of such enforcement measures as are necessary to ensure the attainment of the objectives set out in this agreement. During the period of the exercise of supreme authority by the Allied Powers the responsibility for the execution of such measures will lie with the occupation authorities concerned. In the subsequent period enforcement of such measures shall be in accordance with the terms of any German settlement.

10. This agreement shall not prejudice the conclusion of subsequent arrangements for the better coordination of the Ruhr coal, coke and steel resources with those of other areas. Any such subsequent agreement would not invalidate so far as the Ruhr is concerned the provisions agreed to herein.

11. This agreement constitutes a statement of principles which if accepted by the participating governments shall form the basis for a more detailed agreement setting up the International Control Agency.

London, 5 March, 1948.

1 This is the Second Report of the Working Party of the Ruhr as discussed, amended, and approved by the London Conference on Germany at its 11th Meeting, March 5; for the report on that meeting, see telegram 896, Delsec 1617, March 5, from London, supra. Regarding the establishment of the Working Party and its First Report, see telegrams 876, Delsec 1611 and 875, Delsec 1612, March 4, from London, and footnote 2 to the former, pp. 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 83], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84].

2 In telegram 901, Delsec 1619, March 6, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas explained this paragraph as follows: “It is clearly understood that the language ‘as soon as possible and at least prior to’ means immediately prior to, even one day prior to, the establishment of a provisional government.” (740.00119 Council/3–648)

3 Telegram 895, Delsec 1618, March 6, from London, not printed, reported that Ambassador Douglas had put into the record of the 11th Meeting of the London Conference on Germany a strong statement pointing out that while the restrictions provided for in this paragraph were necessary and desirable, it would be most difficult for the United States to see them put into force with respect to German business if at the same time other countries were not prepared to accord similar treatment to Germany. Ambassador Douglas emphasized the importance of bringing Germany into the framework of the International Trade Organization or of some similar arrangement which would ensure that on trade questions of this kind German trade would receive reciprocal treatment. He also emphasized the competitive disadvantage in which German business would otherwise be placed with no compensating gain of security and with an adverse effect on the load the United States was forced to bear in financing German imports. (740.00119 Council/3–648)

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/S–648: Telegram

[Document 91]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, March 6, 1948—4 p. m.

904. For Lovett. Yesterday I had a very private, confidential and unofficial meeting with Massigli and Sir William Strang and later in the day with the same two and Van Verduynen. We discussed the question of security which is one of the items on the agenda of the present talks about Germany. In accordance with your cable, I said what I had said before privately that it was evident that the US was deeply concerned with the fate of Western Europe and that this concern was demonstrated by ERP and by the reaction of our Government to Mr. Bevin’s proposals for a western union.

Speaking unofficially, I said first, “The United States Government was willing to make an endeavor to find a formula which would provide for consultation between the US and the UK and France in the event of a threat of aggression by Germany or in the event of a default by Germany in the sphere of disarmament and demilitarization. Consultation would take the form contemplated in the proposed Byrnes’ treaty and participation by Benelux countries would be welcomed if they desired. If a conclusion in this sense was reached, it was contemplated that a public statement would be made at a later date”.

Second, that we were considering the possibility, during the period of occupation, of setting up in Germany a military security board consisting of representatives of the three western occupying powers as an adjunct of tripartite military government.

Third, I said that in my opinion it was very unlikely that American forces would be withdrawn from Germany for a long time—until the threat from the east had disappeared.

I preferred to present these views unofficially and privately rather than at a full plenary meeting. I took pains to impress upon them the need for guarding with the greatest secrecy. Privately and unofficially all expressed the view that if these ideas could be put into effect, they would go far toward providing satisfaction.

Douglas

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/3–648: Telegram

[Document 92]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent London, March 6, 1948—5 p. m.

905. For Lovett from Douglas. In regard to reparations, I had a long conversation with Bevin this morning in which I attempted to persuade him to shift his position relative to delivery of reparations to the Soviet.

1. He finally agreed that although he was not prepared now to accept our proposition, he would be willing to review delivery of reparations to the Soviet with us every month. He suggested that the matter of delivery of reparations to the Soviet might be handled by administrative action. By this he did not mean that the position which he now takes in regard to the immediate future forecloses in any way his subsequent agreement to a suspension of deliveries.

2. As to the suspension of dismantling, he agreed that he would cooperate with us in the study which we contemplate, and that if: (A) the plants to be retained were not too numerous; (B) were not war potential plants and; (C) could be used effectively in the ERP in their present sites; he would concur in our proposal without substitution. (Other matters were discussed with Bevin on which I will report personally when I arrive Washington on Monday.)1

3. At lunch with Massigli and Alphand for the French, Strang and Stevens for the British, Murphy and myself, a further discussion of reparations was had. The British position was as outlined above. Strang indicated that administrative action referred to administrative delay, dismantling and delivery of plants that might be allocated to the Soviet. The French position, briefly, was that they were prepared to accept our proposal in regard to the Soviet, provided this did not throw a cloud upon the title to plants to be delivered to the IARA countries. In this connection they expressed the opinion that the difficulties about legal title in the event of abandonment of quadripartite allocation machinery and substitution therefor of tripartite allocation machinery were not insurmountable.

4. As to suspension of dismantling and the retention of plants, the French indicated that they were willing to suspend judgment as to substitution until further facts were known covering the number of plants to be retained, whether they could be immediately used in the ERP, whether they affected security, and their effect upon the level of industry. They indicated, however, that they much preferred substitution, and would try to influence the British to accept it, even though subject to German approval.

5. Both the British and the French expressed a willingness to collaborate with US on the study, and expressed the hope that it could be concluded as promptly as possible. (Our opinion is that it must be concluded very speedily.)

6. The whole question of reparations raises the problem of allocations by the Quadripartite Control Council in Berlin. Will we proceed with the accepted practice of presenting plants to the Control Council for allocation, deleting from the list of such plants for the time being those which we might wish to retain? I will discuss this with you on Monday when I arrive, for it is important that a communication on this be sent early next week to the British, the French and Berlin.

7. At the luncheon the question was raised as to what action, if any, should be taken in the event the Soviet, having heard, and doubtless they have heard, of our proposal in regard to deliveries to the Soviet, were to obstruct by delaying tactics all allocations by the quadripartite machinery. I replied that should they take this course, a new situation would have developed, and we should face the problem in its new context.

Douglas

1 No record of such a report has been found.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–648: Telegram

[Document 93]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, March 6, 1948—6 p. m.

906. Delsec 1620. Meeting on German problems recessed noon March 6 in cordial atmosphere after agreeing text communiqué for release 5 p. m. London time.1

In reviewing communiqué, section on Ruhr, Douglas referred paragraph (1) Ruhr paper2 re setting up international control “as soon as possible and at least prior to establishment of provisional German government.” He sought clear understanding that this meant immediately, possibly only one day, before establishment such government. Other delegates agreed this interpretation. Massigli stated his point was controls should be ready to function as soon as provisional government established; therefore, it should be set up beforehand. In any case, it would not start functioning until government existed.

It was agreed insert in communiqué brief paragraph to effect that there was agreement in principle on recommendations for association of Benelux in policy re Germany. This was inserted after agreement reached on third question raised by Benelux representatives re consultation in Germany. Benelux now informed on this point that US, UK and French Governments prepared consider form of consultation that in practical way might meet their wishes, but cannot commit themselves to consult before taking action, irrespective its nature, which they may regard as necessary for proper administration their zones. Recognizing Benelux interests in being well informed these matters, US, UK and French Governments have asked their military governors make arrangements for close association with Benelux representatives in Germany.3

Sent to Department 906, repeated to USPolAd Berlin 53, Paris 94, Moscow 45, The Hague 27, Oslo 21, Copenhagen 23, Stockholm 29, Rome 45, Brussels 39, please keep Luxembourg informed.

Douglas

1 The text of the communiqué is printed infra. This was the 12th Meeting of the London Conference.

2 Document TRI/7 (Final), March 5, p. 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90].

3 For the text of the communication by the United States, United Kingdom, and French Delegations concerning the future association of the Benelux countries in policy regarding Germany, see document TRI/10, March 6, p. 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 95].

Communiqué Issued at the Recess of the London Conference on Germany CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 2173: London Meeting Press Releases

[Document 94]

Communiqué Issued at the Recess of the London Conference on Germany 1

London, March 6, 1948.

The informal discussions of German problems which began in London on 23rd February between the representatives of the United States, United Kingdom and France, and as from February 26th with the representatives of the Benelux countries, went into recess today.

At the request of the other delegations, the meetings were held under the chairmanship of the U.K. representative, Sir William Strang. The U.S. and French Delegations were led by Mr. Douglas and M. Massigli, the U.S. and French Ambassadors in London. At the first meeting it was agreed to invite the Benelux countries to take part, on an equal footing, in the discussions of all items on the agenda, except those dealing with administrative matters which are the direct responsibility of the Occupying Powers controlling the three occupied areas. The chief representatives of the Benelux Delegation were Jonkheer Michiels van Verduynen, the Netherlands Ambassador, Vicomte Obert de Thiesieus, the Belgian Ambassador, and M. Claessen, the Luxembourg Minister.

Important progress has been made and it has been decided that these discussions will be resumed during April for the purpose of reaching conclusions on the remaining questions, so that the Delegations may be in a position to submit to their Governments, at the end of the next session, their recommendations over the whole field. In the meantime various aspects of certain of these problems will be the subject of more detailed examination.

The continuous failure of the Council of Foreign Ministers to reach quadripartite agreement has created a situation in Germany which, if permitted to continue, would have increasingly unfortunate consequences for Western Europe. It was therefore necessary that urgent political and economic problems arising out of this situation in Germany should be solved. The participating Powers had in view the necessity of ensuring the economic reconstruction of Western Europe including Germany, and of establishing a basis for the participation of a democratic Germany in the community of free peoples. While delay in reaching these objectives can no longer be accepted, ultimate Four Power agreement is in no way precluded.

The various items on the agenda were the subject of a detailed study, with the exception of security questions, which were given preliminary examination and will be considered in detail upon resuming the discussions. Similarly discussion of territorial questions will be held over until the next session.

Discussions took place among the U.S., U.K., and French Delegations on certain limited aspects of the question of reparations from Germany relating to internal policy in the Zones for which they are responsible as Occupying Powers.

The relationship of Western Germany under the Occupying Powers to the European Recovery Programme was also discussed by the U.S., U.K. and French Delegations. It was agreed that for the political and economic well-being of the countries of Western Europe and of a democratic Germany there must be a close association of their economic life. Since it has not proved possible to achieve economic unity in Germany, and since the Eastern Zone has been prevented from playing its part in the European Recovery Programme, the three Western Powers have agreed that close cooperation should be established among themselves and among the Occupation authorities in Western Germany in all matters arising out of the European Recovery Programme in relation to Western Germany. Such cooperation is essential if Western Germany is to make its full and proper contribution to European recovery. It was also agreed to recommend to the three governments that the Combined Zone and the French Zone should be fully associated in the European Recovery Programme and adequately represented on any continuing organization. Proposals in this sense will be presented at the forthcoming meeting of the C.E.E.C.

Agreement in principle has been reached on recommendations for the association of the Benelux countries in policy regarding Germany.

Consideration was given by all Delegations to the establishment of an international control of the Ruhr on which Germany would be represented. The purpose of this international control would be to ensure that the economic resources of this area should not again be used for the purposes of aggression and that there should be adequate access to the coal, coke and steel of the Ruhr for the benefit of extensive parts of the European community including Germany. Agreed recommendations in this respect will be submitted to the governments concerned on the scope and form of this control.

A constructive discussion among all the delegations took place on the present situation and the possible evolution of the political and economic organization of Germany in the combined U.S./U.K. Zone and the French Zone. A wide measure of agreement was reached on a number of controversial points. In particular it was agreed that a federal form of government, adequately protecting the rights of the respective states but at the same time providing for adequate central authority, is best adapted for the eventual reestablishment of German unity, at present disrupted. Moreover, in order to facilitate the association of Western Germany with the European Recovery Programme the three delegations concerned further agreed that prompt action should be taken to coordinate as far as possible the economic policies of the three zones, in such matters as foreign and inter-zonal trade, customs, and freedom of movement for persons and goods.

1 The text of this communiqué was approved by the Conference at its 12th Meeting, March 6; see telegram 906, Delsec 1620, March 6, from London, supra.

Text of Communication From the United States, United Kingdom, and French Delegations at the London Conference on Germany to the Belgian, Netherlands, and Luxembourg Representatives CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 2172: Benelux Documents

[Document 95]

Text of Communication From the United States, United Kingdom, and French Delegations at the London Conference on Germany to the Belgian, Netherlands, and Luxembourg Representatives 1

London, March 6, 1948.

[TRI/10]

Talks on Germany

The representatives of the Benelux Governments have asked about their future participation in inter Allied discussions relating to Germany.

2. The U.S., U.K. and French Governments, in reply, wish to state that it is their intention to invite the representatives of the Benelux Governments to take part in a similar way in any joint discussions on Germany which may be held in similar circumstances to the present meeting. In addition, they will keep this question under review and take opportunity to exchange views on developments and prospects through the ordinary channels.

3. The U.S., U.K. and French Governments continue to recognise, as they have hitherto done, the just claim of the Benelux Government to be associated with future Four Power deliberations on the preparation of the German Peace Treaty. They will, as far as it lies within their power, further this claim at the appropriate time, having in mind particularly the claims of other countries for similar association.

4. The Benelux Governments have asked to be consulted on matters affecting the government of Western Germany and the implementation of important decisions. The U.S., U.K. and French Governments realise the importance for the Benelux countries of such matters as may affect the vital interests of the Benelux countries, and they therefore are prepared to consider a form of consultation that in a practical way might meet their wishes. The U.S., U.K. and French Governments, however, do not feel that they can commit themselves to consult the Benelux Governments before taking action, irrespective of its nature, which they may regard as necessary for the proper administration of their Zones. As, however, the U.S., U.K. and French Governments recognise the interest of the Benelux Governments to be well informed on these matters, they have asked their Military Governors to make arrangements for a close association with the Benelux representatives in Germany.

1 This communication was prepared by the American, British, and French Delegations in reply to the Benelux statement of February 28, p. 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 69]. The communication was discussed by the London Conference at its 8th Meeting, March 2 (see telegram 829, Delsec 1599, March 2, from London, p. 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 76]) and was completed and approved at its 12th Meeting, March 6 (see telegram 906, Delsec 1620, March 6, from London, p. 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]). On March 8, Sir William Strang informed the American Embassy in London that he sent this communication, in the form of a memorandum, to Netherlands Ambassador Michiels van Verduynen with the request that it also be given to the Ambassador’s Belgian and Luxembourg colleagues. This communication was Annex A to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, p. 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 205].

C. The Military Governors' Conference at Berlin, March 20–April 12, 1948; arrangements for the resumption of the London ConferenceC. The Military Governors' Conference at Berlin, March 20–April 12, 1948; arrangements for the resumption of the London Conference

[96] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington, 11 March, 1948.

740.00119 Council/3–1148

[97] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington, 12 March, 1948.

740.00119 Council/3–1248

[98] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

Washington, March 15, 1948—noon.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–948: Telegram

[99] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, March 20, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–2048: Telegram

[100] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

Washington, March 24, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–2048: Telegram

[101] The Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs (Reber) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson)

Paris, March 27, 1948—6 p. m.

862.00/3–2748: Telegram

[102] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, March 30, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–3048: Telegram

[103] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

Washington, March 30, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–3048: Telegram

[104] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, March 31, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–3148: Telegram

[105] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 1, 1948—5 p. m.

862.00/4–148: Telegram

[106] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 1, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–148: Telegram

[107] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 2, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–248: Telegram

[108] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, April 2, 1948—7 p. m.

862.00/4–248: Telegram

[109] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

London, April 3, 1948—6 p. m.

862.00/4–248: Telegram

[110] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

Washington, April 3, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–348: Telegram

[111] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 5, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–548: Telegram

[112] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 7, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–748: Telegram

[113] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson)

Berlin, April 8, 1948.

751.62/4–848

[114] Final Report of Working Party Number 5 of the Military Governors’ Conference

9 April 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 119: MGC Papers

[115] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 9, 1948.

862.00/4–948: Telegram

[116] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

Washington, April 10, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–1048: Telegram

[117] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 13, 1948—5 p. m.

840.50 Recovery/4–1348: Telegram

[118] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 13, 1948—8 p.m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–1348: Telegram

[119] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

[Berlin, April 13, 1948.]

840.50 Recovery/4–1348: Telegram

[120] Report by the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany to the London Conference on Germany

[Frankfurt,] 14 April, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 119: MGC Papers

[121] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 15, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–1548: Telegram

[122] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, April 16, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–1648: Telegram

[123] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United, Kingdom

Berlin, April 18, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 EW/4–1848: Telegram

[124] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, April 19, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–1948: Telegram

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00119 Council/3–1148

[Document 96]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

secret

G.5/162/48

Aide-Mémoire

As a result of the first session of the talks in London about Germany, Mr. Bevin has sent to the Military Governor of the British Zone instructions on certain points arising from those talks.

2. In summarised form, with reference to the relevant meetings and documents, these instructions are as follows: (a) To complete, if possible within thirty days, the tripartite analysis of the situation in the bizonal area and in the French Zone, and the study of measures to harmonise policy and action in the two areas. Priority is to be given to the second point. (Plenary meeting on the 2nd March1 ).

(b) To make arrangements for a close association with the Benelux representatives in Germany on the lines of the reply to the Benelux Delegation contained in document TRI/10,2 which was approved at the Plenary meeting on the 6th March.3

(c) In conjunction with the United States and French Military Governors to convene a Working Party whose proceedings should be secret to consider certain points in the report on political and economic organisation (TRI/44 ). It is to be understood: (i) that the Military Governors will call in those representatives in Berlin who have the best right to express their views, and

(ii) that, for the purpose of the study of Land boundaries, referred to in paragraph 21 of the report contained in document TRI/4, no consideration will be given to the convenience of the present occupation forces. (TRI/8 and Plenary meeting on the 5th March5 ).

(d) To convene a Working Party of representatives of the three Military Governors in consultation with a Delegation of the Benelux Governments to study the question of safeguarding the rights of foreign owners of the coal and steel industries in the Ruhr. This study will be conducted in the context only of the future international control of the Ruhr and not with reference to the present practices of Allied Military Government. (TRI/5 and Plenary meeting on the 4th March6 ).

(e) In conjunction with the United States and French Military Governors to complete as soon as possible, the review of existing stocks of machine tools, started after the discussions in August on the level of industry. (Informal meeting on the 3rd March.7 )

3. Mr. Bevin hopes that the United States Government will be able to send similar instructions in the very near future to the United States Military Governor. He is particularly anxious that the analysis and study, mentioned in paragraph 2 (a) above, should proceed without delay.8

Washington, 11 March, 1948.

1 The reference here is to the 8th Meeting of the London Conference on Germany, March 2; see telegram 829, Delsec 1599, March 2, from London, p. 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 76].

2  Ante, p. 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 95].

3 For the report on the meeting under reference, see telegram 906, Delsec 1620, March 6, from London, p. 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93].

4 The substance of the document under reference was reported upon in telegram 894, Delsec 1616, March 5, from London, p. 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88].

5 The 10th Meeting of the London Conference on Germany, March 5, referred to here, was reported upon in telegram 894, Delsec 1616, March 5, from London, p. 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88]; regarding document TRI/8, see footnote 2 to telegram 894.

6 Document TRI/5 and the 9th Meeting of the London Conference on Germany, March 4 are the subject of telegrams 876, Delsec 1611 and 875, Delsec 1612, March 4, from London, pp. 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 83], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84].

7 See telegrams 849, March 8, and 851, March 3, from London, pp. 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 78] and 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 80].

8 In a communication to Secretary of State Marshall dated March 16, not printed, British Ambassador Lord Inverchapel reported that Foreign Secretary Bevin had discussed with members of the British Cabinet the results of the London Conference on Germany and had been authorized to state that the British Government was in agreement with the general trend of the talks at the Conference (740.00119 Council/3–1648).

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00119 Council/3–1248

[Document 97]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

secret

Ref: G66/—/48

Aide-Mémoire

association of italy in three-power talks on germany

The United States Government have recently urged on the British Government the desirability of associating Italy in the Three-Power talks on the future of Germany.1

2. Mr. Bevin has had the question of the association of Italy in these talks and in German policy generally under close consideration for some time. He is of the opinion that the best course would be for the British Government (and for the United States and French Governments to act similarly if they agree to do so) to send for the Italian Ambassador in London and give him an oral summary of the results of the talks recently concluded in London, adding that any views which the Italian Government might wish to express would, be welcomed. Mr. Bevin considers that the same procedure should be adopted with the Ambassadors of Norway, Denmark and Greece in London.

3. Mr. Bevin has been considering as an alternative the possibility of drawing up a memorandum setting out the general conclusions reached at the recent talks and formally presenting it to the Italian (and the other three) Governments. He has, however, rejected this, since the German talks were informal and the results provisional. Furthermore, the task of drafting such a memorandum and agreeing it with the United States and French Governments would undoubtedly be a lengthy affair. In Mr. Bevin’s view a comprehensive but informal discussion with the Italian Ambassadors in the three capitals would be likely to give a more complete picture and to make it easier for the Italian Government to make any comments which they wish. Mr. Bevin is most anxious to make clear to the State Department that he fully agrees with their desire to do everything possible to support the Italian Government at the present time. He doubts, however, whether the question of allowing the Italian Government to express views on Western Germany is one which is likely to have great interest for the Italian voter, and any gesture made to this end must be more dramatic if it is to have a substantial effect on the elections.

4. Mr. Bevin would be grateful to know whether the State Department would be prepared to follow a similar course to that suggested in paragraph 2 above. He is also asking the British Ambassador in Paris to speak to M. Bidault on the same lines.

Washington, 12 March, 1948.

1 In a memorandum to the Department of State dated February 12, 1948, not printed, the Italian Embassy expressed the feeling of the Italian Government that the Italian position with respect to European economic questions not be overlooked or jeopardized by the policies to be adopted with regard to German economic problems (740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–1248). In a note of February 25, 1948 to Assistant Secretary of State Thorp, not printed, Italian Ambassador Alberto Tarchiani conveyed the interest of the Italian Government in attending any conferences, such as those then taking place in London, regarding the economic situation in Western Germany (740.00119 Council/2–2548).

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–948: Telegram

[Document 98]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

secret Washington, March 15, 1948—noon.

450. Personal for Murphy. Army is dispatching following message to General Clay (urtel 532, Mar 91 ): “In accordance with recommendations agreed by delegations of London talks on German problems, you are requested to concert with UK and French Mil Governors re following: 1. Arrangements with Benelux representatives in Germany as outlined London Tel 53, Mar 6, to USPolAd;2

2. Negotiations to effect closer cooperation between French Zone and Bizonia (London tel 44, Mar 2, to USPolAd 3 );

3. Continuation by working party of discussions on western German political structure (London tel 50, Mar 5, to USPolAd 4 );

4. Convening of a working party of representatives of three Mil Governors in consultation with a delegation of Benelux Govts to study the question of safeguarding the rights of foreign owners of the coal and steel industries in the Ruhr. This study will be conducted in the context only of the future international control of the Ruhr and not with reference to the present practices of AMG (London tel 49, Mar 5, to USPolAd 5 ).

Ambassador Douglas understands that French also ask resumption of examination of machine tool situation in western Germany initiated by French during last summer’s discussion of level of industry. No objection here.

Understand Murphy and Riddleberger fully acquainted with background London talks. For continuity State would appreciate their participation in further appropriate Berlin discussions. Request we be kept currently and fully informed developments in these discussions so as to facilitate States preparation and reconvening London talks in April.”

Dept attaches importance to last point and will appreciate your assistance in seeing that this objective is achieved.

Marshall

1 Not printed; it reported that General Clay had been informed of the recommendations made by the recently concluded London Conference on Germany on matters to be taken up by the military governors in Berlin. Clay felt, however, that he should have instructions on these matters from the Department of the Army. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–948)

2 Same as telegram 906, Delsec 1620, March 6, from London, p. 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93].

3 Same as telegram 831, Delsec 1601, March 2, from London, not printed.

4 Same as telegram 894, Delsec 1616, March 5, from London, p. 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88].

5 Same as telegram 880, Delsec 1610, March 5, from London, p. 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86].

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–2048: Telegram

[Document 99]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, March 20, 1948—3 p. m.

647. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. My 532, March 9, and Army’s instruction to General Clay re Berlin discussions on German problems as agreed at London meeting.1

General Clay and I met with UK and French opposite numbers today2 and agreed on following agenda.

1. To study arrangements for a close association between the Military Governors and the representatives of the Benelux countries in Germany.

2. Measures to improve economic cooperation between the Bizonal area and French zone for example, in regard to (A) circulation of persons and trade and (B) foreign trade.

3. The study of arrangements which have been made for the administration (German and Allied) of Bizonal area with view to exploring possibilities of fusion of French zone with Bizonal area.

4. To examine the practical application of possible fusion mentioned in paragraph 3 affecting the Allied partners to the fusion.

5. To continue discussions undertaken at London on future political organization of western Germany as set out in document TRI/4.3

6. To study question of safeguarding rights of foreign owners of coal and steel industries in Ruhr and elsewhere in Germany.

UK requested that appropriate opportunity for consultation be afforded Berlin military missions of the Dominions. US representative agreed but General Koenig stated it would be necessary for him to consult Paris.

It was agreed that proceedings would be kept confidential hut that the Military Governors would be authorized to give to the press such off-the-record and background information as they might in their discretion deem desirable and necessary.

Working groups were designated to handle the several items on the agenda. It was decided that they would submit their preliminary reports by March 31 and final reports on April 9. Military Governors will then make final report April 10 to 15.

A letter was received from the Chief of the Belgian mission requesting to be advised of the date and agenda of meetings and indicating that he expected that Belgian representatives would participate fully in discussions. It was agreed that the chairman would send a joint reply enclosing a copy of agenda and expressing the hope that a Belgian representative would meet with the Military Governors to present Belgian views on items (1), (5), and (6) of the agenda. It was decided that the first meeting with Benelux representatives and the Military Governors would be held March 23. By agreement, General Robertson took the chair today and will continue as chairman throughout the sessions.

Sent Department as 647, repeated London 81, Paris as 108, Brussels as 24, The Hague as 6.

Murphy

1 The Department of the Army instructions to General Clay are quoted in telegram 450, March 15, to Berlin, supra. Telegram 532, March 9, from Berlin, is not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 450 to Berlin.

2 This was the first of four formal meetings of the Military Governor’s Conference at Berlin. Subsequent formal conference meetings were held on March 23, April 1, and April 12. Minutes of these meetings are included in Lot M–88, Box 120, File—MGC Minutes. For the Final Report of the Conference, document MGC/P (48) 16, April 14, see p. 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]. Participating at this first meeting were: United States—General Clay and Ambassador Murphy; United Kingdom—General Robertson and Christopher Steel; France—General Koenig and Tarbé de St. Hardouin. The second, third and fourth formal meetings of the Conference were also attended by Lieutenant General Goethals for Belgium, Major General Huender for the Netherlands, and Colonel Wehrer for Luxembourg.

3 The substance of the document under reference was reported upon in telegram 894, Delsec 1616, March 5, from London, p. 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88].

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–2048: Telegram

[Document 100]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

secret Washington, March 24, 1948—7 p. m.

528. Caffery has cabled Dept1 that Schneiter, State Secretary for German and Austrian Affairs, told him he had discussed with Premier relations between French and US authorities in Germany. In effect Schneiter had said: “We are somewhat confused. We do not know whether you really desire early trizonal fusion or whether you would prefer it a little later, in two or three months. If you wish it soon I shall try to persuade Schuman to bring pressure on some of my colleagues to meet your wishes”.

Dept has noted US Delegation paper L/G/48, Mar 2,2 on proposed recommendations on trizonal fusion and we recognize the force of some of the arguments against trizonal fusion under the present circumstances. Reurtel 647, Mar 20,3 Dept also notes the discussions proposed in pars 3 and 4. We believe that in any event certain preparatory rearrangements might well be developed in the near future in anticipation of trizonal fusion, possibly along the lines of some of the recommendations in Depths position paper for the London tripartite conference. In connection with approval by the next Ambassadors’ meeting of the sum total of recommendations, we consider it would be desirable to obtain an agreement in principle on trizonal fusion to be made public at appropriate time together with other agreements. Details of implementing fusion could be worked out later. It should be our understanding with French that administratively fusion may take place gradually in several steps so as not to disturb unduly present arrangements for bizonal economy but that fusion should be fully realized prior to establishment of western German constitutional government, or alternatively that when a provisional government is established over the bizonal area and the French zone agreement at least as to financial responsibility and authority commensurate with it will be obtained.

Ambassador Douglas concurs. Request your views and those of General Clay concerning how matter may best be handled with the French.

Marshall

1 Telegram 1527, March 22, from Paris, not printed.

2 The paper under reference read in part as follows: “1. If we can get either now or within the next month or two agreement on the establishment of a provisional government for Western Germany by this time next year at the latest, we should not seek to effectuate complete trizonal economic fusion prior to the creation of such a government.

The basic reason for this recommendation is that economic fusion prior to that date would have to take place on the basis of integrating the French administratively into the rather elaborate bipartite military government supervisory bodies which would either be drastically reduced in functions and personnel or entirely abolished on the surrender of authority to a provisional German government. Such a task which would create serious administrative headaches would be all the more thankless in view of the early establishment of a provisional government which would make the entire bipartite (or tripartite) machinery out-of-date.”

The paper went on to outline measures to achieve limited trizonal fusion. (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 2172, File—504 Verbatim Minutes 1948) These latter measures for limited fusion were advanced by Ambassador Douglas at the 8th Meeting of the London Conference on Germany, March 2; see telegram 829, Delsec 1599, March 2, from London, p. 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 76].

3  Supra.

The Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs (Reber) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson) 862.00/3–2748: Telegram

[Document 101]

The Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs (Reber) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson)1

top secret Paris, March 27, 1948—6 p. m.

1628. When I saw Paris at Quai d’Orsay this morning in connection with Austrian treaty, he agreed that we should renew efforts to review other aspects of treaty and failing agreement on these clauses, seek early suspension of present negotiations.

It became immediately clear however, that he was not nearly as interested in discussing Austria as in taking this opportunity to express the deepest concern over the memorandum recently handed the other members of the Berlin working party by Litchfield on the subject of the organization of a future German government.2 This memorandum calls for the creation of a provisional German government by September 15, an announcement to this effect by May 18 and a constituent assembly in October of this year.

Whereas the French are quite prepared to agree to a constituent assembly this year, they are apparently greatly worried by the rapidity at which we appear to be anxious to set up a provisional government.

They believe it would promptly be followed by the creation in Berlin of a strong centralized German authority for the Eastern Zones which would exercise attraction for Western Germany, inevitably resulting in an agreement among Germans on lines dictated in the first instance by the Soviets. Paris explained that our proposal had come as a great surprise since the French had not understood or intended to utilize the working parties in Berlin to deal with questions of this magnitude which, in their opinion, would be handled by the Ambassadors in London upon the resumption of the tripartite discussions. In this connection, he urged they be reconvened as soon as possible.

According to Paris, the French are as desirous as we are of bringing about the integration of Germany with Western Europe and are prepared to strengthen the local authority of the German Länder arid the economic council, which could lead to the establishment of a provisional government, probably early next year. As a preliminary, however, they consider the constituent assembly an important first step, since they believe any provisional government set up now would set the pattern for the future government, and that it must of necessity, in present circumstances, be granted greater centralization of powers than they would like to see for the future.

Above all, however, they argued that the question of timing was important, and that opinion in France, which is evolving should not be forced at too rapid a pace.

Paris said he realized our proposal was probably based upon necessities of propaganda among the Germans, but asked whether the same results could not be achieved by an announcement of elections for a constituent assembly in October, leaving the Allied governments more time to consider the implications of the creation of a German government now. Koenig will be instructed to set forth similar views to Clay and Robertson on March 30.

I explained that I could not, of course, comment on these observations, but as Paris had so requested, I would transmit them to you.

[ Reber ]

1 This telegram was transmitted via the facilities of the Embassy in Paris. Reber was serving as the United States Deputy for Austria in the meetings of the Deputies of the Council of Foreign Ministers regarding an Austrian peace treaty. For documentation on the meetings of the Deputies for Austria see pp. 1466 [Pg. 1466 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815] ff.

2 The reference here is to an informal American proposal regarding the future political organization for Germany, not printed, presented to a Berlin Military Governors’ Conference working group on March 22 by Edward Litchfield, the American representative thereon.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–3048: Telegram

[Document 102]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 1

secret Berlin, March 30, 1948—6 p. m.

726. Your 528, March 24,2 regarding Ambassador Caffery’s conversation with Schneiter and latter’s suggestion that French are somewhat confused regarding US wishes for early trizonal fusion and the possibility of an intervention by Schuman.

The following represent the views of General Clay and myself.

The timing of trizonal fusion would depend to considerable degree upon our ability to reach agreement not only as to trizonal fusion itself but also with respect to the timing of other measures. It would seem obvious that trizonal fusion without complete understanding on certain other matters might only lead to friction and extreme administrative difficulties.

It seems clear to us that it would be most desirable for trizonal fusion to be undertaken in connection with the establishment of a provisional government or administration for the territory embracing the three Western zones if such a provisional government or administration could be agreed prior to the adoption of a constitution and the creation of a constitutional government. Pending the establishment of such a government, it should be possible for the French zone to adopt bizonal policies, particularly in the financial and economic fields. We believe that the French zone should enter into the Land Union Bank and the Allied Banking Commission which will be responsible for its supervision. It should also enter into currency reform. The French also might well participate in the Joint Export-Import Agency provided their zone is financed under ERP and under the terms which now regulate the existing Anglo-American partnership. French participation in JEIA would of course necessitate a common customs policy as well as the elimination of trade barriers.

It would be our suggestion that the French Government be informed that it is the US view that trizonal fusion should become fully effective with the establishment of a provisional government or administration and/or a constitutional government for the three zones. An announcement to this effect would be made as soon as the type of government has been definitely determined and the date of its establishment fixed. The French should be advised that full trizonal fusion prior to that time would require difficult adjustments in present administrative arrangements. However, to indicate our unity of thought, it would be hoped that in announcing the date for full trizonal fusion it could be pointed out that the French had already joined us in the Allied Banking Commission, in common financial and economic policy to include currency reform and participation in the JEIA which would provide for a common customs program and for the elimination of all interzonal trade barriers. We feel that the French should be advised that the United States would welcome the earliest possible French participation on the basis outlined and would be prepared to accept an immediate trizonal fusion if desired by the French Government, recognizing fully the difficulties which would be faced in reconciling administrative procedures pending full and complete agreement on matters unresolved at present.

I am not certain whether the use of the word “government” above as a matter of terminology is difficult for the French in this connection. That is why the alternative word “administration” has been inserted.

Sent Department as 726; repeated to Paris for Caffery as 115.

Murphy

1 This telegram was repeated to London as No. 1109, April 1.

2  Ante, p. 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100].

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–3048: Telegram

[Document 103]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

top secret   us urgent Washington, March 30, 1948—5 p. m.

561. For Murphy—Eyes Only. Without making formal representations here or in Paris, French FonOff in casual conversation with US official expressed its concern that US representative on Berlin working party presented proposal for creation of a provisional western government by Sept 15, announcement to this effect on May 18, and constituent assembly in Oct of this year.1 Dept and Ambassador Douglas are likewise concerned about this proposal. Project to set up a provisional western government in advance of a constituent assembly is new to us. Without fuller info it seems to us to possess disadvantage of further dislocating continuity of authority since provisional government would soon be displaced by one formed by constituent assembly. Although we realize working party agreements represent tentative recommendations, proposal if correctly reported seems to go too far in above respect as well as in suggesting accelerated time schedule which may tie our hands too closely at this time as regards many still uncertain factors including US position in Berlin. French indicate their willingness to proceed with integration of western Germany with western Europe and their readiness to strengthen the local authority of the German states and Economic Council with a view to establishment of a provisional government, probably early next year. We share French opinion that matters such as those suggested in US proposal above should be left to next Ambassadors’ conference.

For your info Dept is further concerned that working party seems on point of recommending decisions on all issues of government, leaving little for a German constituent assembly to determine. We understand this is in accordance with French wishes. We suggest that a certain moderation on our part as to timing of steps toward establishment of a government might help obtain lesser French insistence on precise form of a future government.

Sent to Berlin as 561; repeated to London for Reber Eyes Only as 1091.

Lovett

1 Regarding the proposal under reference here, see footnote 2 to telegram 1628, March 27, from Paris, p. 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101].

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–3148: Telegram

[Document 104]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Berlin, March 31, 1948—3 p. m.

731. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson Eyes Only. Reference Dept’s 561.1 Re informal conversation between French Foreign Office and US representatives in Paris and concern felt by French re Berlin working party paper on provisional western govt, this entire matter was discussed in detail in letter airmailed Beam on March 29.2 For your strictly confidential information this paper was presented to French and British by Litchfield without my concurrence and in fact paper itself had not been seen by General Clay according to his subsequent advice to me altho he had outlined ideas contained in the paper to Litchfield. Latter’s inexperience in negotiation and his over-eagerness proceed with great speed are largely responsible for this development. I informed him and General Clay of my objections to the procedure and fact I had not concurred in the paper. Prior to presentation this particular paper Political Affairs had also non-concurred in suggestion by Litchfield re proclamation to be made by Military Governors at Frankfurt on May 18, 1948 incident to ceremonies connected with revolution of 1848. I also made it clear to my French colleague that Dept had not been consulted so that French here understand it is not a governmental position’.

Quite apart from merits of paper in question I wish you would understand and explain to the Acting Secretary in strictest confidence that the psychology governing General Clay in this matter is concentrated on developing tension in our relations with Soviet Union. In his mind this factor overshadows everything else and he views progress of events as exceedingly grave. In other words the military considerations outweigh reluctance of French to progress rapidly with the reorganization of western Germany. He is convinced that their thinking suffers from a time lag and is not synchronized with the developing pattern of Soviet policy in Germany. For example, today we are faced by Soviet demand for a control of our train service into Berlin by Soviet military authorities to which General Clay is refusing to accede. For your top secret information he is having telecon this afternoon with Army. Subject to latter’s approval armed guards on our military trains to and from Berlin will be given orders to shoot if Soviet military insist on entering our trains. He proposes to concert on this action with British and French and Robertson has signified his tentative agreement but desires to play for a little more time. It is needless to emphasize grave possibilities inherent in such procedure. Please bring this urgently to personal attention of Acting Secretary.3

I inject foregoing into this discussion of paper on provisional govt for western Germany to illustrate background of local US approach to the subject. I might say also that Clay’s idea is not to tie hands of our delegation in London in forthcoming talks but merely to try out these proposals at working group level without in any way committing our delegation in London apriori. This is why Litchfield’s action in presenting a rather formal paper was so ill-advised and that method was not contemplated by General Clay. He had in mind an informal suggestion for purposes of discussion with an idea of making as much progress as possible in light of what he considers the advanced Soviet timetable.

My airmail to Beam incloses copy of the OMGUS paper on Western German Govt.

Murphy

1  Supra.

2 The letter under reference here is not printed; regarding the American paper under reference, see footnote 2 to telegram 1628, March 27, from Paris, p. 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101].

3 Regarding the events discussed in this paragraph, see telegram 748, April 1, from Berlin, et seq., pp. 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106] ff.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.00/4–148: Telegram

[Document 105]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Berlin, April 1, 1948—5 p. m.

747. For Saltzman and Hickerson Eyes Only. Third meeting Governors Conference Berlin was held this morning. French proposed further effort be made to progress in matter of the discussion undertaken at London of future political organization western Germany. UK and US pointed out that progress had been made on reconciliation their views but, in view French apparent inability to yield on any of positions taken (in fact on some points such as size and population of Laender which French insist should be fairly analogous and represented in Constituent Assembly by equal number delegates they seem to have gone backward rather than forward), Robertson and Clay expressed view it would be useless continue discussions this subject Berlin. They recommended that matter go over to London meeting. Benelux said that as the paper has thus far only had a first reading in order clarify the points but not to compromise it might be well to go over it again as Benelux was quite prepared make some compromises. Working party instructed go over report once more and then submit it final form.1

There was discussion re preliminary report working party on arrangements which had been made for administration Bizonal area with view to exploring possibilities of fusion French zone and Bizonal area.2 French maintain their previous criticisms of Bizonal organization. Robertson pointed out present arrangements resulted from long negotiations with Germans and that it would be difficult if not impossible change them now because of French criticisms at least until a German government is established. Clay took position as long as there is no western German government it would be impossible change Bizonal organization and as French indicate they are unable join on present basis further discussion now would be fruitless. Sentiment of three delegations was to effect that fusion was impracticable but that with establishment of German Govt it will develop automatically.

Working party instructed submit their report final form.

There was also discussion of preliminary report of working party on improvement of economic cooperation between Bizonal area and French zone.3 Robertson made statement to effect that he thought there would be an attempt to harmonize procedure of two areas leading up to eventual fusion for purpose of accelerating such fusion. He said that frankly results obtained by working group so far are to effect that sessions in effect in French zone and Bizonia are incompatible and that efforts to harmonize them are futile. Principal difficulty seems to lie in degree of authority which occupying powers are willing give to Germans. He said that in almost every instance in French zone authority still rests in hands of French authorities. He pointed to a good example of this coming under heading of interzonal and internal trade. In French zone programming is restricted to essential items and both programming and negotiating is carried out (by Germans who are directly in employ and work under instructions of French military government. This was contrasted with degree of responsibility and authority given Germans in Bizonia. Koenig admitted frankly that thus far French had tightly kept lines of authority in economic and financial fields and on the whole they are satisfied with results. However a reorganization is now in progress and instructions have been received from Paris to release some of “administration” to Germans. Koenig made distinction between “administration” and “authority”. Robertson said no doubt we could keep on discussing this matter forever but unless there is fundamental change of position no real progress could be achieved. He again referred to possibility that we may still be discussing these things when Hammer and Sickle reign in western Germany.

Clay made following two points: (1) Are we working toward fusion? If so, when? (2) Are we working toward a western German Govt? If so, when? If these questions are answered in affirmative and time is indicated then working groups will have to find solutions to details of the problem. If we are not agreed on these fundamentals then we are wasting time discussing them here in Berlin and should return the question to London.

General Koenig replied that both these points are for consideration on governmental level and it was obvious he had no authority to go further on them. Meeting noted the preliminary report on this subject and working party was requested submit report in final form.

This meeting again demonstrates point made by Ambassador Douglas at London meeting that German problem must be reviewed in light of changed context of European situation. This is not yet reflected in changed attitude on part of French re timetable for western Germany. Both UK and US representatives minimize security risk in permitting Germans assume responsibility and authority now. French on other hand are apprehensive on security grounds and apparently not alarmed over danger of Soviet penetration in western zones. It is obvious that between the two risks their principal fear continues to attach to Germans rather than to Russians.

Repeated London personal for Douglas 95, repeated Paris personal for Caffery 121.

Murphy

1 For the text of the Final Report of Working Party No. 5 (Future Political Organization of Western Germany), see document MGC/P(48) 8, April 9, 1948, p. 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114].

2 The Preliminary Report of Working Party No. 3, document. MGC/P(48) 3, March 31, 1948, is not printed.

3 The Preliminary Report of Working Party No. 2, document MGC/P(48) 4, March 31, 1948, is not printed.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–148: Telegram

[Document 106]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]

top secret
urgent Berlin, April 1, 1948—6 p. m.

748. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson (Eyes Only).

[For the first two paragraphs of this telegram, see p. 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528].]

Last evening General Clay gave a dinner for Generals Robertson and Koenig which I attended. There was very frank discussion of question referred to in your 5611 re eventual establishment of provisional western German government. This meeting took place really at instance of Koenig who opened discussion with statement it was his understanding Berlin conversations were simply continuation of London meeting and would be completed in London. Therefore in his opinion the discussions here should remain within framework of London outline. He made it quite clear that from information he had obtained from Paris the security consideration re German rehabilitation still remained. His government, he said, was unable accept the proposition that provisional government should be established in western Germany in advance of convening of Constituent Assembly. He said that, speaking frankly, it was his understanding that motivating reason back of accelerated time-table suggested by US at Berlin was apprehension re aggressive tactics of Soviet Union. He never looked at the matter differently and believed that if action proposed by US were taken in western zones it would provide exactly pretext to Soviet Union for which they had been looking. In other words if provisional government were established he believes we would open ourselves to Russian propaganda attack which would then have substantial foundation because our action would involve a violation of Potsdam and spirit of other agreements under which we operate in Germany on quadripartite basis. General Koenig, while not minimizing Russian menace, did not share feeling of urgency to same extent as did Robertson and Clay. Koenig said that while his government could not see its way to approve establishment of provisional western German government it was willing to go further than its delegation had at London and agree to convening of a Constituent Assembly “this fall”. If Constituent Assembly then developed text of a constitution which three western powers would approve it then might be possible permit establishment of western German government as provided by such, a constitution “sometime in 1949”. He had no authority to go any further than this.

Both Robertson and Clay urged with considerable warmth that in their opinions situation was far more urgent. Robertson said if we keep on talking indefinitely we might wake up some fine morning to find Hammer and Sickle already on Rhine. General Koenig did not believe menace was that great. Robertson also said that as far as providing Russians with pretext to accuse western powers of violation of Potsdam he saw no difference in principle between French suggestion and US/UK proposals. French suggestion for Constituent Assembly would amount to same thing and expose us to about same accusations. Clay argued vigorously in support of permitting Germans early progress toward duly elected government and emphasized risk we ran of losing support of approximately 45 million Germans in western zones. He stressed necessity of their orientation to west and their inclusion ERP and western economy.

Sent Department as 748, repeated London personal for Douglas as 96, to Paris personal for Caffery as 122, and Moscow personal for Smith as 92.

Murphy

1 March 30, p. 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103].

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–248: Telegram

[Document 107]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret Berlin, April 2, 1948—7 p. m.

766. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson (Eyes Only). In continuation of mytel 747, April 1,1 I am now in a position to give more detailed information respecting Berlin discussions as reports of working parties are concluded or begin to emerge in their final form. Emphasize that none of such reports are final as yet as they have not been submitted to the three military governors.

1. Close association between military governors and Benelux, US, UK, and France have agreed upon a report submitted today to Benelux representatives which will be discussed with them April 5. This report recommends that recommendations of three military governors of direct interest to Benelux will be made available to Benelux representatives at conclusion of present Berlin meetings in order to enable Benelux governments to be adequately informed of Berlin discussions before talks are resumed in London. With respect to future cooperation, items pending before the Bipartite Board of interest to Benelux would, so far as possible, be given to their representatives before board meeting in order that Benelux representatives could submit comments which would normally be considered by board in its meeting. Furthermore, Benelux representatives would be informed of decisions taken by Bipartite Board and would be given minutes which are not exclusively of interest to the board. Similar arrangement would be put into effect with respect to the French zone. For information provided in Frankfurt and Baden-Baden, this should be transmitted through the consular representatives of Benelux countries in those cities. For purpose of assuring regular contact and providing information both on developments in Bipartite Board and French zone, meetings will be held at stated intervals between respective political advisers of three military governors and Benelux representatives; upon request each political adviser would arrange interviews between Benelux representatives and other officials of respective military governments, both in Berlin, Frankfurt, and Baden-Baden.2

2. Measures to improve economic cooperation between Bizonia and French zones, particularly in regard to circulation of persons and trade and foreign trade. This working party was broken down into six subcommittees, all of whose reports are not yet prepared. The report will probably be very detailed but we hope to submit summary next week.3

3. Study of administrative arrangements for Bizonia with a view to exploring the possibilities of fusion. Preliminary report states that the task of the working party was not to determine when or how trizone fusion should be reached, but merely to study the administrative arrangements already existing in Bizonia with view to examining the necessary adjustments required if French zone were to be included in bizonal economic administration. This problem was examined under two headings: (a) German bizonal administration, and (b) allied control of German administration. On (a) report states that no administrative difficulties arose over the composition and choice of members of Bizonal Economic Council and Laenderrat as these were composed and chosen in manner agreed by French for future federal legislature, provided that agreement should be reached on competence of these bodies. It is stated that a suitable formula could be found on the composition of the executive committee and of the bizonal high court. French representatives could not accept all powers included in competence of bizonal economic administration nor powers of taxation given to Bizonal Economic Council and Laenderrat. Furthermore, French representatives disapproved of Laenderrat being given only power of suspensory veto. French representatives also objected to creation of special federal agencies and in particular to Article III, paragraph 10, of Proclamation No. 7.4 On (b) French representatives will submit paper with their views.5

4. Practical implications of possible fusion as affecting allied partners fusion arrangement. Working party report concluded this morning. Report reviews the economic and financial aspects of eventual fusion which relate primarily to the following: A. The US/UK fusions agreements of 2 December 1946 and 17 December 1947 were put forward by bizone representatives as providing the principle for fusion.

B. General agreement will be necessary for requirements of occupation forces to be met from indigenous sources.

C. The question of delegation of authority to German agencies and methods of control were considered.

D. The need for common economic policy and common decisions regarding prices and wages was agreed.

E. Other aspects discussed were voting procedure, integration of allied staff, budget, German staff, and representation in ERP. It became clear in working party that there are political difficulties to immediate fusion. With respect to timing, US representatives expressed view that trizonal fusion should be fully effective with the establishment of a provisional or constitutional government for the three zones but that announcement to this effect be made as soon as type of government has been definitely determined and date set on which the government is to be established. In effect, there is a question of whether or not before the establishment of a provisional government the gains of fusion would outweigh the cost and disturbance of administrative reorganization. It was therefore suggested by US and UK representatives that following steps be considered as a program for fusion: (a) Fusion will be announced at time when there is agreement on character and date of a provisional and constitutional government and that fusion will become fully effective at time such government is established. (French representatives stated not in position to comment on this.)

(b) Meanwhile, the following steps could be undertaken (French representatives agreed to recommend that these steps could be undertaken): 1. French zone should immediately enter and participate in Bank Deutsche Laenderrat and Allied Bank Commission.

2. Trizonal plans should be agreed immediately for early implementation of financial reform.

3. Common customs and frontier control policy in western Germany would be established.

4. French zone might participate in JEIA or alternatively adopt parallel policies and procedures.

Foreign trade is recognized as keystone and it is recalled that both French zone and bizone would be members of multilateral agreement established under ERP. Administrator of ERP will probably require bizonal and French zone develop programs in closest harmony. It is believed that practical results of pooling of foreign trade can be largely realized by requiring Germans of French zone and Bizonia to develop common import and export program. By common plan practical steps can be taken immediately to anticipate fusion which will become effective politically when provisional government is established. On the general economic side the essence of fusion in next 12 months likewise in common fiscal and financial policies and in development of common production program with corresponding import and export programs. If immediate steps are taken along these lines, the two areas will have developed basic elements of integration about as rapidly as practical results could be obtained under any circumstances.6

5. Continuation of London discussions on future political organization of western Germany. Report is now emerging as statement of principle on form and scope of future German government which presumably will eventually be given to Germans as minimum requirements of western allies for German constitution. It covers federal legislative bodies, federal executive bodies, chief of state, division of powers between federal and Land governments, federal judiciary, civil rights, execution of federal law, citizenship, Land boundaries, composition of constituent assembly, and ratification of constitution. The report at present is studded with brackets and represents no appreciable progress over London. However, the committee will continue next week to explore possibilities of reconciliation of views and therefore shall not include details of position taken in this telegram.7

6. Safeguarding the rights of foreign owners of coal and steel industries in Ruhr and elsewhere in Germany. Nothing to report as yet.8

7. French request re-examination of machine tool stock in Germany. No working party established as yet but anticipated question will be examined next week.9

Sent to Department as 766; repeated to London, personal for Douglas, as 101; to Paris, personal for Caffery, as 126.

Murphy

1  Ante, p. 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105].

2 The Final Report of Working Party No. 1, document MGC/P(48)7, April 6, 1948, “Proposal for Close Association Between the Military Governors and the Representatives of the Benelux Countries in Germany”, is included as Appendix “B” to document MGC/P(48)16, April 14, the Final Report of the Military Governors, p. 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120].

3 The Final Report of Working Party No. 2, together with the final reports of the six sub-committees, was circulated as document MGC/P(48)11, April 7, 1948, not printed. The entire document comprised 33 pages. For a summary of the significant subjects discussed by Working Party No. 2, see telegram 797, April 5, from Berlin, p. 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111].

4 See the editorial note, p. 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36].

5 The Final Report of Working Party No. 3, document MGC/P(48)10, April 9, 1948, is not printed. The views of the French Delegation were set forth in an Appendix to that document.

6 The Final Report of Working Party No. 4, document MGC/P(48)6, April 6, 1948, is not printed.

7 For the text of the Final Report of Working Party No. 5, see document MGC/P(48) 8, April 9, p. 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114].

8 The Final Report of Working Party No. 6, document MGC/P(48) 12, April 10, 1948, is not printed; for a summary of the Report, see telegram 845, April 13, from Berlin, p. 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117].

9 A Working Party on Machine Tool Holdings was subsequently established. Its Final Report, document MGC/P(48) 15, April 11, 1948, is not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 862.00/4–248: Telegram

[Document 108]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent London, April 2, 1948—7 p. m.

1330. For Hickerson from Douglas.

1. In discussing with Bevin this morning the date on which the talks on Germany, which were recessed on March 6, should be resumed, he indicated that he preferred that it be postponed to about the 27th so as to provide for a week’s notification subsequent to the Italian election.1 His preference was based upon his fear that publication of the resumption of the talks on the 20th prior to the Italian election might induce the Soviet to take some action which might adversely affect the results of the election.

2. Subsequently, I talked with Massigli who indicated that his government was very anxious that the meeting be reconvened as soon as possible. In this conversation, as a result of a telephonic talk with Clay yesterday, I told Massigli that I thought the French were unduly sticky in Berlin in regard to coordination of their policies in the French Zone with the policies of the Bizonal area; were not acting as though they were conscious of the prompt action which the European situation required; and that according to my information had retreated somewhat from the position they had taken in London on the structure and organization of the government for Germany. Massigli indicated that if this were true in regard to the coordination of policies between, the zones, the French were making a mistake. As to the discussions on the structure of government etc., he felt that in Berlin they had served their purpose and should now be transferred to the resumed meeting on Germany to be held in London.

3. I then talked with Clay in Berlin who feels that the London meeting should be reconvened as soon as possible; that if the British and US meet on the 15th or 16th for preliminary exchange of views; and that if the four participants, that is the US, UK, French and Benelux, convene on the 20th, the time requirements will be satisfied. He is somewhat apprehensive that if the talks are put off beyond this date, the Soviet will have taken action in Berlin and in their zone which will have an adverse effect upon developments in the three western zones. He doubts that the Soviet will be able to do any more to influence the Italian elections than they are now doing.

4. At first blush I was somewhat persuaded by Bevin’s view as to timing, but after my conversation with Clay it seems to me that we are on the horns of a dilemma. On one horn, by postponing until the 27th the reconvening of the London meeting, we may place ourselves in a vulnerable position in western Germany. On the other horn, by reconvening the meeting on the 20th,”the Soviet may be induced to take some action which may adversely affect the Italian election.

On consideration, it seems to me the risks are fewer by adhering to the 20th at the latest as the date for reconvening the talks in London than by postponing them.

It is not impossible that preliminary talks with British could be advanced to the 13th and that full meeting be scheduled for 15th. If you concur, I suggest that I put this view to Bevin.

Sent Department as 1330, repeated Berlin (for Murphy and Clay) 73.

Douglas

1 In telegram 1094, March 30, to London, not printed, the Department concurred in a suggestion made by Ambassador Douglas that the London Conference on Germany be reconvened on April 20. Douglas was requested to take up the suggestion with Foreign Secretary Bevin. (862.00/3–3048)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 862.00/4–248: Telegram

[Document 109]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent London, April 3, 1948—6 p. m.

1158. Personal for Ambassador. On basis available info Dept is not so much concerned about possible prior Soviet announcement of establishment German Govt, if this is action envisaged in par 3 urtel 1330 April 2.1 It seems to us this would clearly shift responsibility to Soviets for splitting Germany and in view of present character German People’s Congress2 would be recognized as patent fraud. We could first exploit this move and then announce that given this regrettable step Western Germany would be forced to set up a provisional constitutional government of its own. Dept recognizes advantage in announcement which could be made by US, UK and French at appropriate time and we understand that French were willing to consider issuance of announcement on May 18 of intent to convoke constituent assembly. Impact Soviet move would probably enable us to get earliest agreement on similar announcement on part western governments for use shortly thereafter but we repeat we see advantage in letting Soviets take onus of split and destruction ACC.

This being the case and in view of present Berlin situation Dept inclines to adhere to date of April 20 for Ambassador’s meeting, subject to suggested prior talks with British and subject to earlier convening at short notice depending on a definitive break in Berlin. Bequest your views as to number of days required for prior talks with British and on what date you believe the small staff group from here including Wisner, Martin, Lightner, should arrive.3

Repeated to Berlin for Murphy Eyes Only as 592.

Lovett

1  Supra.

2 Regarding the Peoples Congress Movement, see telegrams 347, February 12, 573, March 12, and 746, April 1, from Berlin, pp. 875 [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 524 and Doc. 525], and 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 527].

3 In his telegram 1348, April 4, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas concurred in the date of April 20 for the reopening of the London Conference on Germany and suggested that three days would be required for prior talks with the British (862.00/4–448). In his telegram 1380, April 6, from London, not printed, Douglas reported that Foreign Secretary was agreeable to the resumption of the London Conference on April 20 but was anxious that there be no publicity given to the date until it was too late for the Soviet Union to spring some sudden action in Italy to influence the elections there (740.00119 Council/4–648). Both the British and the French subsequently confirmed that the London Conference would resume on April 20.

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–348: Telegram

[Document 110]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

secret
us urgent Washington, April 3, 1948—5 p. m.

591. For Murphy Eyes Only. French have made three approaches, including visit by Ambassador, objecting to Litchfield’s proposal (urtel 7311 ). Your telegrams indicate that question of actual timing of establishment western German government has been left to Ambassador’s conference. We agree with this, subject to possible announcement prior to Ambassador’s meeting of intent to establish western German constitutional government to match possible Soviet announcement. This question is further dealt with in separate telegram2 dealing with London’s 73 to you.3

Dept disturbed by your reports concerning French reluctance to grant Germans necessary authority, and French stepping back from previous position with new proposal for rearrangement German States on basis analogous size and population. According to Bérard of French Emb here, French Govt considers it most desirable to reinforce separate identity of States to combat drawing power of Berlin under later Communist Govt. He mentioned French proposals (1) to transfer Ruhr from Rhine to Westphalia to break up industrial complex; (2) to reconstitute old Rhine Province, and (3) to set up separate State of Palatinate. Bérard was indignant at Litchfield’s refusal to discuss territorial arrangements until governmental matters settled.

To prepare ground for next Ambassadors’ meeting Dept is willing to engage in strong talking with French here, and will welcome info and comments supplementary to your recent telegrams.

Sent USPolAd, Berlin as 591; rptd London as 1159 personal for the Ambassador.

Lovett

1 March 31 from Berlin, p. 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 104].

2 Telegram 1158, April 3, to London, supra.

3 London’s 73 under reference here is the same as telegram 1330, April. 2, from London, p. 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108].

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–548: Telegram

[Document 111]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret Berlin, April 5, 1948—8 p. m.

797. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson (Eyes Only). Re paragraph 2 mytel 766, April 2.1

Report of working party on measures to improve economic cooperation between Bizonia and French zone now taking shape although not finally complete.2 Following is summary of subjects discussed to date: 1. Financial reform. No problems foreseen on questions of taxation and banking. As to flow of funds between zones, French representatives will state later whether any restriction will be necessary.

2. Foreign trade. No essential differences with respect to payments agreements. Trade agreements existing at present between Bizonia and foreign countries are limited essentially to enumeration of commodities which would be of interest in mutual trade. Most recently concluded agreement with Greece specifies quantities and estimated costs. French zone trade agreements specify nature, quantities, and values of commodities to be exchanged during given period. All trade of zone is covered by such agreements except trade with France. No report yet available on trade between the zones and respective occupying powers. On export procedure, MG control of exports in French zone amounts to an export monopoly under French direction while in Bizonia return of export trade to German exporters under MG supervision is far advanced. Re import-export price policy, there is no difference at present in policy of pricing exports and imports, but Bizonia is about to introduce a system based upon a uniform conversion factor of 30 cents to the mark with the exception of food and fuel. No information yet on customs and tariffs.

3. On interzonal trade the differences are found to be of degree and not of principle. It is therefore recommended in principle: (a) to eliminate permit system and to abandon such controls as are not required to insure reasonable balance of trade between the two areas; (b) present system of agreements might well be replaced by allocations system designed to equalize in advance the results of the exchange of certain commodities. No essential differences exist between the two areas on internal trade. There appears to be no economic objection to the abolition of restrictions on movements of persons. Re rationing of foodstuffs, no substantial barriers exist to closer cooperation other than existing differences in ration level and in degree of control exercised by French MG. Systems of distributing consumer goods are in substance the same. Re wage and price policy, no great differences in two areas to date which are likely to make future coordination difficult, although certain marked differences exist in administration of price control. French give general support to recent revised price policy of Bizonia subject to reservation that it is premature to give extensive executive power to German authorities in this field.

4. On transport, in French zone allocation of materials and movement priorities are MG responsibilities while in Bizonia they are German responsibilities. There exists central German transport administration in Bizonia but not in French zone except for railroads. No difficulty foreseen in assimilating highway transport except as raised in preceding sentence. In French zone railways are controlled by Laender and railroad union representatives; in Bizonia railways are controlled by agencies of Economic Council. For inland water transport, Bizonia has a German organization responsible for operation of traffic. As few Rhine craft are based in French zone, French authorities requisitioned all vessels and these are operated by a German organization under French director. French representatives state that before releasing vessels and before combining traffic operations question of decartelization and future limitation of German Rhine fleet should be decided. Re civil aviation no substantial divergencies but differences in practices make desirable establishment of agency for coordination.

5. No report from subcommittee on communications as yet.

6. No report from subcommittee on statistics (measures for securing uniformity in Bizonia and French zone) as yet.

Sent Department 797; repeated London, personal for Douglas, 112; Paris, personal for Caffery, 137.

Murphy

1  Ante, p. 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107].

2 The text of the Final Report of Working Party No. 2, document MGO/P(48) 11, April 7, 1948, is not printed. The report of the Working Party and its six subcommittees comprised 33 pages.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–748: Telegram

[Document 112]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret Berlin, April 7, 1948—9 p. m.

806. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson (Eyes Only). Reurtel 591, April 3.1 There seems little basis for Bérard’s indignation at alleged refusal to discuss the territorial arrangements.

In mytel 800, April 7, giving text of working party report on governmental structure,2 paragraph 10 sets forth the US, UK and BE position as follows: “The question of redrawing the Land boundaries should be referred to the Germans as part of the constituent process under specific directions to be agreed among the allies.” Subsequent parts of paragraph 10 establish certain principles for redrawing of land boundaries. The last session of working party was held at the specific request of the French who indicated that they might have some additional suggestions to offer on this question. When the meeting was convened, however, the French merely maintained their previous position. It seems to us that it is more a case of French reluctance to commit themselves in Berlin and that Bérard’s indignation is merely a cover for this attitude. It should be further noted that three delegates were in agreement on the general principle of redrawing land boundaries and that the French were alone on this.

Sent to Department at 806; repeated to London, personal for Douglas, as 117; to Paris, personal for Caffery, as 142.

Murphy

1  Ante, p. 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111].

2 The telegram under reference is not printed; for the text of the Final Report of Working Party No. 5, document MGC/P(48) 8, April 9, see p. 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114].

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson) 751.62/4–848

[Document 113]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson)

secret Berlin, April 8, 1948.

Dear Jack : Mr. Couve de Murville is in Berlin as the guest of General Clay for a two-day visit.1 General Clay and I had a lengthy conversation with him last night on the subject of Germany and its relation to the USSR. We found that Couve’s thinking has apparently progressed enormously since our last meeting. He said, for example, that in his personal opinion “war with the Soviet Union within the next two or three years is inevitable—and that may mean this year”. With that as a keynote we found that Couve’s approach to the German problem has undergone substantial evolution. For example, we discussed with him the question which has been under consideration as the result of French representations in Washington and London regarding German participation in the plenary session of the CEEC in Paris next week.2 Couve stated it is his personal opinion that the German representatives should accompany General Robertson as originally planned. He stated as his opinion that obviously there was a question of French internal politics which could not be ignored but he believed that the importance of the impact that German attendance might have on French public opinion may have been colored and exaggerated. Couve promised to telephone to Mr. Bidault this morning in an effort to see whether matters could not be arranged. In that connection it might be mentioned that General Clay is determined that if the Germans are not permitted to enjoy this modest participation after having received his assurances some weeks ago that it would be permitted then he would, wish to withdraw OMGUS representation from the plenary session. I believe that he intends to discuss that matter with the Department of the Army by telecon.

Our conversation with Couve regarding German political structure in Western Germany took a very satisfactory turn. We found that Couve had a much more advanced time-table on the constitutional assembly than the instructions heretofore given to the French Delegation in Berlin have permitted. In other words, Couve proposed a much earlier convening of a constitutional assembly which would place the date of the eventual establishment of a constitutional Western German government far in advance of anything heretofore suggested. Under those circumstances, General Clay assured him that he would be willing to forego the idea of the establishment of a provisional government to be followed by a constitutional assembly because Couve’s present proposal would eliminate the necessity for such action. If Couve’s suggestion is confirmed, I believe that we have the solution of the most controversial point in that issue.

Yours ever,

Robert Murphy

1 According to his account in Decision in Germany, pp. 397–398, General Clay learned informally that Couve de Murville was interested in conferring with him. On April 6, Couve de Murville interrupted his Riviera vacation to fly to Berlin in General Clay’s personal aircraft.

2 Documentation regarding the arrangements for the inaugural session of the Council of European Economic Cooperation and the question of the make-up of the delegation from Bizonia is included in volume iii .

Final Report of Working Party Number 5 of the Military Governors’ Conference CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 119: MGC Papers

[Document 114]

Final Report of Working Party Number 5 of the Military Governors’ Conference 1

secret 9 April 1948.

MGC/P(48) 8

Future Political Organization of Western Germany

1. federal legislative bodies

(a) The German Legislative system should be bicameral.

(b) The Upper House should be composed of an equal number of representatives from each Land.

(c) Representation in the Lower House should be proportional to the population of the Laender.

(d) [Members should be elected to the Lower House by the individual Landtage in proportion to the strengths of the political parties in each Landtage. (FR & BE).]

[The election should be carried out directly by the populations of the Laender under arrangements to be made by individual Laender, the latter being allowed to choose their own electoral system. (US & UK).]

2. federal executive bodies

[The question of whether executive power should be exercised by an independent Executive, by Ministers collectively responsible, by Ministers individually responsible, or by a combination of these systems, should be left to the decision of the Germans. (US & UK).]

[The Executive Power should be constituted by a collegial authority of which the members, individually responsible before the two Assemblies, would be individually elected by these for a fixed term. The Chairmanship of this Government would be undertaken by one of its members for an equally limited length of time, his immediate reelection at the expiration of his mandate being forbidden. He would fulfil the functions of the Chief of State. (FR & BE).]

3. chief of state

(a) If there is to be a Chief of State [which the French Delegation does not favour] his powers should be limited to those exercised by a Constitutional Head of State without independent executive authority. Emergency powers, if any, should be exercised by the Government within narrow limits prescribed in the Constitution.

(b) [The direct popular election of the Chief of State is not admitted (UK, FR & BE).]

4. division of powers between federal houses

(a) [The two houses should enjoy approximately equal powers of legislation, subject to certain reservations mentioned below (Para 4–b) (US, FR & BE).] [The question of whether the Upper House should enjoy a suspensory veto only or whether both Houses should enjoy equal powers of legislation, should be left to the Germans (UK).]

(b) The two Houses should enjoy equal powers of initiating legislation except that the initiation of money bills might be reserved to the Lower House, and there might be certain powers reserved to the Upper House, e.g. in connection with Foreign Affairs and the confirmation of certain appointments.

5. division of powers between federal and land governments

(a) The Federal Government should enjoy only those powers expressly delegated to it under the Constitution.

(b) In no case should the following powers be delegated to the Federal Government: Education, Public Health, Public Welfare, Police, Culture and Religious Affairs and Local Government.

(c) In such fields as Criminal, Civil and Commercial Law, Banking and Insurance, Food and Agriculture, Trade and Commerce, matters concerning only one Land should not be delegated to the Federal Government. The jurisdiction of the Federal Government should be restricted to the aspects of these fields affecting more than one Land. [N.B. Subject to confirmation so far as the French Delegation is concerned.]

(d) In the field of taxation: (i) The Federal Government should only enjoy the powers of taxation expressly delegated to it and to the extent necessary to meet expenditure incurred in the performance of the functions allotted to it under the constitution. [This delegation should be limited to customs. (FR & BE)] [On the assumption that the two Federal Houses have approximately equal powers of legislation (US).]

[The Federal and Land Governments should have independent sources of revenue, the actual Allocation within the following principles being left to the Germans (US & UK).]

[The needs of the Federal Government which will not be covered by the yield of customs should be met by contributions of the Laender which, on the assumption that both Federal Houses have approximately equal powers of legislation, could be fixed as a percentage of the resources of the Laender or of certain of those resources and would be determined each year by the Federal legislative Houses (FR & BE).]

(ii) The Federal Government should have the power to dispose of monies only for the purposes for which it is set up.

(iii) The Federal Government should be empowered to set the rates for certain specified taxes.

(iv) The Federal Government should have the power to legislate on the general principles of assessment [and administration (US & UK).] of those taxes for which a certain uniformity is essential.

(v) The agencies of the Laender should be used for the collection of taxes, except that it should be possible for the Federal Government to set up its own collecting agencies for customs [and other taxes assigned to it (US & UK).]

6. federal judiciary

(a) There should be a Federal Supreme Court with the power to settle conflicts between Federal and Land Authorities, to decide on the constitutionality of Federal legislation, and with appellate jurisdiction to protect the civil rights of individuals against acts by the Federal Government, and to ensure the application, with due regard for uniformity, of Federal Law;

(b) There should be complete independence of the judiciary from the Legislative and Executive Branches of the Government.

(c) [In cases involving Federal Law, the establishment of a system of lower Federal Courts or the maintenance of original jurisdiction in such cases in the Courts of the Laender, should be left to the decision of the Germans (US, UK & BE).]

[There should be no Federal Tribunals at Land level (FR).]

7. civil Rights

The German constitution should conform to the provisions of the draft declaration and covenant of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights.

8. execution of federal law

[Certain Federal Administrative agencies will be required for the execution of Federal Law and Land and Local level, and these agencies should be staffed by Federal Personnel (US & UK).]

[Although certain Federal Administrative agencies may be unavoidable, they should be exceptional and should, to the maximum possible extent, be staffed under arrangements made by the Land Authorities (FR & BE).]

9. citizenship

Some form of dual citizenship is favoured.

10. land boundaries

(a) [The question of re-drawing the Land Boundaries should be referred to the Germans as part of the constituent process under specific directions to be agreed among the Allies (US, UK & BE.) ]2

[The question of the new delineation of Laender should be settled, after consultation with the Germans in a certain number of cases, before the convocation of the Constituent Assembly and within the limits defined by precise Allied directives (FR).]

(b) The re-drawing of Land boundaries should be completed in accordance with the following principles: (i) The State of Prussia should never be revived; nor should the constitution of any state sufficiently powerful to dominate Germany as a whole be permitted.

(ii) There should be no enclaves or exclaves. This will mean that the Palatinate must remain separated from Bavaria.

(iii) There is no objection to the continuance as units in the German Federation, of the free cities of Hamburg and Bremen but the creation of any other comparably small units should be permitted only in exceptional circumstances.

(iv) Large states with historic identity should not be split up unless compelling necessity therefor can be shown.

(v) Wuerttemberg-Baden may be either one whole state or two separate states. The question should be settled by plebiscite. It was agreed that one state would be preferable.

(c) Views of delegations on Rhineland, Westphalia, Palatinate

U.K.: His Majesty’s Government would be unwilling to agree to the separation of North Rhine from Westphalia unless German opinion showed itself clearly in favour of separation. In principle, however, His Majesty’s Government would wish to give effect to the recommendation of a German inter-Land Boundary Commission appointed to consider the subject.

France: The French delegation foresees the constitution of a Rhineland State, which would be formed of a Rhineland actually included in the British Zone and the Regierungsbezirke of Coblenz and Trier. The capital would be Cologne. The Two Kreise of Diez and St. Goarshausen and possibly the Bavarian Palatinate, if its population pronounce itself for this solution, would be attached to the existing Hesse, while Westphalia would constitute a Land.

In the event of the Land North Rhine Westphalia being maintained, the French delegation demands the maintenance of Land Rhineland Palatinate.

Benelux: The question of the North Rhineland and Westphalia is naturally linked to that of South Rhineland and the Palatinate. Considering the whole of the Rhenish problem and the arguments presented on the one hand or on the other, which all carry real weight, the Benelux Delegation is of the opinion that a procedure for the consultation of the population should be undertaken through the organs of the Governments of the interested Laender.

11. composition of the constituent assembly

(a) (i) The Constituent Assembly should be formed on a basis which would achieve a compromise between the principle of equal Land representation and the principle of representation in proportion to Land populations.

(ii) [The task of summoning the Constituent Assembly should be entrusted to the German Provisional Government with instructions to do so on the basis set out in sub-para 11 (a) (i) above (US & UK).]

[As far as possible, the Laender which are to form Germany should be fairly analogous in size and population. This is one of the reasons why they should all be represented in the Constituent Assembly by an equal number of delegates. This principle would, on the other hand, admit of exceptions in order to take into account differences of population, in the event of the plan for the delineation of new Laender bringing out between them too marked a disequilibrium. The Free Cities can in this connection be held as an example. (FR)]

[The compromise, referred to under 11 (a) (i) above, could be realised by ensuring the formation of a Constituent Assembly by a double method of election of its members, a fraction of the members of the Constituent Assembly being elected in accordance with the principle of equal representation of the Laender and the other in accordance with the principle of representation proportional to the population of the Laender. (BE)].

(b) Subject to agreement on its composition, the Constituent Assembly should be convened not later than 1 October 1948.

ratification of the constitution

24. The Constitution should be ratified at least by a majority of votes in the majority of Laender, and also by a majority of total votes cast.

1 The Military Governors did not approve this Report nor did they agree to submit it to the resumed London Conference on Germany, but it was agreed to make available copies of the Report for the information of the Conference; see the Report of the Military Governors, document MGC/P(48) 16, April 14, p. 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120].

2 Telegram 601, April 6, to Berlin, not printed, stated that in general the Department of State favored revision of Land boundaries along rational lines with (a) adequate opportunity for the consideration of German views and (b) the least possible change in current zonal boundaries (740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–648). Telegram 820, April 8, from Berlin, not printed, explained that this paragraph seemed in general to correspond largely with the thinking of the Department. The telegram pointed out that the Working Party recommendation obviously associated the Germans with the decisions on Land boundaries and gave them complete opportunity of offering constructive proposals (740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–848).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.00/4–948: Telegram

[Document 115]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, April 9, 1948.

821. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. During course our informal conversations with Couve de Murville he stated personal willingness to advance time-table of political structure western Germany by advancing date on which Constituent Assembly might be held. General Clay has informed him we would be willing compromise our position re early establishment of Provisional Western German Govt if French would agree to convening of Constituent Assembly not later than 1 Sept 48. We discussed this point informally with Robertson and Koenig and Couve de Murville today. British while insisting that more rapid action is required under prevailing circumstances said that they might be willing to accept such formula if French Govt found it possible to do so. Informal suggestion this connection made by Clay to French and British includes:1

(1). Several states would be advised that Constituent Assembly would be held not later than 1 Sept 48 to prepare constitution for ratification by several states:

(2). Delegates would be elected by people of several states under procedures adopted by states;

(3). Number delegates to be in proportion to population; total number to be determined by dividing population figure by 750,000;

(4). Assembly would be instructed to draft democratic constitution establishing federal governmental structure and to determine boundaries of the several states to form that federal govt recognizing traditional patterns, etc.;

(5). Constitution to be ratified by two-thirds of participating states;

(6). Constitutional Assembly would designate electoral procedures committee consisting of one representative of each of proposed states which in cooperation with state governments will arrange for elections provided in constitution. Government so elected would take office 30 days after ratification.

Sent Dept as 821, repeated London 120, Paris 146.

Murphy

1 The points set forth here were contained in a paper hastily prepared by General Clay on April 9 and subsequently often referred to as the “Clay paper”. For the text of the paper, see Clay, Decision in Germany, pp. 398–400. The full text of the paper was transmitted by Ambassador Murphy to the Department in his telegram 898, April 16, from Berlin, not printed (862.011/4–1648). Telegram 1904, April 12, from Paris, not printed, reported that Couve de Murville brought back to Paris a copy of this paper which had been sympathetically studied in the French Foreign Ministry (740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–1248). Telegram 1980, April 15, from Paris, not printed, reported that the French Cabinet had discussed the paper and probably would accept it as a basis for discussion at the reconvened London Conference on Germany (740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–1548).

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–1048: Telegram

[Document 116]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

top secret Washington, April 10, 1948—6 p. m.

685. Personal for Murphy from Hickerson. We consider General Clay has skillfully handled difficult Berlin situation and we have joined Army Dept in seeing he has been given all necessary authority. Your reports have been informative and timely. I would like your frank views on the real question which faces us, namely, what do we do about the Control Council and about the timing of an announcement of intent to proceed with the establishment of a government for western Germany. This Govt has declared its firm resolve to continue in the Control Council and this is one of the best arguments for our staying in Berlin. How would our position be affected by our taking the lead in forming a western German government in advance of any similar Sov step? If we adopt this initiative, which the Sovs will surely exploit to impute to us responsibility for splitting Germany, do you think it advisable we should try to represent our plan as having wider scope than western Germany, that is, should we claim also that we are aiming at the initiation of constitutional processes in Germany in the tradition of the Frankfurt Assembly of 1848?

Have just received your letter of Mar 29 with US plan of Mar 22 presented to Berlin governmental working party.1 Although events have now overtaken plan, we question advisability of three sets of elections, that is, one for provisional government, another for constituent assembly, and final election for “permanent government”. It seems to us Germans would become “election happy”, and given remarkable consistency in balance between political parties, such elections would probably lead to superfluous and identical results. With respect to your 800, Apr 6 [7],2 we are working on possibility of combining direct elections for provisional government with those for constituent assembly. Would appreciate your views. Without engaging in backseat driving, I would like to suggest to Lew Douglas that you be made US Rep on governmental working party at London3 in view importance of this question. [Hickerson.]

Lovett

1 Neither the Litchfield memorandum of March 22 nor Murphy’s letter of March 29 to Beam is printed. The Litchfield memorandum was discussed by Reber in telegram 1628, March 27, from Paris, p. 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], and by Murphy in telegram 731, March 31, from Berlin, p. 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 104].

2 Not printed; it transmitted the preliminary text of the report of Working Party No. 2 of the Military Governors Conference on Germany; for the text of the Final Report of Working Party No. 2, document MGC/P (48) 8, April 9, 1948, see p. 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114].

3 i.e., the scheduled meetings of the London Conference on Germany.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 840.50 Recovery/4–1348: Telegram

[Document 117]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, April 13, 1948—5 p. m.

845. Following is summary of final report dated April 10 of Working Party number 6 of Military Governor’s Conference:1 British member regarded himself bound by recorded results of recent London tripartite talks, interpreted that present conversations should be restricted to studying question of safeguarding foreign interests in coal and steel industries in context of future international Ruhr control, and consequently refrained from comment on certain points of discussion.

Item 1. France–Benelux proposed allied property should not be subject of measures affecting ownership rights, such as deconcentration, expropriation, decartelization, nationalization and land reform. US delegation while giving assurance to general principle that foreign interests would be safeguarded and pointing out that selection of final list of plants for reparations from US zone required reparations be taken first from German owners, took position measures referred to are not imposed on Germans as punishment for war guilt but imposed as sound and healthy basis for future German peacetime economy and that it would be impracticable to attempt to establish special economic conditions for limited and specified interests. British reserved position.

Item 2. France–Benelux after pointing out limitation at present imposed on powers of owners by virtue of appointment of custodians and control exercised by coal control and management authorities asked that allied owners be permitted to recover full enjoyment of their rights as soon as possible. US delegation considered foreign manager could not at this time be appointed because of lack of supplies and accommodations, pointed out conflicts of authority with coal control and management authorities involved in proposal, and recommended matter be referred to US/UK coal control group for study. British reserved position.

Item 3. France–Benelux proposed in exports of coal from Germany to allied countries concerned priority be given to collieries belonging to nationals of those countries wherever technically possible and that as soon as economic and financial conditions permit, allied owners should have disposal of fuel produced by their mines or at least part thereof. US held it would be impractical and would lead to confusion to inject the additional consideration of ownership of the delivering mine into the already complicated allocation process. British reserved position.

Item 4. It was agreed “allied enterprises should be in a position to operate with facilities at least equal to those of the German enterprises, both from the production and from the marketing aspect, and in a general way should not be the object of any inequitable discriminatory measure by the responsible administrations,” particularly in certain specified fields.

Item 5. France–Benelux proposed that under existing conditions of exploitation, with sales prices fixed by higher authority, allied mines should be put in a position to insure financial equilibrium, involving if necessary supplementary financing in form of subsidies. US delegation pointed out economic council legislation provided for price increase and subsidy adequate to cover charges except for capital account (which it is contemplated will be sought from private capital market) and in view of this action no further steps now necessary. British reserved position.

Item 6. Regarding French–Benelux proposal for discontinuing allegedly discriminatory measures in Aix-la-Chapelle mines it was agreed France and Benelux should take part in investigation being conducted by US/UK control group as a result of requests presented to obtain receipts per ton sold by the Aix mines different from those of the Ruhr, but US delegation considered remainder of proposal should fall under working party 2 (British reserved position in this regard).

Item 7. France–Benelux proposed control of implementation of measures to be taken to insure protection of allied enterprises with special reference to discrimination. Insofar as framework of future organization is concerned, agreement was reached to assure against discriminatory measures. With respect to measures within framework of present organization, US delegation considered this subject one to be discussed under terms of reference of working parties 2 and 4 (British reserved position).

See also OMGUS cable to Army Department CC–3809, April 10.2

Murphy

1 The text of the Final Report summarized here, which was designated document MGC/P(48) 12, is not printed. At their Fourth and final meeting on April 12, the American, British, and French Military Governors agreed to submit the report to the London Conference on Germany.

2 Not printed.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–1348: Telegram

[Document 118]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]1 top secret Berlin, April 13, 1948—8 p.m.

853. Personal for Hickerson. Your 635 April 10.2

. . . . . . .

About timing of an announcement of intent to proceed with establishment of a government for western Germany we do not seem to be any farther along on this road than we were some months ago. In absence of an agreement with French it doesn’t seem to me we are in any position to make an announcement re establishment of a government for western Germany. However in view of attitude and conduct of USSR at Berlin recently our position in Berlin would not in my opinion be adversely affected by establishment of a western German government in advance of similar Soviet step. We have made our position on German unity abundantly clear and should we arrive at point where an announcement re western German government may be possible it should undoubtedly be accompanied by explanation that it is aimed in direction of eventual government for all Germany. A reference to the tradition of the Frankfurt assembly of 1848 would undoubtedly be apt.

We also doubt advisability of three sets of elections and find your suggestions re combining direct elections for provisional government with those of constitutional assembly attractive. You of course had my 821 of April 93 outlining compromise suggested by General Clay to Couve de Murville during latter’s recent Berlin visit. Under that compromise Clay would be willing forego establishment of provisional government in consideration of advance of the timetable for constituent assembly, namely, 1 September 48, This compromise would automatically reduce number of elections and has much to be said for it, Couve de Murville seemed to be attracted to it.

I suggest that it would not be wise for me to handle governmental working party at London for reasons you will understand. I believe this can be handled satisfactorily if Douglas is given firm instructions re Departmental policy. I think he should be telegraphed a formula which the Department desires followed. Incidentally, we have as yet no instructions or travel orders re London meeting. I presume these will be forthcoming.

Murphy

1 The portion of this telegram omitted here, dealing with the breakdown in the functioning of the Allied Control Council for Germany, is printed on p. 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

2  Ante, p. 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116].

3  Ante, p. 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115].

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army 840.50 Recovery/4–1348: Telegram

[Document 119]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army 1

[Extracts]

secret [Berlin, April 13, 1948.]

[CC–3854.] British, French and US Military Governors met yesterday in Berlin to consider the final reports of the working parties set up by the Military Governors as covered in my cable C–35842 and to decide on the report to be made by them to the London Conference.

Final reports were submitted by all seven working parties. The heads of the Benelux military missions in Berlin were present for the discussion of the reports of working parties 1, 5 and 6 at the conclusion of which they withdrew and the three Military Governors finished discussion of the rest of the reports.

We agreed a report to London of the study we have caused to be made these past four weeks as a result of the last London Conference. The text of the report follows. This text will be finalized in Frankfurt on Thursday 15 April 1948. Should there be any changes I will notify you. The papers referred to in the various appendices to this report have already been sent separately by air both to the Under Secretary of War and to CSCAD:

[Here follows the text of the Report by the United States, United Kingdom and French Commanders in Chief to the London Conference; for the text of that Report as subsequently slightly amended and signed on April 14, see infra.]

I will make a separate report to London of the maer [Amer] position on these various working party’s reports.3 My chief criticism of them is that they did not record any substantial progress on matters of principle, but instead dealt in details. I considered, and I so informed the British and French Military Governors, that it was a great mistake to agree details before reconciliation of the principles involved. I feel especially that working party 5 report, dealing with the future political organization of west Germany, showed no progress over the position taken at the last London Conference. A new approach to the solution of this problem is needed.

[ Clay ]

1 The source text was transmitted as telegram 859, April 13, from Berlin, not printed.

2 Not printed.

3 The report under reference here is not printed.

Report by the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany to the London Conference on Germany CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 119: MGC Papers

[Document 120]

Report by the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany to the London Conference on Germany 1

secret [Frankfurt,] 14 April, 1948.

MGC/P(48)16

1. In accordance with instructions received from their respective Governments, the French, United States and British Commanders-in-Chief in Germany have caused a study to be made of certain matters remitted to them as a result of the recent conversations held in London in February and March 1948.

2. They agreed to set up Working Parties to examine each of these subjects and to report to them. The list of the subjects and the composition of the Working Parties is given in Appendix “A” (MGC/P(48)1) attached.

3. The Commanders-in-Chief further invited the representatives of the Benelux countries in Germany to present their views on, and to discuss, the matters affecting them. This invitation was accepted and the Benelux representatives have participated on this basis in the discussion of Items 1, 5 and 6 of Appendix “A”.

4. On the proposal of the British Commander-in-Chief, the Commanders-in-Chief also agreed to invite the representatives in Germany of Australia, Canada and the Union of South Africa to submit to them any views which they might have on the matters under discussion. The representatives of Australia and Canada have submitted in writing expressions of their views2 which were considered by the Commanders-in-Chief and are available to the Conference.

5. The Commanders-in-Chief now wish to report as follows on the items on their Agenda as given in Appendix “A”:— (a) Working Party No. 1. Proposal for close association between the Military Governors and the representatives of the Benelux countries in Germany. An agreed paper is submitted at Appendix “B”. In so far as this paper envisages an association between the Benelux countries and tripartite institutions of any kind, it is pointed out that no tripartite machinery at present exists in Germany other than that set up to deal with the meetings just concluded in Berlin. The proposed measures for close co-operation between the Benelux countries and the Bizonal Area and the Benelux countries and the French Zone are already operable.

(b) Working Parties 2, 3 and 4 As will be seen from Appendix “A” these Working Parties dealt with the various aspects of co-operation and co-ordination of economic-affairs as between the Bizonal Area and the French Zone, including the implications of their ultimate fusion.

Discussions took place as a result of which the points of view of the three delegations were clarified and recorded on many matters of detail.3

The Commanders-in-Chief have not agreed to approve the results of these discussions nor have they agreed to the desirability of forwarding them to the London Conference. Each Commander-in-Chief is, therefore, forwarding to his Government’s representative such records of these discussions as he considers desirable together with his comments thereon.

The Commanders-in-Chief are agreed that there is considerable divergence in the extent to which matters are handled by German officials in the Bizonal Area and by the Allied officials in the French Zone. The United States and United Kingdom Commanders-in-Chief consider that in all fields where this divergence obtains it is not practicable to carry out an effective harmonization. The French Commander-in-Chief considers that in these cases harmonization is more difficult but not impossible.

A number of details, however, have been agreed which will be most helpful when agreement in principle is reached.

(c) Working Party No. 5—Future Political Organisation of Western Germany. The report of this Working Party4 reveals numerous important divergences of opinion.

Views presented on this subject by Australia and Canada have been considered by the Commanders-in-Chief.

The Commanders-in-Chief have not agreed to approve this report nor to forward it to the London Conference, but it will be available for reference.

(d) Working Party No. 6—Safeguarding the Rights of Foreign Powers in Germany. The Report of this Working Party is attached at Appendix “C”.5

(e) Working Party No. 7—Machine Tool Holdings. There has been some doubt as to the field which the Commanders-in-Chief were required to investigate. The Commanders-in-Chief agreed that they had been asked to complete the survey of the stocks of Machine Tools in Western Germany. The French delegation was under instructions to discuss also certain matters regarding the Prohibited and Restricted Industries and Reparations. The U.S. and U.K. Commanders-in-Chief expressed a willingness to discuss these matters at any time but not within the framework of the discussions covered by this report.

The Working Party, therefore, concentrated its attention on the survey of Machine Tools.

The Report of the Working Party is attached at Appendix “D”.6

6. The Commanders-in-Chief express their regret that they were unable to make further progress.

Lucius D. Clay B. H. Robertson Koenig

General, U.S. Army, General General

Commander-in-Chief Commander-in-Chief Commander-in-Chief

and Military Governor and Military Governor and Military Governor

U.S. Zone of Occupation in Germany British Zone of Occupation in Germany French Zone of Occupation in Germany

Appendix “A”

Terms of Reference of the Working Parties of the Military Governors’ Conference 7

secret

Terms of Reference of Working Parties Set Up in Berlin in Accordance With Decisions of London Conference

1. To study arrangements for a close association between the Military Governors and the representatives of the Benelux Countries in Germany.

2. Measures to improve economic co-operation between the Bizonal Area and the French Zone, particularly in regard to: (a) Circulation of persons and trade.

(b) Foreign trade.

3. The study of the arrangements which have been made for the administration of the Bizonal Area with a view to exploring the possibilities of a fusion of the French Zone with the Bizonal Area.

4. To examine the practical implications of the possible fusion, mentioned in paragraph 3 above, as affecting the Allied partners to the fusion arrangement.

5. To continue the discussions undertaken at London on the future political organization of Western Germany, as set out in document TRI/4.8

6. To study the question of safeguarding the rights of foreign owners of the coal and steel industries in the Ruhr and elsewhere in Germany.

[Sub-Appendix]

Composition of Working Parties Set Up in Berlin in Accordance With Decisions of London Conference

1. Mr. Steel (Br.)

M. Seydoux (Fr.)

Mr. Riddleberger (US)

2. Sir Cecil Weir (Br.)

Sir Eric Coates (Br.)

M. Leroy Beaulieu (Fr.)

M. Filippi (Fr.)

Mr. Wilkinson (US)

Mr. Bennett (US)

3. Mr. Chaput de Saintonge (Br.)

M. Sabatier (Fr.)

Dr. Litchfield (US)

4. Sir Cecil Weir (Br.)

Sir Eric Coates (Br.)

M. Leroy Beaulieu (Fr.)

M. Filippi (Fr.)

Mr. Wilkinson (US)

Mr. Riddleberger (US)

5. Mr. Steel (Br.)

M. Seydoux (Fr.)

Dr. Litchfield (US)

6. Mr. Harrison (Br.)

Mr. Young (Br.)

M. Humbert (Fr.)

Mr. Wilkinson (US)

Mr. Bennett (US)

Appendix “B”

Final Report of Working Party Number 1 of the Military Governors’ Conference 9

secret

Proposal for Close Association Between the Military Governors and the Representatives of the Benelux Countries in Germany

In order to give effect to the recommendations of the London discussions of February–March 1948 respecting a close association between the Military Governors of the U.K., U.S. and French Zones and the representatives of the Benelux countries in Germany, the following report of Working Party No. 1 is submitted.

1. With respect to discussions now being held in Berlin, it was agreed that the reports and/or recommendations of the three Military Governors would be made available to the Benelux representatives at the conclusion of the meetings on those subjects which are of direct interest to them. This will enable the Benelux Governments to be adequately informed of the results of the Berlin discussions before the talks are resumed in London in April of this year. Furthermore, it is noted that the Benelux representatives have expressed their views upon the subjects considered by this working party and those relating to the future political organisation of Western Germany (Working Party No. 5) and to the question of safeguarding the rights of foreign owners of the coal and steel interests in the Ruhr (Working Party No.6).

2. With respect to continuing this cooperation in the future, it was agreed that for the Bizonal area items pending before the Bipartite Board (of interest to the Benelux countries) would so far as possible be communicated to their representatives before the meeting of the Board. The Benelux countries would then be able to submit their comments on such items and these could normally be considered, by the Board in the course of its meeting. Furthermore, the representatives of the Benelux countries would be immediately informed of decisions taken by the Bipartite Board and would be given the minutes for those items which are not exclusively of interest to the Board.

3. An arrangement similar to that outlined in Paragraph 2 above will be put into effect with respect to the French Zone under which information respecting both impending developments and decisions will be communicated to the representatives of the Benelux countries.

4. With respect to information provided in Frankfurt and Baden-Baden, it is recognised that this should be done through the consular representation of the Benelux countries established in those cities.

5. For the purpose of assuring a regular contract and for providing background information, both on developments in the Bipartite Board and in the French Zone, meetings will be held at stated intervals between the respective Political Advisers of the three Military Governments on the one hand and the representatives of Benelux countries on the other. Each Political Adviser would also, upon request, arrange for interviews between representatives of the Benelux countries and other officials of the respective Military Governments, both in Berlin, Frankfurt and Baden-Baden.

1 This Report was generally agreed upon at the Fourth and final meeting of the Military Governors Conference at Berlin on April 12; see General Clay’s telegram CC–3854, supra. Regarding the signing at Frankfurt of the final text of this Report, see telegram 888, April 15, from Berlin, infra. At the resumed London Conference on Germany, this Report was circulated as document TRI/11, April 16, 1948.

2 The views of the Australian and Canadian Military Missions in Berlin to the Military Governors Conference were circulated as documents MGC/P(48) 9, April 8 and MGC/P(48) 14, April 9, respectively, neither printed (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 119, MGC Papers).

3 The text of the Final Report of Working Party No. 2, document MGC/P(48) 11, April 7, 1948, is not printed; for a summary of the subjects discussed by the Working Party, see telegram 797, April 5, from Berlin, p. 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]. Neither the Final Report of Working Party No. 3, document MGC/P(48) 10, April 9, 1948 nor the Final Report of Working Party No. 4, document MGC/P(48) 6, April 6, 1948, is printed; for brief summaries of the contents of these reports, see telegram 766, April 2, from Berlin, p. 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107].

4 Document MGC/P(48) 8, April 9, 1948, p. 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114].

5 The full text of this report is not printed, but for a summary of its contents, see telegram 845, April 13, from Berlin, p. 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117].

6 Not printed.

7 This paper had been circulated separately as document MGC/P(48) 1, March 20, 1948.

8 Not printed, but its substance is set forth in telegram 894, Delsec 1616, March 5, from London, p. 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88].

9 The Final Report printed here was also circulated separately as document MGC/P(48) 7, April 6, 1948, and was Annex B to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–1548: Telegram

[Document 121]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, April 15, 1948—9 p. m.

888. Yesterday at Frankfurt after regular fortnightly Bipartite Board meeting I attended final meeting Military Governors Conference. General Koenig came to Frankfurt for this purpose, meeting heaving on its agenda only approval of final report1 to be submitted to London Ambassadors Conference on Germany. Text of report with two minor amendments is as reported in mytel 859, of April 13.2 Copy of report was sent by air today to London is being mailed to Department.

[The portion of this telegram omitted here, dealing with a discussion of the Berlin situation, is printed on page 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534].]

There was also a further discussion initiated by Koenig regarding General Clay’s paper on Constituent Assembly and establishment of Western German Government (see mytel 821, April 8 [9]3 ). He said that Paris found this paper a “good basis for discussion”. He was not authorized to commit his government, but could assure General Clay that there was much in the paper which was worthy of study and which should be used at London. The three military governors agreed that General Robertson in presenting his report to London meeting would add orally a reference to General Clay’s paper, with the suggestion that military governors consider contents of the paper as a useful basis for discussion. It is obvious from our discussion with French Delegation here that they do not wish to give offense to General Clay in view his strong feeling on this subject and yet their basic views on this question seem to remain unchanged. They hope that in one way or another London meeting will succeed in finding some compromise which will relieve them of a certain embarrassment this connection.

Sent Department 888, repeated personal for Douglas London 130, Paris personal for Caffery 163, Moscow for Smith 125.

Murphy

1  Supra.

2 Not printed.

3  Ante, p. 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/4–1648: Telegram

[Document 122]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, April 16, 1948—7 p. m.

1597. Delsec 1674. Following two preliminary discussions with members US Delegation, first meeting held with British Delegation this afternoon for purpose discussing agenda and related matters.1 Agreement reached to adhere as closely as possible to original agenda2 with following exceptions: deletion items B and E and following language from item C “role of the German economy in the European economy and.” Also agreed that US, UK Delegations would recommend to French rearrangement agenda items in following order: A, F, C, (as revised), G, D. Other subjects covered by position papers and Berlin working party proposals and reports will be discussed under most appropriate agenda headings but without being listed in agenda for publication. Further agreed various other items of current interest might be discussed informally on bipartite or tripartite basis, as may seem advisable.

British indicated desire to discuss on this basis following items: A. Reparations, including German machine tools, resumption of allocations and basis on which resumption to be made, and (if available before end of discussions) preliminary report of technical mission. (Tripartite).

B. German assets in Italy.3 (Tripartite).

C. Berlin situation. (Tripartite).

D. Aspects of German trade, particularly German-Danish and German-Italian trade (Bipartite); and

E. German steel scrap.4 (Bipartite).

No commitment given to discuss foregoing subjects, not all of which appear appropriate items for consideration here and concerning some of which US Delegation has insufficient background. Views Department requested concerning these items suggested by British. Views Clay and Murphy will be obtained here.

First regular meeting to be held twentieth preceded by possible further preliminary meeting with British April 19 and preliminary conversation with French and British morning twentieth. US, UK will propose termination discussions May 6 with final formal meeting set for May 10 to permit drafting and for release official communiqué. Commencement date discussions will be announced April 19 and US, UK will propose that further publicity be handled same basis as first session.

Sent Department 1597; repeated Paris as 162, Berlin 93.

Douglas

1 Taking part in this meeting were: for the United States—Ambassador Douglas, Samuel Reber, and Frank Wisner; for the United Kingdom—Sir William Strang, Patrick Dean, and Roger Stevens. The United States Delegation verbatim record of this meeting is included in CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 118, File—Verbatim Minutes 1948. This was the only U.S.–U.K. meeting to be held prior to the opening of the London Conference on April 20.

2 The agenda adopted by the London Conference at the outset of its meetings in February is described in telegram 684, Delsec 1569, February 23, from London, p. 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51].

3 For additional documentation regarding this topic, see p. 863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 513].

4 The British were expected soon to begin negotiations regarding a bilateral U.K.–Bizonia trade agreement and were expected to concentrate on the purchase of steel scrap. Other European countries were also eager to obtain steel scrap from Germany. There was strong feeling in American industrial quarters that an over-riding priority be given to German scrap exports to the United States steel industry in the interest of national security. In March 1948 a U.S. Government-sponsored scrap mission to Bizonia had confirmed the existence of a substantial tonnage of scrap in Western Germany surplus to German needs. An agreed American policy on scrap exports had not yet been developed at this time, although an inter-departmental ferrous scrap committee was in the process of being formed.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United, Kingdom 740.00119 EW/4–1848: Telegram

[Document 123]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United, Kingdom

secret
us urgent Berlin, April 18, 1948—11 p. m.

137. For Douglas and Reber. Your 93, April 16.1 Berlin party now plans depart for London 6:30 GMT, 20 April.

I have discussed contents your telegram with Clay who has sent personal wire to Draper as follows: “I am advised by Ambassador Douglas that British desire to enlarge agenda of London discussions to include questions of reparations, adding to general question of allocation, the question of German machine tools and preliminary report of US technical mission. I do not believe that these two additions should be discussed at London and certainly not until US position is fixed. I would like to see technical mission’s2 report and have opportunity make appropriate recommendations prior to its discussion at governmental level.

“Another new item proposed by British is German assets in Italy. I do not know what the subject of discussion is; however, since as far as we are concerned these assets are no longer German property, I of course have no objection to the discussion. It would not appear to be within our purview here at all.

“British also propose to discuss Berlin situation. I see no advantage in a discussion of this situation at London. It is primarily situation which must be dealt with by commanders-in-chief. Obviously they must operate under instructions from their Governments; nevertheless, questions involved seem to me to more properly pertain to commanders-in-chief than to London Conference.

“Another proposal offered by British for discussion is aspects of German trade, particularly German-Danish and German-Italian. This is clearly question to be decided in Germany where US has a predominant voice, and I would object very strongly to it being on agenda for discussion London Conference. It is unquestionably a desire of British to evade the decisions being made in JEIA. It is another evidence of British desire to “shop around” in order secure better terms. Moreover, British here have raised no objections to present policy.

“Finally, British propose to add question of German steel scrap. This question is entirely within competence of JEIA where American voice is predominant, and there is no reason for this to be discussed London Conference level. Moreover, no British objections to present policy have been raised here.

“There is an increasing tendency discuss day to day problems in Germany at London Conference or in governmental-level discussions, when in fact there have been no discussions in Germany between the military governors. This can only lead to confusion and division of responsibility which will prove disastrous.

“It would appear to me that conference might well be held to original terms of reference, as in fact it appears likely that much difficulty will be experienced in resolving the questions still to be settled under these original terms of reference.

“In any event, I do object to discussion in tripartite conference those matters which under bizonal fusion agreement must be settled by JEIA with US representatives having final say. This is particularly true in matters which either pertain to day to day operations or which have not been reported by me to Department of Army for clarification of US position with State Department. Any deviation from this position on our part is certain to lead to increasing difficulties in future. I would appreciate it if you would bring these views to attention of State Department. I have sent copy this message to Ambassador Douglas.” End Clay’s message.

I had hoped that principal emphasis would be placed on items C, F and D of agenda adopted at first meeting and that fresh instructions relating particularly to C and D would be received from Department.

Sent London 137, repeated Department 914, Paris 168.

Murphy

1 Same as telegram 1597, Delsec 1674, April 16, from London, supra.

2 The reference here is to the Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations; for documentation regarding the Mission, see pp. 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440] ff.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/4–1948: Telegram

[Document 124]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent
niact London, April 19, 1948—11 p. m.

1625. Delsec 1678. For Saltzman from Douglas. Reference message to Reber and myself from Murphy; repeated Department as 914 and to Paris as 768,1 regarding Delsec 1674 of April 16.2

I wish to make it clear that there is no feeling here that tripartite conversations should be extended to include matters which are of exclusive or predominant concern to military governors and, therefore, more appropriate for consideration and disposition Berlin. I am most desirous of limiting our London discussions to subjects which are of immediate and direct concern to the respective governments. On this basis, and without approving an enlargement of the official agenda of the meeting, I believe it entirely appropriate and unavoidable that there be discussion here of the subjects of reparations, German assets in Italy and the Berlin situation.

Regarding reparations, subject was on the original agenda, and I was instructed on the one hand to seek to obtain agreement with the British and French regarding suspension of reparations deliveries to USSR and Poland except upon a proposed modified basis, and on the other hand, retention in Germany of certain plants which can contribute more effectively to ERP in their present location than if removed elsewhere. Moreover, this is consistent with terms of ERP legislation and previous statements of Secretary. Partial agreement only was accomplished at the first session and I think it necessary to press for further agreement on these and related points at this time.3

Finally, it is to our advantage to discuss with the British and French what form of allocation machinery should be established in the event that quadripartite allocation machinery breaks down. This is an aspect of the matter which is of pressing importance. Without some understanding concerning it, it will probably be impossible to dispose of the other aspects of the reparations problem. (Any views which the Department may have concerning substitute allocations machinery would be extremely helpful.)

With regard to German assets in Italy. I agree with General Clay that this question does not concern the military governors.

There is no thought that any discussion here of the military situation in Berlin should be of a character which would interfere with the responsibility of the military commanders. However, the developments in Berlin have a direct and vital bearing upon the other problems which we are to discuss and, in fact, the timing for the implementation of certain decisions which may result from these conversations will to a considerable extent depend upon the military governor’s judgment as to probable future course of events in Berlin. Moreover, it will be of the greatest benefit to our conversations to hear at first hand from the three Commanders-in-Chief concerning this subject.

I do not believe Bizonal trade with Denmark or Italy should be on the agenda; nor do I think scrap is appropriate for discussion.

I am in full accord with Mr. Murphy’s concluding observation to the effect that principal emphasis should be placed on items C, F and D of the agenda. These are the most significant items and they will receive the relative amount of attention which their importance demands.

Sent Department as 1625; repeated USPolAd Berlin as 94, AmEmbassy Paris as 164.

Douglas

1 Telegram 137, April 18, from Berlin to London, supra.

2  Ante, 187.

3 In telegram 1629, Delsec 1681, April 20, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas added that he wished to make clear that reparations would not be on the official agenda of the London Conference. He also felt that the question of machine tools should not be discussed in London but should be referred to the Military Governors. (740.00119 Council/4–2048)

D. The London Conference on Germany (resumed), April 20–June 1, 1948D. The London Conference on Germany (resumed), April 20–June 1, 1948

[125] Editorial Note

[126] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, April 20, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–2048: Telegram

[127] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, April 20, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–2048: Telegram

[128] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, April 21, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–2148: Telegram

[129] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, April 21, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–2148: Telegram

[130] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, April 22, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 EW/4–2248: Telegram

[131] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, April 22, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–2248: Telegram

[132] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, April 23, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–2348: Telegram

[133] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, April 27, 1948—1 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–2748: Telegram

[134] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, April 28, 1948—11 a. m.

740.00119 Council/4–2748: Telegram

[135] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, April 28, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–2848: Telegram

[136] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, April 30, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–3048: Telegram

[137] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, April 30, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 EW/4–3048: Telegram

[138] Editorial Note

[139] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 1, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–148: Telegram

[140] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson)

Berlin, May 2, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–748

[141] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 3, 1948—1 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–348: Telegram

[142] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 3, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–348: Telegram

[143] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 4, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–348: Telegram

[144] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 4, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–448: Telegram

[145] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 5, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–548: Telegram

[146] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 6, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–648: Telegram

[147] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 7, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–748: Telegram

[148] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 10, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1048: Telegram

[149] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 10, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1048: Telegram

[150] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 11, 1948—noon.

740.00119 Council/5–1148: Telegram

[151] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 11, 1948—noon.

740.00119 Council/5–1148: Telegram

[152] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 11, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1048: Telegram

[153] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 12, 1948—1 a. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1248: Telegram

[154] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 12, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1248: Telegram

[155] Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany

London, 12 May, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 118: File—TRI Documents

[156] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 13, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1348: Telegram

[157] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 13, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1348: Telegram

[158] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 13, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1348: Telegram

[159] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 13, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1348: Telegram

[160] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 14, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1448: Telegram

[161] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, May 17, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 EW/5–1748: Telegram

[162] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 18, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1848: Telegram

[163] The Secretary of the Army (Royall) to the Secretary of State

Washington, 18 May 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–1848

[164] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 19, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1048: Telegram

[165] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 19, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1948: Telegram

[166] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 19, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1948: Telegram

[167] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 19, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1948: Telegram

[168] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 19, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1948: Telegram

[169] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 19, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1948: Telegram

[170] Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany

London, 19 May, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 118: File—TRI Documents

[171] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 20, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2048: Telegram

[172] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 20, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1948: Telegram

[173] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 21, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2148: Telegram

[174] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 21, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2148: Telegram

[175] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Tinder Secretary of State (Lovett)

[Washington,] May 21, 1948.

711.61/5–2148

[176] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 22, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2148: Telegram

[177] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 24, 1948—1 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2448: Telegram

[178] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, May 24, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2448: Telegram

[179] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 24, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2048: Telegram

[180] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 24, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2448: Telegram

[181] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, May 25, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2148: Telegram

[182] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary General of the French Ministry for Foreign Affairs (Chauvel)

Paris, May 25, 1948.

Paris Embassy Files: 1948: File—800

[183] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 25, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2548: Telegram

[184] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 25, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2548: Telegram

[185] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, May 25, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2548: Telegram

[186] The Under Secretary of State (Lovett) to the Secretary of the Army (Royall)

[Washington,] May 25, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–1848

[187] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 26, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2648: Telegram

[188] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, May 26, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–2648: Telegram

[189] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, May 26, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–2148: Telegram

[190] Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany

London, 26 May, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 118: File—TRI Documents

[191] Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany

London, 26 May, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 118: File—TRI Documents

[192] Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany

London, 26 May, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 118: File—TRI Documents

[193] Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany

London, 26 May, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 118: File—TRI Documents

[194] Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany

London, 26 May, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 118: File—TRI Documents

[195] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 27, 1948—1 a. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2748: Telegram

[196] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, May 27, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2748: Telegram

[197] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, May 28, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2648: Telegram

[198] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 28, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2748: Telegram

[199] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 28, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2848: Telegram

[200] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 30, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–3048: Telegram

[201] Memorandum of Trans-Atlantic Telephone Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman)

[Washington,] May 31, 1948.

740.00119 Council/5–3148

[202] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Berlin, May 31, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–3148: Telegram

[203] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 31, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–3148: Telegram

[204] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 31, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Council/5–3148: Telegram

[205] Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany

London, 31 May 1948.

EUR Files: Lot 55 D 374: Box 5342: File—500 London Tripartite Conf.

[206] Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany

London, 31st May, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 118: File—TRI Documents

[207] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, June 1, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Council/6–148: Telegram

[208] Report of the London Conference on Germany

London, 1 June, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–148

[209] Communiqué Issued by the Four Delegations to the London Conference on Germany, June 1, 1948

London, June 1, 1948

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 119: File—London Conference Press Releases

[210] Communiqué of the London Conference on Germany, Released to the Press on June 7, 1948

London, June 7, 1948

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–748

Editorial Note [Document 125]

Editorial Note

On April 20, 1948, representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg resumed their discussions in London on German problems. These discussions, constituting the second part of the London Conference on Germany, were concluded on June 1. The Conference was not conducted within rigid, formal lines. Much of the work of the Conference was carried on in small meetings and conversations between members of the various delegations. During the early weeks of this resumed session, the larger meetings of the delegations were designated as formal or, more often, as informal meetings of the Conference. In the latter stages of the Conference, however, this type of meeting designation was apparently not attempted.

Membership of the various delegations included the following:

united states delegation

Representative

Lewis W. Douglas, Ambassador in the United Kingdom

Special Advisers

General Lucius D. Clay, Military Governor for Germany and Commander in Chief, European Command

Robert D. Murphy, Political Adviser for Germany

Samuel Reber, Deputy Director, Office of European Affairs, Department of State

Frank G. Wisner, Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas

Advisers

Commander William C. Butler

Lieutenant Colonel James W. Coutts, Department of the Army

John C. deWilde, Associate Chief, Division of Occupied Areas Economic Affairs, Department of State

Donald D. Humphrey, Deputy Economic Adviser to the Military Governor for Germany

E. Allan Lightner, Jr., Associate Chief, Division of Central European Affairs

Edward Litchfield, Director, Civil Administration Division, Office of Military Government for Germany (U.S.)

Fritz Oppenheimer, Special Assistant to the Legal Adviser, Department of State

James W. Riddleberger, Counselor, Office of the Political Adviser for Germany

Lawrence Wilkinson, Economic Adviser to the Military Governor for Germany

Secretary

Kenyon C. Bolton, Division of International Conferences

united kingdom delegation

Representative

Sir William Strang, Permanent Under-Secretary of State for the German Section, Foreign Office

Advisers

General Sir Brian Robertson, Commander-in-Chief in Germany Sir Ivone Kirkpatrick, Assistant Under-Secretary of State, Foreign Office

Patrick H. Dean, Head, German Political Department, Foreign Office

John W. Nicholls, Head, German Trade Department, Foreign Office

Christopher E. Steel, Political Adviser to the Commander-in-Chief in Germany

E. S. Jackson, Deputy-President, Economic Sub-Commission, C.G.G.(B.E.)

Sir Wilfred Eady, Second Secretary, Treasury

french delegation

Representative

René Massigli, Ambassador in the United Kingdom.

Advisers

Maurice Couve de Murville, Director General for Political Affairs, Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Hervé Alphand, Director General for Economic, Financial, and Technical Affairs, Ministry for Foreign Affairs

General Pierre Koenig, Commander-in-Chief for Germany

Jacques Tarbé de Saint-Hardouin, Political Adviser to the Commander-in-Chief in Germany

Jacques-Camille Paris, Minister Counselor of the Embassy in London

General Perruche

Pierre de Leusse, Deputy Director, Office of Central European Affairs, Ministry for Foreign Affairs

François Seydoux Fornier de Clausonne, Commissariat for German and Austrian Affairs

belgian delegation

Representative

Baron Hervé de Gruben, Secretary General of the Belgian Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Advisers

Vicomte Alain Obert de Thieusies, Ambassador in the United Kingdom

Lieutenant General Georges Goethals, Chief of the Military Mission at Berlin

netherlands delegation

Representative

Jonkheer Edgar Michiels van Verduynen, Ambassador in the United Kingdom

Adviser

Dr. H. M. Hirschfeld, Commissioner for German Affairs, Ministry for Foreign Affairs

luxembourg delegation

Representative

André Clasen, Minister in the United Kingdom

Adviser

Colonel Albert Wehrer, Chief of the Military Mission at Berlin

The documentation that follows comprises the major Conference agreements and decisions, selections from Ambassador Douglas’ telegraphic reports on the proceedings of the Conference, various Department instructions and observations, and certain other related, supplementary papers. There appears to be no complete collection of United States Delegation minutes of the various meetings constituting this portion of the London Conference on Germany. Such Delegation minutes as are available, the texts of the formal Conference documents, and a variety of Delegation position papers, drafts, and correspondence are included in CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 118.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/4–2048: Telegram

[Document 126]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, April 20, 1948—4 p. m.

1397. Personal for Douglas. Dept concurs generally in your views (Delsecs 1674, Apr 16;1 1678, Apr 19;2 1681, Apr 203 ) and Clay’s views (Berlin’s tel 914, Apr 18, sent London as 1374 ) that it is undesirable to extend London discussions to include other items as suggested by Brit. We agree with you and Clay that items D and E proposed by Brit (Delsec 1674) are not proper subjects for London talks.

Re item A, reparations, we agree that questions of German machine tools and report of technical mission should not be subject of discussions in London. However, we see no objection to an informal exchange of views on allocation machinery, on understanding that topic not be on official agenda. We interpret Berlin’s 914 to indicate this agreeable to Clay.

Re item B, German assets in Italy, Dept does not believe necessary that discussions with UK on this subject be held in connection with conference, and deems preferable that no informal discussions be held until written UK reply received to points made Deptel 1225, Apr 8.5

Re proposed item C, Berlin situation, Dept believes discussion of broader aspects current German and Berlin situations is not only unavoidable but desirable. While operational features Berlin problem can best be dealt with by Commanders-in-Chief, Dept concurs in your view that Govts will wish to consider broad implications Berlin question. Brit and particularly French pressing for such discussion. For your top secret info, Sec State in reply to personal message from Bidault on immediate security problems is suggesting that London talks may afford opportunity for informal conversations at governmental level on current German situation.6 We envisage that Clay, on basis general authority granted him by State and Army, will be able to participate with you in such discussions situation Germany and Berlin, which it is recommended be kept at highest and most secret levels. Concur question should not be on official agenda, and of course no final decision will be taken in London. Please show Gen Clay this telegram, the gist of which was read to Draper who is in agreement.

Please telegraph final conference agenda.

Lovett

1  Ante, p. 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122].

2  Ante, p. 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 124].

3 Not printed, but see footnote 3 to telegram 1625, April 19, from London, p. 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 124].

4  Ante, p. 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123].

5 Not printed.

6 Secretary of State Marshall’s message of April 21 to Foreign Minister Bidault is included in the documentation on the antecedents of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization presented in volume iii .

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/4–2048: Telegram

[Document 127]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, April 20, 1948—9 p. m.

1649. Delsec 1683. At first meeting resumed German talks this afternoon1 following revised agenda was adopted: (a) Association of Benelux countries in policy regarding Germany;

(b) Role of the German economy in the European economy and control of the Ruhr;

(c) Evolution of the political and economic organization of Germany;

(d) Provisional territorial arrangements;

(e) Security against Germany.

New agenda represents no change from original except for different order and deletion of items entitled “relationship of western Germany under the occupying powers to the ERP” and “reparations” (old b and e). It was agreed that in reply to press queries the reasons for the deletion of these items from agenda would be given as follows: former dropped because this matter now settled and hence nothing further to discuss, and latter because delegations not in a position at this time to continue discussion.

It was also agreed that last meeting this session should be held not later than three weeks from today although every effort will be made to conclude discussions earlier.

Press will merely be informed meetings will be concluded soon as possible to do so and will not be given any specific date of conclusion in order avoid publicizing any timetable which might be used by Soviets to their advantage. In general publicity will be handled same basis as first session.

Sent Department 1649; repeated USPolAd Berlin 97, AmEmbassy Paris 167, Moscow 64, The Hague 33, Brussels 51 (Brussels please keep Luxembourg informed); Oslo 30, Copenhagen 25, Stockholm 42, and Rome 100.

Douglas

1 This is the 13th meeting of the London Conference on Germany. The numeration begins with the 1st meeting on February 23.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/4–2148: Telegram

[Document 128]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact London, April 21, 1948—7 p. m.

1665. Delsec 1684. Personal for Saltzman from Douglas.

1. I agree with your cable completely except on one point about which I have some doubt. (Deptel 1397, April 20.1 )

2. While I agree that the report of the technical mission should not be the subject of discussion, comment and criticism in London, if we are to negotiate on the matter of reparations covering the second phase to which reference is made in Delsec 1678, sent as Embtel 1625, April 19,2 we cannot escape, it seems to me, using the facts as determined by that commission.

You will recollect that one of the reasons for sending the technical mission to Germany was to provide us with the facts without which it is impossible to negotiate. You will recall, also, that it was our inability to indicate the number of plants which would, in our judgment, better serve European recovery in Germany than elsewhere, that made it impossible to carry the negotiations on reparations to a conclusion at the last meeting.

Unless we are free to use the evidence provided by the technical mission, we will again be negotiating in vacuo. If you agree, this may make it necessary to make some reference to the technical mission’s report and any comments which General Clay or the cabinet committee may have to make on the subject.

3. Certainly, experience has indicated that we cannot negotiate without the facts. If, therefore, the findings of the technical mission are not to be used for negotiation in London, then I suggest that the question of reparations, excepting delivery to the Soviet, be not discussed here.

4. In this connection, the technical mission has indicated that it will be able to submit its findings by the end of this month which would afford time for the negotiations to be conducted here. If, however, the findings of the mission together with such comments as General Clay and the cabinet committee may have, to make are not completed before this meeting adjourns, then obviously, the negotiations on the subject of reparations, with exception noted in three above, cannot proceed at this session and may better be conducted either here at a later time, or elsewhere.

Douglas

1  Ante, p. 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126].

2  Ante, p. 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 124].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/4–2148: Telegram

[Document 129]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, April 21, 1948—10 p. m.

1669. Delsec 1686. At second meeting resumed German talks.1 Item A regarding association of Benelux countries in policy regarding Germany was promptly disposed of, meeting accepting report of Working Party number 1 as submitted by Military Governors.2

Item B was then discussed with particular reference to previous paper on international control of the Ruhr (TRI/7).3 Douglas made several general observations emphasizing close relation between all subjects under discussion, fact that purpose of setting up International Control Agency was not only security but also to effect integration of economy of Western Germany with Western Europe. He mentioned that Ruhr paper had been drafted in some haste, which was one reason for including final paragraph. Without proposing any specific language Douglas suggested several points seemed to require clarification by amendment or additions. He recalled making 3 points at last session on March 64 which he felt should now be resolved. He mentioned 4 additional points which while less important from American point of view also should be taken into account in any redrafting of present paper in order to overcome ambiguities.

1. While explanation was given at last session regarding time International Control Agency would start operating, paragraph one was not clear and should be revised to state exactly what was intended.

2. Language should be included in paper to take into account US responsibilities deriving from magnitude its financial contributions to Germany, responsibilities which must be protected.

3. Account should also be taken in paper of necessity to protect Germany from abuse of power vested in control agency. As drafted, paper guards against discriminatory practices by Germany but there is no protection for Germany against possible discriminatory practices of other powers.

4. In line with intent to convince Western Germany her interest lay with Western Europe rather than with Eastern Europe, US Delegation would propose preamble be changed to sound slightly less punitive.

5. There was some question in paragraph 7 regarding period of supreme authority but without going into this point there was also question regarding intent of paragraph. It did not seem to envisage possibility that certain controls might be relaxed during this period.

6. Paper does not provide for appeal from actions of International Control Agency (this point not unrelated to point 3 above).

7. Paper did not appear to be sufficiently precise regarding enforcement of decisions of control agency.

In addition to foregoing, US Delegation had several other points of drafting and of minor nature which might be of use later to working party.

Massigli emphasized paper worked out last session was compromise between different views; that his government felt French Delegation had gone pretty far in original paper and therefore not likely give him much latitude for further amendments. He warned that Germans would use present international situation to obtain utmost advantages for themselves; that he realized importance obtaining German cooperation for benefit Western Europe but felt it was just as important to consider susceptibilities of peoples formerly occupied by Germany who subject to propaganda campaign urging alignment with East, In short he raised familiar French line of importance consider psychological reaction of French people.

Douglas recalled for Massigli’s benefit that his first 3 points, which were most important ones, were not new, that they were deeply embedded in US thinking, and that he would not have approved paper even as a draft if he had felt there was any question their acceptance. It was now important to make sure paper clearly covered these points. He did not feel that other points raised, even though new ones, should present difficulties. While appreciating dangers of potential German aggressive power Douglas vigorously asserted we face choice at present time of either taking all reasonable steps to consolidate Western Germany with Western Europe, or admitting this couldn’t be done and letting Western Germany move eastward.

Van Verduynen commented that steps required to bolster morale of Germans will also encourage their nationalistic tendencies. Benelux Delegation nevertheless glad to give most sympathetic consideration any proposed changes in paper.

Strang stated British Delegation found paper generally acceptable but recognized it had been hastily drafted and believed improvements should be made, particularly in paragraphs 5, 8, and 10. He suggested that in considering points raised by Douglas it would be useful if US Delegation presented specific proposals for suggested amendments. He confirmed that 3 points had been mentioned by Douglas first session and stated that UK Delegation is prepared consider these as well as 4 new points. However, he emphasized that British well pleased with measure of accord represented by present draft and expressed hope that there be no significant departure from the fundamental principles therein embodied.

Same subject will be discussed tomorrow when US Delegation expects present drafts on several points.

Sent Department 1669; repeated USPolAd Berlin 99, AmEmbassy Paris 168, Moscow 64, The Hague 34, Brussels 52, Brussels please keep Luxembourg informed, Oslo 31, Copenhagen 26, Stockholm 43, and Rome 102.

Douglas

1 This was the 14th meeting of the London Conference on Germany.

2 The Report under reference here is included as Appendix “B” to the Report by the U.S., U.K. and French Military Governors, April 14, p. 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 120].

3  Ante, p. 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90].

4 For a brief report on the meeting under reference here, see telegram 906, Delsec 1620, March 6, from London, p. 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 EW/4–2248: Telegram

[Document 130]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, April 22, 1948—6 p. m.

1442. For Douglas from Saltzman. Urtels Niact 1625,1 1629.2 Dept’s views on resumption of allocations of reparations follow. Army is requesting Clay’s comments, following which will telegraph definite instructions.

It is desirable that flow of reparations equipment to IARA be resumed promptly. Difficulties are reluctance to allocate to Soviet Union, re-examination dismantling lists now in progress, and breakdown quadripartite machinery. Re-examination of lists no obstacle to resumption, because present allocations are contemplated only of plants not being considered for retention in Germany to produce items in worldwide short supply. Breakdown quadripartite machinery facilitates handling problem Soviet deliveries.

Propose that US, UK and French informally agree to direct allocation to IARA by individual zone commanders, not touching plants being considered for retention and stopping well short of the 75% of total remaining on list. If public announcement necessary, should be described as interim measure to meet the needs of IARA countries, pending clarification of future of quadripartite machinery.

There is precedent for this action in British and French emergency delivery schemes during US stop-order, under which approximately 29,700,000 RM worth of equipment was allocated to IARA members solely on notice of availability from British or French zone commander.

Foregoing procedure does not contemplate any allocations to U.S.S.R., since it is necessitated by Soviet failure to participate in quadripartite machinery. This point would be pressed strongly with British and French. Contemplate you inquire how much equipment remains to be delivered to U.S.S.R. from U.K. and French zones under previous allocations, and that unless amount and character of equipment is insignificant, you urge that deliveries of these plants be withheld.

Agree entirely with your views on report of technical mission (urtel Niact 1665 Apr 213 ), but doubt that report can be completed and reviewed by Clay and this Govt in time to be used at present session London. If report is reasonable, assume this Govt would be able authorize its use in negotiations without detailed study, and that Clay would agree. Dept would not wish report to be used as basis international negotiations, however, without some knowledge of contents. Suggest therefore this question be deferred until more is known about the report and when it will be available. [Saltzmann.]

Lovett

1  Ante, p. 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 124].

2 Not printed, but see footnote 2. p. 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 124].

3  Ante, p. 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 128].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/4–2248: Telegram

[Document 131]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, April 22, 1948—11 p. m.

1699. Delsec 1688. Third meeting resumed German talks1 continued discussion item B. Massigli stated his Government after considering limitations of paper on international control of Ruhr2 authorized him to agree to the draft subject to satisfactory measures being taken re security. Furthermore, French delegation wanted 2 points incorporated in order to complete text: 1. Amendment to provide necessary safeguards and protection for allied owners.

2. In order assure association of Ruhr agency with objective of integrating Western Germany with Western Europe, agency should cooperate not only with local German authorities but also with ERP authorities.

Douglas commenting on Massigli’s 2 points felt it unwise to draw line between proprietary interests of Allied nationals holding properties in the Ruhr and those with interests elsewhere in Germany. He also questioned intent of Massigli’s second point which seemed to imply that Ruhr agency would assume elements of sovereignty which actually should be exercised by occupying powers or German Government. He was unwilling consider this agency having seat on ERP continuing organization which French proposal implied. No more reason having Ruhr so represented than Lorraine or other areas of great concentration of industry.

Massigli replied re his point 1 that he was not asking preferential treatment for Allied properties in Ruhr. It happened control of Ruhr industry rather than industry of all Germany was under discussion and since many Allied interests there it was desirable to protect them. He referred to agreed report of Berlin Working Party number 63 which had accepted principle that no discriminatory action should be taken against Allied properties. Re his point 2 he said Ruhr not other regions of industrial concentration has been used as starting point for aggressive war; many Europeans unconvinced all Germany desires rapprochement with west; some day it may be possible to organize European economy rationally for peace but in meantime it was necessary adopt measures to prevent use of Ruhr for aggression.

Douglas also hoped ERP would lead to closely welded European economic system but felt this purpose would not be served by bifurcating Germany or setting it up as sovereign entity apart from whatever German Government may exist. (Massigli later in reply to question by Strang indicated he did not intend agency should sit on CEEC as 19th member but he did not clarify just what French intended by suggestion in point 2.) Re Massigli’s point 1 Douglas pointed out Berlin Working Party’s report, though agreed at working level, had not been approved by military governors and had been submitted to London for information only. He indicated that until paper had approval of US Delegation he could not accept it as basis for discussions. However, he had no objection considering general problem protecting Allied interests in Germany but felt it would be difficult consider separately their interests in Ruhr.

Van Verduynen stated Benelux accepted March 5th paper and favored setting up agency soon as possible. Benelux attached importance to safeguard rights of foreign owners particularly since they [are?] experiencing difficulties now in Ruhr. It was his view that guarantees for this purpose would bring about closer coordination of all interested powers. (De Gruben later emphasized problem had been raised at last session by Benelux as result of measures taken by occupying powers which caused Benelux owners certain losses.)

It was agreed defer further discussion and decisions on how to handle problem of safeguarding Allied interests until tomorrow’s meeting.

Meeting then considered draft amendments circulated by US delegation. (Text given in concluding paragraphs this message.) Douglas explained US delegation would have additional suggested amendments tomorrow and that his suggestions were put forward, as explained yesterday, to clarify important principles and would be ambiguities. He wanted it be understood US delegation was not insisting upon exact language of new proposal but that it hoped principles contained in drafts would be found acceptable and then could be referred to Working Party for any drafting changes which might be found desirable. There was little discussion re proposed changes in preamble and paragraphs 1 and 2 but considerable discussion re amendment to paragraph 5(A). For Department’s information revised paragraph 5(A) embodies change discussed in connection paragraph 8 in position paper on Ruhr. After discussing with General Clay and US Delegation staff question of best means assuring adequate protection to US during period when it is providing major share of financial support for Germany, it was decided advance strongest statement of principle as amendment to paragraph 5(A). This tactic deemed advisable particularly in view anticipated French intransigeance. US delegation is, however, prepared in forthcoming discussions to retreat somewhat from this strong statement if necessary although no departure from principle will be considered.

In reply to question by Strang, Douglas made clear intent of paragraph 5(A) was that Ruhr agency would be advisory body during lifetime of JEIA or its successor organization and that only after that period would agency assume authority to determine allocations. He also told Strang in reply to question that in effect agency will not do allocating until Germany self-sustaining, i.e. until US no longer providing financial support to Germany. He added it is nevertheless conceivable that US might withdraw financial support prior to time Germany became self-sustaining. He took occasion to point out that it would be somewhat anomalous if on one hand US was supporting Germany while others were in position to increase US financial responsibility by controlling German exports.

There was some discussion whether US amendments should be referred to Working Party. Strang commented while principle raised in paragraph 5(A), had been mentioned by Douglas before, mechanism to achieve results desired was not known until today. This mechanism involved questions of principle (agency initially to be merely advisory with JEIA actually in control). He felt it would be better to defer submitting proposals to Working Party until these principles were discussed further and until remaining US proposed amendments received.

Amendments proposed by US Delegation to TRI/7 (final): Begin preamble as follows:

Whereas international security and general economic recovery require

That the resources of the Ruhr shall be used in the interests of the economic well-being and peace of Europe:

That access to the coal, coke and steel of the Ruhr shall be guaranteed to the countries of Europe cooperating in the common economic good;

That access to these products for the benefit of the economic life of such European cooperating countries shall be without discrimination, and,

(Last 2 paragraphs of preamble unchanged).

Paragraph 1. An international control shall be set up in the Ruhr; it will be organized and ready to function at the time that a provisional German Govt is established.

Paragraph 2. The International Commission for the Ruhr, hereinafter referred to as “the Commission” shall be composed of representatives of the US, UK, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg and Germany.

Paragraph 3. Begin “The Commission shall”.

Paragraph 4. No changes.

Paragraph 5. The functions of the Commission shall, in the light of existing and future international agreements, be as follows: (A) To advise the allied Joint Import-Export Agency and its allied successor agency during their existence as to, and thereafter to determine, the allocations of coal, coke and steel from the Ruhr as between German consumption and export, in order to insure adequate access to supplies of these products taking into account the needs of Germany in order to become and to remain economically self-sustaining; and subject to the provisions of paragraph 8 below, to insure the fulfillment of the terms of such allocations.

Sent Dept 1699; repeated USPolAd Berlin 101, Paris 170, Moscow 66, The Hague 35, Brussels 54, Brussels please keep Luxembourg informed, Oslo 32, Copenhagen 27, Stockholm 44, Rome 104.

Douglas

1 This was the 15th Meeting of the London Conference on Germany.

2 Document TRI/7 (Final), March 5, p. 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90].

3 The Report tinder reference is not printed, but for a summary of its contents, see telegram 845, April 13, from Berlin, p. 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/4–2348: Telegram

[Document 132]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, April 23, 1948—10 p. m.

1720. Delsec 1690. Fourth meeting resumed German talks1 continued discussion Item B. USDel circulated additional proposed amendments as follows:2 “Provisions of sub-paragraph (B) of paragraph 5 still under consideration by USDel and treatment proposed will be submitted later.

“Paragraph 6 (C) add ‘as may be arranged through the allied governing authorities’.

“Paragraph 7 during the period of exercise of military government authority by the Allied Powers the occupying authorities concerned will maintain adequate controls over management of the Ruhr coal and coke industry.

“Consideration is being given to changes in paragraph 8 in connection with treatment which will be proposed regarding paragraph 5 (D).

“It is proposed to add a new paragraph as follows:

‘At such time as the allocating powers of the commission shall become operative, appropriate provision shall be made for appeal from the decisions of the commission’.

“It is proposed that the expression ‘military government authority’ [apparent omission] wherever the latter occurs throughout the paper.”

There was brief discussion of proposed new paragraph on appeal from decisions of commission, Douglas commenting that it was difficult for USDel to be more specific at this time reference manner of handling appeal owing to uncertainty as to most appropriate organization. He made it plain that USDel did not consider any appeal procedure was required during period when US bearing major financial burden but that after that period appeals should be provided for in order to prevent abuse of power.

Strang suggested desirability examining all the amendments to determine which were matters of principle and thus required decision around table prior to reference to working party.

Massigli believed questions of principle were involved in good many proposed changes, even in new US proposed preamble. He warned that US desire to restore [remove] punitive touch, which took form deleting all reference to war of aggression, no doubt would please Germans but might create stronger psychological difficulties on allied side.

Douglas indicated main question of principle was raised in US proposed amendment to paragraph 5 (A).

In private meeting after main session principal representatives agreed accept principle that US responsibility during period its major financial contributions to Germany should be protected. Means achieving this not agreed and will be subject further discussion. Subcommittee appointed to see that progress can be made on other US proposed amendments (Wisner and Riddleberger representing US).

Massigli proposed following as additional sub-paragraph (D) to paragraph 5 of March 5 paper: “to ensure safeguard and protection for enterprises involving Allied interests in the Ruhr, particularly in the light of existing or future agreements between France, and the United States of America, Great Britain, Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands.”

In discussions on this proposal Douglas indicated USDel had no objection to safeguarding and protecting property of allied nationals in Germany or in Ruhr but, as he had said yesterday, he was not sure it was wise to make provision for properties in Ruhr only.

Strang believed there was general agreement that there should be certain protection for allied interests and that only question was whether this was right way to do it. He mentioned Berlin Working Party paper this subject,3 particularly item 1, and proposed that paper should now be studied in order to determine suitability of French amendment.

Douglas referred to paragraph 6(A), item 1, Berlin Working Party paper, the French and Benelux proposal that Allied property should not be subject to measures affecting ownership rights. He asked whether French and Benelux delegates contemplated extra-territorial rights for Allied nationals. Massigli and Van Verduynen replied in negative, but it became clear under further questioning by Douglas that their proposal clearly contemplated such a privileged position for allied nationals. For example, they intended that foreign firms be exempt from any nationalization measures which German Government might enact.

Strang agreed with Douglas it would be impossible to exempt United Nations properties in Germany from such measures as de-concentration, expropriation, decartelization, nationalization and land reform. He felt real problem was one of providing adequate compensation to allied interests affected.

It was agreed appoint small committee (Oppenheimer and Humphrey for US) to examine general question raised in French proposed amendment and in Berlin Working Party report to advise on best way to handle the various questions, i.e. which ones should be considered further in plenary session and which might be referred to working parties.

Next meeting scheduled for Monday afternoon.

Sent Department 1720, repeated USPolAd Berlin 103, Paris 174, Moscow 67, The Hague 36, Brussels 57, Brussels please keep Luxembourg informed, Oslo 33, Copenhagen 28, Stockholm 45, and Rome 108.

Douglas

1 This was the 16th Meeting of the London Conference on Germany.

2 The proposals quoted here were amendments to document TRI/7 (Final), March 5, p. 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90].

3 The reference here is the Report of Working Party No. 6; for a summary of that Report, see telegram 845, April 13, from Berlin, p. 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–2748: Telegram

[Document 133]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, April 27, 1948—1 p. m.

1750. The Secretary’s and Lovett’s eyes only from Douglas.

1. In regard to the Ruhr, the fundamental issue has been raised by Clay whose views are at least implicitly endorsed by Murphy. The issue is whether, in view of the changed conditions, we still endorse the principle stated by the Secretary on November 17 in his Chicago speech,1 and agreed to in the working paper, however much it needs modification and amendment, at the session on Germany which adjourned on March 6.

2. Clay and Murphy would like to sink the principle without a trace.

3. My opinion is that an agreement on the Ruhr can be reached which will give us protection during the period in which we are assuming financial responsibility, be generally acceptable to Germany and reasonably satisfy the French position. Moreover, I doubt that we can carry the French on the German problem as a whole without a satisfactory agreement both to us and to them on the Ruhr, based upon the principles agreed to at the previous session in London, modified as was stated then and confirmed since so as to protect our position during the period which we are carrying the financial burden.

4. Would appreciate your views. Sorry to bother you with “eyes only” communication, but think it desirable, for obvious reasons, that this cable does not have wide circulation.

Douglas

1 The reference here is to the Secretary of State’s address on problems of European revival and German and Austrian peace settlements, delivered at Chicago, November 18, 1947; for the text, see Germany 1947–1949, p. 9 or Department of State Bulletin, November 30, 1947, p. 1024.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/4–2748: Telegram

[Document 134]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret Washington, April 28, 1948—11 a. m.

1509. For Douglas (Eyes Only) from the Secretary and Lovett. Lovett and I fully support your views in par. 3 urtel 1750 Apr 27,1 which was clearly understood to be the position of US Govt in the London talks. The principle of Ruhr control enunciated in my Chicago speech of Nov 18 remains US policy, has never been challenged by any responsible authority here and has served as the basis of all discussions I have had on the subject of the Ruhr. We are morally committed to this general proposal, which I continue to believe offers the best solution for Europe and Germany. I agree with you that the possibilities of future understanding on the German problem with the French as well as with Benelux depend upon our going through with it. As to the protection of US financial responsibility in Germany, I hope you will be able to achieve a broad and statesmanlike agreement on this principle which I understand both the Brit and French are willing to acknowledge.

Marshall

1  Supra.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/4–2848: Telegram

[Document 135]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, April 28, 1948—2 p. m.

1792. Delsec 1696. As the Department is aware the agreed report of the Berlin Working Party (TRI/4) which considered the various problems in regard to the future German government showed little progress.1 During Couve de Murville’s visit to Berlin General Clay handed him a compromise proposal (see Berlin’s 898, April 16 to Department repeated Paris as 1642 ) and subsequently the three military governors agreed to transmit Clay’s paper to the present London meeting as a basis for discussion.

Last Friday Couve de Murville, after preliminary discussion with Clay and Murphy, submitted a French counter-proposal. This was followed by a British redraft on political organization dated April 26. USDel was prepared to base discussion at this meeting on the French counter-proposal as it is believed better progress could be made working from one paper which seems to offer the possibility of agreement. However, the British paper is not without merit. Both the French counter-proposal and British redraft are quoted below. These are now the basis of current discussions on German political organization.

At yesterday’s meeting there was reached considerable area of tentative agreement on the language in the French counter-proposal below. Thus paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 were agreed but there was no agreement on paragraph 4 on the key question of whether the delegates to the Constituent Assembly would be “designated” or elected. Paragraph 5 was agreed but paragraph 6 is still wide open. In that connection please note paragraph 4 of British redraft below. There was no particular difficulty about paragraph 7 and on the point here involved of ratification by the states it was agreed that the states would be the new ones after whatever boundary changes are eventually approved. It should also be said in that reference that the British and French are wide apart on the question of the boundaries of the future north Rhine-Westphalia, Paragraph 8 was agreed with the amendment of “this committee” in the second sentence to read “the Minister Presidents”. Paragraph 9 also seemed to find agreement. Paragraph 10, it was agreed, would be replaced by paragraph 8 of British redraft. There was discussion without agreement on the question of approval or disapproval by the Military Governors of the several actions to be taken by the Germans. British and US agreed that disapproval could be indicated by majority but the French desired more time to consider this point.

It was also tentatively agreed that the provisions of paragraph 11 are not necessary in the present paper.

Today a working party is endeavoring to bring the French and British papers into a single draft. After another attempt by US, British and French delegates to harmonize views, Benelux, which has not yet participated in these discussions, will be asked for views.

Text of French and British drafts follow:

French Counter-Proposal.

1. Three commanders-in-chief will, not later than blank, call for meeting of Presidents of States of their respective zones. This meeting will be instructed to examine boundaries of the several States in view of determining what modifications might be proposed to commanders-in-chief. This survey will be carried out recognizing traditional patterns, and avoiding, to extent feasible, creation of States which are either too large or too small in comparison with the other states composing the federation. This survey will take place in close contact with allied authorities, so as to enable them to take their decision before meeting of Constituent Assembly.

2. Meeting of Minister-Presidents shall be informed of decisions taken as to convening of Constituent Assembly. It will be instructed to communicate those decisions to the various States and to make the necessary arrangements.

3. Constituent Assembly will be held not later than September 1, 1948 to prepare constitution to be ratified by states composing the federation.

4. Delegates to this Constituent Assembly shall be designated, in each of existing States, under procedure and regulations as adopted by each of these States.

5. Number of delegates from each State will be in proportion that its population is to total population of participating States. Total number of delegates will be determined by dividing total population from last census by 750,000.

6. Constituent Assembly will draft democratic constitution which will establish for States composing the federation a government structure of federal type which will protect rights of participating states and which will contain guarantees of individual rights and freedom. (This paragraph to be completed.)

7. Constitution as prepared by Constituent Assembly will be examined by occupying powers to determine its compliance with general principles stated in paragraph six. If constitution as prepared by Constituent Assembly does meet these principles, it will be submitted for ratification by states composing the federation under such rules and procedures as these may adopt. When constitution has been ratified by two-thirds of the states, it will become the constitution of the federation. It will come into force and will be binding upon all states. Thereafter, any amendment to constitution must be ratified by like majority of the states.

8. Constituent Assembly shall designate committee consisting of one representative from each of the States which will form the federation. This committee, in cooperation with governments of existing States, will take necessary steps for election in due time of Assemblies of such States boundaries of which will have been modified. These Assemblies and those of the States boundaries of which have not been modified shall determine conditions for ratification of constitution as stated in paragraph 7 above.

9. As soon as constitution has been voted, Constituent Assembly will be dissolved and committee mentioned in paragraph 8 will be instructed to submit constitution for ratification of States composing federation. Within thirty days following coming into force of constitution, this committee shall also provide for establishment of institutions as determined for by constitution.

10. Commanders-in-Chief shall determine control and administration powers which occupying authorities intend to retain subsequent to coming into force of constitution, as regards federal government as well as governments of the States.

11. Prior to coming into force of constitution, it is impracticable to establish trizonal allied control. However, in interim period, certain steps have or will be taken to ensure full economic coordination of trizonal area and French zone of occupation. Steps which have already been taken are: mint banking policy under tripartite allied banking commission; agreement in principle to currency reform in trizonal area. Remaining steps which should be taken as soon as conditions of implementation will have been agreed upon by Commanders-in-Chief are: common management of export and import by tripartite Allied export-import agency and common custom policy.

British Redraft.

1. Three military governors will not later than blank call joint meeting of Ministers President their respective zones to tell them that they have decided to authorize them to arrange for convention of Constituent Assembly to which any German Land will be permitted to send delegates.

2. (A) In order that serious anomalies in present arrangement of Land boundaries may be rectified before constitution ratified (see paragraph 5 below) Ministers President will be asked to examine this matter and to report within one month to Military Governors as to what modification they think desirable. Ministers President may conduct this examination in any way which appears to them appropriate. Military Governors will consider their report, and will take steps to put into effect such recommendations as they agree to accept. Where Military Governors fail to agree, no change will be made. (B) Constitution will provide machinery to enable changes to be made in boundaries of Laender, subject to approval of people of Laender affected. Any residual problems regarding Land boundaries not settled by procedure in (A) above will be settled subsequently by this machinery.

3. Ministers President shall also be told to make necessary arrangements to ensure (A) that Constituent Assembly should meet as soon as possible and not later than September 1, 1948; (B) that delegates to this Assembly should be elected by the people of the several Laender under the electoral procedures and regulations adopted by the several Laender; (C) that the number of delegates from each Land should be in the proportion that its population is to total population of participating Laender, total number of delegates being determined by dividing total population at last census by 750,000.

4. Constitutent Assembly will draft a democratic constitution which will establish for the German Federation (Bundesstaat Deutschland) a governmental structure which will protect rights of Laender and contain guarantees of individual rights and freedom. In particular, constitution must provide that: (A) legislature is bicameral, with one Chamber representing the states; (B) chief of state (if any) is not directly elected and is not given direct emergency powers; (C) federation enjoys only those powers expressly delegated to it; (D) Laender have a minimum exclusive power of legislation and administration in fields of education, culture, and religious affairs, public health, public welfare, police and local government; (E) Laender have sufficient independent sources of revenue to carry out their functions.

5. Constituent Assembly will also prepare transitional provisions which will lay down procedure for ratification of constitution, and holding of elections as provided in constitution. These transitional provisions must provide that when at least two-thirds of Laender participating in Constituent Assembly have ratified constitution it will come into force and be binding upon all participating Laender. They must also provide for establishment of the government of the German federation within thirty days after entry into force of constitution.

6. Constitution and transitional provisions will be submitted to Military Governors to determine their compliance with general principles stated above before they are put to Laender for ratification.

7. Constituent Assembly will be prorogued as soon as its tasks have been completed. It may, however, set up, in transitional provisions, committee of one representative from each of proposed Laender which, in cooperation with Land governments, will ensure execution of transitional provisions and establishment of the institutions provided for in constitution.

8. Prior to entry into force of constitution, there shall be a determination of control and administrative powers which occupying authorities intend to retain as regards both proposed government of the German federation and the governments of the Laender.

Douglas

1 The reference here is to the Final Report of Working Party No. 5 of the Military Governors’ Conference at Berlin, document MGC/P(48) 8, April 9, p. 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]. Document TRI/4, March 4 of the London Conference on Germany is not printed, but its substance is set forth in telegram 894, Delsec 1616, March 5, from London, p. 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88].

2 Not printed; it transmitted the text of the “Clay paper” on the political structure for Western Germany (862.011/4–1648). The essential substance of that paper was reported upon in telegram 821, April 9, from Berlin, p. 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/4–3048: Telegram

[Document 136]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, April 30, 1948—5 p. m.

1551. Secdel 1568. Dept gratified with progress in discussion of German political organization (Delsec 1696 Apr 281 ). Without desiring to intervene in current negotiations, as evidence of interest Dept offers following comment on two general issues, both suggested by Brit redraft.

(1) Consider summons to Constituent Assembly might be so stated as to leave open possibility for any German Land to send delegates. We interpret paragraph 1 Brit redraft thus. In this way Constituent Assembly can present itself as establishing, not merely a Western German government, but in principle an all-German government. Presumably Soviet Mil authorities will not permit Eastern Zone Laender to participate, in which case jurisdiction of constitutionally established government will be restricted to Western Zone only through action of Sov authorities or Eastern Zone Land governments.

(2) German federation should be translated “Bundesstaat Deutschland” as in para four Brit redraft. If French were to propose German word Staatenbund, which is closer their original thoughts, it should not be accepted. If French raise point, you might indicate that in centennial year of 1848 Frankfurt Congress it is hardly appropriate to attempt foist on Germans political concepts which ante-date 1848.

Marshall

1  Supra.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 EW/4–3048: Telegram

[Document 137]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, April 30, 1948—7 p. m.

1561. For the Ambassador.

1. It has been Dept’s intention to ask you to discuss reparation deliveries to Soviet satellites with Brit and French when policy decision on subject is reached here (re Delsec 1699, April 291 ). Following is present status of problem.

2. Dept’s view is that deliveries to Soviet satellites should be continued except in case of products to be withheld on security grounds. In determining what should be withheld, Dept believes same general policy should be followed as in field of trade relations with countries in Soviet orbit. US policy is to deny to these countries, in addition to military supplies, products of direct significance to war production, and those the denial of which would affect production in key sectors of economies of Soviet orbit countries.2

3. In formulating its views, Dept has had in mind that US restrictions would be ineffective unless it is possible equally to deny Soviet orbit access to alternative sources of supply, particularly ERP countries, Western Germany and Canada. In order obtain cooperation of other countries to such policy and to avoid undue restrictions on East–West trade, it is clear goods to be denied Soviet orbit will have to be kept to a small and relatively important list.

4. Study is under way here by technical committee to determine weak spots in economy of Soviet orbit which would be affected by denial of exports. Meanwhile, a preliminary list has been worked out for purposes of consideration of current export licenses, copy of which is being air pouched to you. Dept believes this list not entirely satisfactory and hopes it will be substantially refined and clarified as result of study mentioned above. Dept believes this will call for reducing its scope, but is not certain this view will be accepted.

5. As you probably know, all reparation and restitution deliveries from US zone to Soviet satellites were suspended by Gen. Clay some weeks ago. In response to his request for instructions, he was told of policy decision on US trade referred to above and asked to apply it to reparation deliveries. While he apparently thought he could apply it in the case of restitution, he did not think he could in the case of reparations. There are about thirty thousand tons of equipment from Category One war plants awaiting delivery to satellites. Although this is general purpose equipment (specialized equipment having been destroyed), Clay pointed out that source of this equipment made it necessarily war potential.

6. Dept has proposed withholding of undelivered equipment which is on present working list of goods to be denied Soviet orbit on strategic grounds, and resumption of deliveries of all other equipment. Adjustments would be made in subsequent allocations to satellites to take into account equipment thus withheld. Army Dept has questioned feasibility and desirability of attempting to apply list to goods now awaiting removal, which Army estimates would in large part fall in the category of goods to be withheld. We are examining with Army inventories of equipment allocated to satellites to see if we can reach agreement on facts and practicability of making segregation of kind we propose.

7. Early decision here important before end IARA Assembly meeting in Brussels beginning May 4 at which Czechs have given notice they will raise question of their suspension of deliveries to them. Dept hopes policy decision will be reached early next week.

8. When matter is taken up with Brit and French, they will undoubtedly raise question of our attitude toward shipment from ERP countries, particularly in light of Section 117(d) of Economic Cooperation Act. We will wish discuss this question with them, but feel this aspect of matter should await completion of more detailed studies here on strategic factors and appraisal of effect of applying restrictions to East–West trade. However, we think that decisions can be made in near future with respect to reparations and restitution deliveries from Germany and hope that we will be able to obtain their cooperation and support in such policies. We think it should also be possible to apply the policies parallel to US export policy rather quickly to bizone trade with Soviet sphere. We have discussed with Dorr the line of action we propose and manner in which we would attempt to fit this into the framework of IARA activities and Paris Reparation Agreement (re second para Delsec 1699). We suggest that, when time for discussion with Brit and French is reached, you ask him to come to London to give you further background and to assist you in your discussions.

9. Definitive instructions will be telegraphed soon as possible. Until then any expression US views should be entirely tentative.

Marshall

1 Not printed. In it Ambassador Douglas reported that there would soon be some discussion at the London Conference of the broad question of reparations to the U.S.S.R. and the Satellites. Douglas asked for guidance regarding the resumption of reparations deliveries to the U.S.S.R. and the Satellites, (740.00119 EW/4–2948)

2 Documentation regarding United States policy on trade with the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe is included in volume iv .

Editorial Note [Document 138]

Editorial Note

American, British, and French proposals for a paper on the political organization of Western Germany were discussed at several private meetings of the heads of the three delegations and at meetings of a Drafting Committee appointed to prepare a paper reconciling the three proposals. These meetings, held on April 28, 29, and 30, eventuated in several successive redactions of a paper incorporating the agreed positions of the three delegations. A version of this paper, designated document TRI/13 (2nd Revise), dated April 30, was transmitted to the Department in telegram 1869, Delsec 1702, April 30, from London, neither printed (740.00119 Council/4–3048). At an informal meeting of the delegations on April 30, it was agreed to prepare, on the basis of document TRI/13 (2nd Revise), two draft communications to the American, British, and French Military Governors. One communication was a draft letter of advice to the Military Governors regarding the German Constitution. The first version of this communication, designated document TRI/15, May 1, was transmitted to the Department in telegram 1883, Delsec 1704, May 1, from London, neither printed (740.00119 Council/5–148). The second communication was a draft letter of advice to the Military Governors regarding the definition of the relationship between the constitutional German government and the Allied occupation authorities. The first preliminary draft of this letter, prepared by the British Delegation, was transmitted in telegram 1884, Delsec 1705, May 1, from London, not printed (740.00119 Council/5–148). Later drafts of this letter were in the TRI/17 Conference documentation series.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–148: Telegram

[Document 139]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, May 1, 1948—5 p. m.

1882. Delsec 1706. Re Delsec 1699, April 29.1 There was informal discussion of reparations deliveries and allocations Friday evening between heads of delegations and assistants.2

Strang reported Bevin’s views as follows: In view of certain contemplated steps including announcement currency reform3 and probable announcement re organization of German Government which will be distasteful to Soviets, it would be “overloading the board” to discontinue reparation deliveries to them at this time. For this reason and in view of fact that Soviets are making timely reciprocal deliveries, it is British position that quadripartite allocations should be resumed and that deliveries to Soviets on some basis should be continued. He proposed calling a meeting of quadripartite council4 for purposes making allocations on regular Potsdam basis. Strang indicated that he was authorized to negotiate with heads other delegations only regarding possible announcement to Soviets that henceforth reciprocal deliveries must be made on current basis.

Douglas with General Clay’s full concurrence expressed in emphatic terms view that it would ‘be most unwise and inadvisable for the three western powers to make an attempt at this time to reconvene the ACC for the purpose of making new quadripartite allocations. Such action on our part would be a sign of weakness and would be so interpreted by the Soviets. General Clay expressed view that such a move particularly if coupled with a resumption of deliveries to the Soviet at this time would have disastrous political effect in Germany. Douglas recommended that there be tripartite announcement to effect that because of the Soviet “walk-out” from the ACC and their continued violation of various important provisions of Potsdam agreement, the other three powers will undertake allocations on tripartite basis. The Soviet share might be allocated but their share would be “put on ice” and delivery thereof indefinitely postponed. (British technical adviser voiced opinion that it would be practically feasible to do this.)

Massigli supported fully this statement of US position and said that in the French view the most important aspect of entire matter is to make sure that reparations deliveries to the Western European nations be resumed at earliest possible date. French fear that any attempted resumption quadripartite allocation will delay indefinitely deliveries to the west and they therefore favor immediate tripartite allocation. French consider time of the essence because they are convinced that if matter is delayed until establishment of German Government, there will be so much resistance to reparations that they will never be realized. Concerning the technical cloud on title in consequence to tripartite allocations, Massigli felt certain that the western nations would overlook this technicality because of their great desire to receive reparations. French do not believe that Soviet point of view will be significantly affected by any action western nations may take concerning reparations.

Douglas then requested views of other regarding deliveries to satellites. Strang ventured opinion that satellites should not be excluded from normal deliveries following IARA allocations. However, he appeared favorably impressed by Massigli’s recommendation that full IARA allocations be made but that, without making announcement of any change in policy, deliveries to satellites be indefinitely postponed owing to “administrative difficulties”. Douglas said that US delegation saw much merit in Massigli’s proposal. Clay indicated that all deliveries to satellites from US Zone have been discontinued, and referred to provision of Potsdam agreement empowering zonal commanders to withhold reparation deliveries. There was general agreement that this procedure would be possible within framework IARA agreement and that satellites would be unsuccessful if upon discovery of intentions they should attempt block allocations.

Clay suggested that Soviets might possibly endeavor initiate quadripartite allocations and recommended that if they should make such a move, we should agree to participate quadripartite allocations but at the same time inform them that they will receive no deliveries until all our other conditions are met.

At conclusion of meeting Strang agreed to discuss entire matter again with Bevin in light of the positions and arguments of US and French delegations.

Sent Department 1882; repeated USPolAd Berlin for OMGUS 109.

Douglas

1 Not printed; it reported that the conferees at the London Conference on Germany would meet shortly to discuss reparations (740.00119 Council/4–3048).

2 According to Ambassador Murphy’s rough notes of this meeting, a copy of which was transmitted to John D. Hickerson under cover of a brief letter dated May 5, neither printed, those participating in the discussion were Strang, Massigli, Douglas, Clay, and Murphy (740.00119 EW/5–548).

3 Documentation regarding the projected currency reform in the Western zones of occupation of Germany is included in chapter vi.

4 i.e., the Allied Control Council for Germany. Documentation on the breakdown of quadripartite administration in Germany is included in chapter vi.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–748

[Document 140]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson)

secret
personal Berlin, May 2, 1948.

Dear Jack : As the London meeting began on April 20, it might be well to put a few points on paper to outline the present position and progress which has been made up to this time. It is my belief that we shall come out of this meeting with joint recommendations regarding the Ruhr and political organization for Western Germany.

About the agreement on the Ruhr—it was I who inspired the question regarding whether such an agreement could be made on an executive basis or whether Congressional approval would be required. I was glad to see the Department’s reply to the effect that the opinion is held that the executive has the authority to make such an agreement.1 It is such a fundamental issue involving so many things that I believe there will be manifest at some stage an active Congressional interest. Basically, General Clay remains opposed in principle to such an agreement and he drafted a letter to Lew Douglas, stating his belief that an agreement for the international control of the Ruhr is wrong in principle. He read the letter to Lewis who asked him not to transmit it to him until he had a chance to think it over further.

Trizonal fusion. On April 29 I attended a meeting with Douglas and Clay and Massigli, General Koenig, Couve de Murville and Saint Hardouin regarding trizonal fusion. The net French position was stated very simply to be that they agree to joining JEIA (in principle). By “in principle” it was understood they mean that they desire to join JEIA but must examine the financial implications which this will have. The following day we had a three-cornered meeting with Strang, Massigli and their staffs at which Mr. Douglas opened with an account of the informal meeting with the French, stating that the French had agreed to fusion in principle as well as to the United States having a dominant voice in JEIA. Strang stated the question whether the French should be permitted to join JEIA and, if so, at what time this action should be taken. Massigli stated that of course an examination of the dollar position would be necessary and stated the question whether it might not be better to have preliminary tripartite discussions in Berlin first in an endeavor to settle the financial features of the problem.

Strang repeatedly made references to the practicability of the French joining JEIA in advance of the complete economic fusion as provided in the original US/UK agreement. He felt that to accomplish this, negotiation should take place on governmental level and at this point suggested that it will be necessary to explore the effect which French participation would have on the present revised fusion agreement which expires December 31, 1948. Strang placed pointed emphasis on the date of expiration of the present fusion agreement, creating an impression that the United Kingdom definitely intends to make further effort to obtain relief from the present so-called dominant voice which the United States now exercises in the economic control of Bizonia.

General Clay at this stage pointed out that the United States is now in the position of advancing funds to the French Zone. For the immediate purpose, he suggested, we believe that acceptance by the French of the charter of JEIA would suffice. There would remain certain basic questions such as the amount of the French contribution, etc.:

Strang also pointed out that the British would have an interest in the terms of trade with other areas and also an active interest in the question of convertibility. These two points would require serious consideration.

Mr. Douglas inquired whether the French would join JEIA’s charter with the understanding that we will then explore what effect this action would have on the fusion agreement.

At this point Strang suggested the text of what he called an unofficial chairman’s draft as follows: “It is agreed in principle that the trade of the French Zone should be brought into the JEIA procedure not later than the first of July under the general terms of the JEIA charter.

“The implications of this will be examined forthwith at ________ by ________ and a report presented to governments.

“It is agreed in principle that any additional liabilities to provide capital or to convert currencies arising from this step should fall on France.”

Mr. Massigli then referred to the statement that acceptance in principle is subject to condition that the implications arising therefrom must be studied particularly with regard to whether this step would increase French liabilities. He made it quite clear that this means that France is in favor of joining JEIA but before doing so must examine all implications. General Koenig made several references to his responsibility as administrator of the French Zone and that whatever action might be taken toward fusion must not increase the costs of operating the French Zone as far as the French treasury is concerned.

Mr. Douglas stated pointedly that the speed with which the French Zone joins Bizonia will have an effect upon the amount of ERP funds which become available for the French Zone. If delayed it will have an adverse effect on funds ECA may allocate. Mr. Douglas’s statement had a visible effect on General Koenig who said that he had never realized that the European Recovery Program would involve such a policy.

Strang then made a statement to the following effect—we want a provisional German government soon and to do that joining of the French Zone at an early date is necessary. The United States considers joining of JEIA at an early date is feasible in advance of a general fusion agreement. The United Kingdom considers this would be desirable but must examine the implications.

Mr. Douglas added that we think that this action should be taken by July 1.

The meeting was then adjourned in order to give the delegations opportunity to reflect on the question.

There is one more point I would add in this letter and that relates to the Benelux. Up to this point they have not been brought into the discussions of the paper on political organization. However, Strang by agreement received the Netherlands Ambassador on April 29 and reported to him generally what had happened up to that time. Strang gave him no texts but told him broadly how we were proceeding. Verduynen raised several points regarding the status of the Benelux delegation. Strang made the following personal observations: (1) There are some items which had been previously discussed in the presence of Benelux such as the Ruhr problem; (2) Other questions were exclusively of tripartite interest such as fusion; and (3) The question of political organization lies in between. Benelux would not be party to the recommendation which would eventually be made but Benelux would be asked at an appropriate time to give their views.

On the question of whether Benelux should be consulted before the Military Governors make an announcement regarding political organization, it was agreed that this was almost impossible because it would risk tying up the eventual constitution for Western Germany. General Clay suggested that we might adopt the procedure of consultation with the political advisers in Berlin as recently agreed.

The Netherlands Ambassador also asked whether the Western German constitution would say anything about external boundaries as he wanted to preserve Benelux claims. It was agreed that it would not be necessary for the constitution to mention this subject. It belongs in the peace settlement. Blanket reservation regarding frontiers could be included in the peace settlement. Massigli made the point that in his opinion the Benelux claims for frontier rectification should be settled before the German government is established. Mr. Douglas offered the opinion that we shall limit our action here to the procedural question of setting up a boundary commission to deal with the problem. Strang stated that the Benelux should have an opportunity if it desired to re-state their claims.

I had hoped to write you more frequently but we have made several trips to Germany during this brief interval and I have been too pressed for time to do so. I shall hope to write you further in a day or two. We are in Berlin over the weekend and returning to London tomorrow morning.

Yours ever,

Robert Murphy

1 The question under reference here was contained in telegram 1751, April 27, from London, and the Department’s reply was sent in telegram 1512, April 28, to London, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–2848).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–348: Telegram

[Document 141]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent London, May 3, 1948—1 p. m.

1890. Delsec 1710. Agree with your paragraph 2 Deptel 1551, April 30 (Secdel 1568).1 As to paragraph 1, entertain considerable doubts because: 1. Soviet military authorities might take the opportunity to permit delegates from eastern zone’s Laender to attend. In this event, even though delegates were chosen by elections, we could be certain they would be of Soviet selection, subservient to their orders.

2. These delegates would presumably be under instructions to use the Assembly as a platform for propaganda, as an instrument for sowing the seeds of discord among the western Laender and for attempting to persuade delegates to reject such private and friendly counsel to the German delegates as the occupying powers, during the course of the deliberations, may give.

3. Even though the delegates from the Soviet Laender were unsuccessful in dissuading the other delegates from accepting broad principles of the constitution which we desire, the five Laender in the Soviet zone might, with two or three Laender in the western zones, by, rejecting the constitution, delay or prevent the acceptance of the constitution by ⅔ of the Laender, which will probably be a condition precedent to making the constitution effective.

These doubts were expressed at a meeting with the French and British delegations, and generally concurred in by them. In subsequent papers the language in the British re-draft, to which your cable refers, was deleted, no distinction is made between the Laender of the western zones and the Laender of the eastern zone, phrases like “various states” are used, and the matter is left to the Ministers President to determine. However, under the latest draft the military governors will make the communication to the Ministers President, presumably of the western Laender.

Suggest that the best method of avoiding the appearance of a purely western German government, is to make it clear that additional Laender may at any time, by accepting the constitution and establishing for each a Laender constitution not inconsistent with the constitution for the German government as a whole, join the federation. This either the Ministers President will probably do, or the constitution itself will make provision for, or both devices will be used.

Hope you agree. Appreciate your comments and hope you will give them to us unsparingly.

Douglas

1  Ante, p. 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–348: Telegram

[Document 142]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent London, May 3, 1948—9 p. m.

1909. Delsec 1712. Department will note that the only remaining difference of substance with respect to guiding instruction to military governor on German constitution, regarding Delsec 1704, May 1,1 turns on the issue of whether there should be specific limitation of the powers of the Central Government in fields of public health, public welfare and police. We shall endeavor to avoid specific mention of these limitations or prohibitions leaving the initiative in the distribution of specific powers to the Germans as provided in Department’s position paper on political organization for Germany.

British and French, however, have expressed preference for specification of these limitations in the letter of instruction. The latter in particular are insistent that the Central Government shall not be granted police, public health, and public welfare powers. As Department will see, we have proposed alternate language for this paragraph. Because of the necessity of granting the Federal Government a restricted measure of enforcement powers and to provide against the possibility that the Communists might obtain control of a single Land, General Clay urges that the Federal Government be granted limited police powers sufficient to take care of emergencies. In the field of public health and public welfare it was also considered desirable that some standardization be provided and sufficient latitude granted the Federal Government to accomplish this purpose.

It is understood the Department’s previous position was that these powers should not be granted the Federal Government but I understand there may be a modification of this position as regards the police powers under discussion in the Department of the Army.

Urgent instructions requested.

Douglas

1 Not printed, but see the editorial note, p. 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/5–348: Telegram

[Document 143]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret
us urgent Washington, May 4, 1948—7 p. m.

1599. Secdel 1568. Dept supports your position re limitation powers Central Government in fields public health, public welfare and police (urtels 1909, May 3,1 and 1883 May 1,2 para C). Believe desirable avoid sweeping and arbitrary prohibition these fields which might seriously handicap effectiveness central authority. Without departing from principle that primary police and internal security controls be vested in Laender, Dept considers carefully restricted police powers might be given Central Government in matters where enforcement own essential powers is involved. Consideration might perhaps be given to authorization of a small mobile gendarmerie under Central Government authority.3 With regard to possible danger that communists or other groups might gain control single Land, Central Government might also be empowered to call upon police forces of other Laender to deal with situation.

Above represents State and Army tentative views. Please keep us currently informed since Army is preparing special study this problem.

Appreciate validity your comments on proposal in Deptel 1551 Apr 30.4 Objective Dept had in mind seems to be fully met in alternative suggestion proposed urtel 1710 May 35

Marshall

1  Supra.

2 Not printed, but see the editorial note, p. 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138].

3 Telegram 1611, May 5, to London, not printed, modified these instructions. The telegram stated that the Army considered any current attempt to organize a Gendarmerie to be premature, although it might be instituted at the time of, or in contemplation of, the withdrawal or reduction of occupation troops. The Army further considered that the size of the Gendarmerie and the Police should be strictly limited to such a size as might be agreed upon among the Allies. (740.00119 Council/5–348)

4  Ante, p. 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137].

5  Ante, p. 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/5–448: Telegram

[Document 144]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret
niact Washington, May 4, 1948—8 p. m.

1601. Secdel 1570. Dept continues feel that allocations to IARA shld be on basis individual Zone Commander’s notification (para 3, Deptel 1442, Apr 221 ) especially in view previous acceptance by IARA of allocations from Brit and French zones on this basis. Assumed that tripartite action referred to Delsec 17062 contemplates this procedure being followed simultaneously but not jointly by the Zone Commanders. Dept’s views regarding deliveries to satellites contained Deptel 1561, Apr 30.3 Examination of inventories referred to therein by Dept indicates that probably more than half of tonnage of equipment allocated to satellites from US zone wld be deliverable on basis indicated Deptel 1561. Further discussions being carried on with Army Dept.

Dept cannot agree that there is unrestricted authority vested in Zone Commander arbitrarily to withhold reparation deliveries which have been previously agreed to for release by him and allocated to IARA by full quadripartite action. Dept willing support withholding only where strong reasons based upon direct US interests can be offered in explanation. IARA allocation only official act upon which delivery of equipment to a particular country is based and therefore IARA allocation presumes delivery. IARA allocation process frequently requires one country yield its claim for specific equipment against guarantee that other equipment will be received.

Suggest you consult Dorr re probable effect restriction satellite deliveries upon IARA allocation arrangements. Dept inclined feel that allocations by IARA shld be honored by delivery except where the items involved fall within the ban described in Deptel 1561, and that utmost efforts be made within limits Paris Act and rules of IARA to prevent future allocation any equipment on prohibited list. Gen Clay has reported previously that administrative delays offer insufficient ground avoiding delivery satellite nations. The informal stop-order he has issued has led to current efforts Yugos and Czechs bring matter officially before IARA.

Dept agrees that initiative shld not be taken re quadripartite allocations. In event Soviets seek quadripartite allocations without reference other quadripartite matters, Dept feels that US rep shld not participate in any such limited discussions. In event circumstances change in such way as to make comprehensive quadripartite discussion feasible and desirable, reparation allocations will be considered in the light of all circumstances then obtaining. No inclination here, however, agree to any allocations to Soviets except on basis current exchange for reciprocal commodities up to 15% of total amounts equipment becoming available and in no event permitting delivery equipment falling within limits Deptel 1561.

Agreement Cabinet members concerned has now been obtained permit notices of availability to IARA those plants on approved lists No. 1–4 which were given to Brit and French during Tech Mission’s discussion at London (London’s 1487, Apr 104 ). Agreement is subject to reservation, however, that any new facts developed by Tech Mission before its return cld be made basis for requesting withdrawal any particular plant. Since this list was further discussed in Germany, however, and list of plants in US zone which were not to be studied confirmed, list is believed quite firm. If necessary working party can be requested provide lists of plants which can be allocated immediately upon reassembling in Wash. In any event working party will have completed its work before any official allocation action can be taken by IARA.

Rptd Brussels for Dorr as 658, USPolAd, Berlin as 786.

London requested repeat Delsec 1706 to Brussels for Dorr.

Marshall

1  Ante, p. 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130].

2 May 1, p. 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139].

3  Ante, p. 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137].

4  Post, p. 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–548: Telegram

[Document 145]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, May 5, 1948—10 p. m.

1958. Delsec 1717. Informal meeting heads of delegations this morning discussed draft letter to military governors regarding powers of civil and military governments.1 (Working Party text transmitted in Delsec 1716). Strang stressed fact this draft did not commit delegations and that British had several important reservations of general nature to make in Working Party text. Robertson indicated British attached great importance to contractual aspect which not included in draft letter. In British view statute had two objectives, (1) to define limitation of Allied authority and (2) to make sure Germans assumed responsibility with respect to powers left to them. He felt letter as drafted put too much emphasis on powers retained by Allies, was not sufficiently positive and might not ensure Germans assumed responsibilities because did not envisage making them party to statute.

Clay made point no German government could survive after being forced approve statute. Therefore, it was necessary to impose it. On other hand he envisaged German people being fully informed its contents before voting for constitution. Thus ratification would imply acceptance by German people of powers reserved to MG. This had contractual aspect without involving German Government.

Couve de Murville, speaking for French in Massigli’s absence, agreed with US point of view and Strang appeared impressed with Clay argument. He asked for further enlightenment on manner in which Clay envisaged letter of instructions to Military Governors would be used and succeeding steps to be taken by Military Governors. Clay stated that constitution should be drafted without reference to MG or powers to be reserved to MG so that it might have chance of surviving after occupation. Steps might be as follows: (1) Confidential letter from governments to military governors along general lines of present draft would provide necessary useful guidance to military governors. (2) Military governors, consulting with ministers-president, would then collaborate on paper describing in general way powers to be reserved to MG; this would be made available to Constituent Assembly upon its convocation; (3) Later after constitution drafted and after consultations with drafting body (Constituent Assembly) military governors would define in greater detail powers to be retained by them, in commenting on specific articles in constitution. This would be part of formal communication approving constitution and would have force of German law. It would be published (presumably together with occupation statute) and available to Germans voting on ratification.

Couve de Murville brought up question of procedures for exercising control over German Governments and circulated French proposal for two additional paragraphs to be inserted after Paragraph 2.

Verbatim text. “Paragraph 3. Military governors shall exercise the above-mentioned controls, jointly on federal government and individually on governments of the states, according to following procedure: (a) Any amendment to constitution shall be submitted to approval of military governors, as provided in Article 7 of (paper on political organization);

(b) In fields mentioned in Article I (A) to (I), German authorities shall comply with decisions or directions of military governors;

(c) Whenever not otherwise provided, in particular for implementation of Paragraph (b) above, all laws and regulations from German authorities shall come into force automatically within 21 days unless disapproved by military governors, after majority vote, whenever federal government is concerned.

Paragrah 4. Appointments to important functions shall be subject to approval by military governors.”

Clay indicated general acceptance of substance of French paper except Paragraph 4. Couve de Murville also brought up question of complications in Allied control which might result from any changes in Land boundaries, particularly those which affected two zones, e.g. Wuerttemberg-Baden. Clay felt it would be necessary to have integrated staffs at Land level in all Laender. He envisaged tripartite boards in each Land to ensure enforcement by Laender of federal law and also to take action on Laender legislation which appeared to be contrary to Laender or federal constitutions. He did not envisage maintaining MG staffs below Land level.

Robertson stated British had no intention withdrawing officers from Kreise. They believed it necessary for long time to come to have at least one officer per Kreis to act as go-between between troops and populace and to obtain information on what was going on throughout zone. These officers would have no real power and would not intervene in German governmental affairs. He felt, contrary to Clay’s experience in US Zone, that Germans welcomed presence of such officers. Couve de Murville agreed with Robertson that contact with Germans at local level was important. Clay disagreed, pointing out that removal of officers below Land level would stimulate Germans to assume responsibilities; leaving them there would have reverse effect even if their powers limited. He stressed need for uniformity of policies but did not believe this personnel problem presented insuperable difficulties, important question being coordination of control at Land and federal levels. He urged three powers act together in order to do away with present fences between zones. It is time, he said, to cast our lot together and to do so MG must be used to enforce orders from the center. Acting together meant acting on tripartite basis.

At this point Strang asked pertinent question whether three military governors in considering all such questions would have equal voice or whether there was any question of “another conception” which had recently been raised by USDel in rather surprising field (paper on international control of Ruhr).

Clay, backed by Douglas, replied three military governors would have equal voice and that quite different machinery was set up to handle that “other conception”. Clay recalled he was ready to accept French amendment.

Both British and French wished time to consider points raised in discussion and no time was fixed for next meeting on political organization matters. In meantime Clay and Robertson together with French representatives will endeavor reconcile views. Clay and Robertson will also endeavor agree on formula regarding definition of “people of the affected arenas” who will vote on any recommendations president may make for changes in Land boundaries.

No discussion today on unresolved points other two political papers. Deptel 1599 (Secdel 1568) May 42 replying to Delsec 17123 regarding police powers will be helpful when discussion this point resumed.

Sent Department 1958; repeated Paris 202, Berlin 118.

Douglas

1 The document under reference was TRI/17, May 3, not printed. The text of this document was transmitted to the Department in telegram 1933, Delsec 1716, May 4, from London, not printed (740.00119 Council/5–448). The Department’s comments on the draft letter were sent in telegram 1613, May 5, to London, not printed (740.00119 Council/5–548).

2  Ante, p. 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143].

3 May 3, p. 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–648: Telegram

[Document 146]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, May 6, 1948—10 p. m.

1978. Delsec 1721. Fifth plenary meeting resumed German talks this morning1 discussed Benelux memo of March 2, 1948 on role of German economy in European economy2 and Working Party report on protection of allied interests involving recommendations on procedure for dealing with report of Berlin Working Party No. 6.3 (Last plenary meeting took place April 23.4 In meantime work of conference has been proceeding by private meetings of heads of delegations and meetings of Working Parties.)

Hirschfeld (Netherlands), speaking for Benelux, proposed set up group to study long term aspects role of German economy in European economy. Problems to be studied in relation to effects future German economic developments would have on other countries.

Douglas emphasized German economic environment depends not on Germany alone but on general economic environment created by collective action other nations. In this connection he cited US attempts have MFN treatment applied to Germany and other occupied areas, proposal which had met considerable resistance.5 In general, he did not think this was appropriate place to study these complicated questions, many of which being studied in connection ITO Charter and OEEC.

Massigli raised population problem, suggesting Germany can export products or people as way out of its difficulties. He indicated French Government would in very near future approach allies with proposal to study this question which involved security as well as economic considerations.

Douglas pointed out this problem, like those raised by Benelux representative, depended on others than Germans, in this case on inclination of other countries to accept German immigrants.

Strang agreed with Douglas observations that Benelux proposal to set up study group would tend duplicate work of other groups.

Van Verduynen expressed willingness abide by decision of other delegates on this but stated he would examine exact nature of problems being studied elsewhere. He recognized that root many these matters might be taken up through OEEC and others with Military Government in Germany in accordance new arrangements made for consultation with Benelux representatives in Germany.

Meeting then discussed Working Party draft on protection allied interests (text appended). Discussion was limited to consideration Paragraph 1 since Benelux immediately suggested its revision to include principle of “equity for” as well as “non-discrimination against allied interests in Germany”. Van Verduynen felt strongly principle of non-discrimination did not go far enough and made it plain he had in mind principle of protection, which, under questioning by Douglas, appeared to mean privilege.

Douglas stated it was impossible accept principle beyond non-discrimination such as equity or protection since these expressions might be easily misinterpreted. In fact Benelux conception seemed to involve more than protection proprietary interests and to include claims, which not within scope of present discussion. Principle of non-discrimination appeared to afford fair treatment. He emphasized US also concerned with protection US property interests in Germany which probably greater than those of any other country.

Van Verduynen commented principle of non-discrimination meant that Dutch interests would be in no better position than German interests and stated plainly his government wanted more than that.

Strang stated Britain also concerned with protecting their interests and satisfied with principle non-discrimination. He too believed it unwise to add principle protection since meaning that term unclear. He felt clarification of term might result from studies proposed in Paragraph 4.

Douglas indicated US Delegation not prepared engage in joint studies since US position not yet established.

Meeting adjourned, discussions to be resumed later.

Verbatim text Working Party report follows:

[Here follows the text of document TRI/18, May 5, not printed. For the final text of this document, TRI/18 (Final) (Amendment), May 31, see page 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206].]

Sent Department 1978, repeated USPolAd Berlin 120, Paris 203, Moscow 74, The Hague 39, Brussels 67 (Brussels please keep Luxembourg informed), Oslo 36, Copenhagen 30, Stockholm 47, and Rome 122.

Douglas

1 This was the 17th Meeting of the London Conference on Germany.

2 The Benelux paper under reference here, entitled “The Role of German Economy in European Economy,” dated March 2, is not printed.

3 Under reference here is document TRI/18, May 5, entitled “Report of the Working Party set up to make recommendations on the procedure for dealing with the Report of Working Party No. 6,” not printed. The final report of Working Party No. 6 of the Military Governors’ Conference at Berlin is not printed, but a summary is contained in telegram 845, April 13, from Berlin, p. 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117].

4 For a report on the previous plenary meeting of the Conference, see telegram 1720, April 23, from London, p. 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132].

5 Documentation on the attempts of the United States to have most favored treatment applied to Germany is included among materials dealing with European Recovery Program in volume iii .

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–748: Telegram

[Document 147]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, May 7, 1948—4 p. m.

1987. Delsec 1722. Re Delsec 17061 and Secdel 15612 and 1570.3 Continued informal discussion reparations allocations and deliveries has resulted following developments.

Strang reported that there is now some disposition on part of British to meet US and French proposals regarding further allocations and deliveries to Soviets. With careful reservations he indicated that British now willing consider resumption allocations on joint three power basis very similar to that we proposed in March, namely, allocation 75% available plants to IARA; allocation 25% USSR upon understanding that 15% deliverable only on basis current exchange for reciprocal commodities and 10% withheld from delivery pending satisfactory resolution other outstanding disagreements under Potsdam. British probably willing make allocations to Soviet “provisional,” specifying that such allocations are not definitive or final but are conditioned upon Soviet willingness accept 15% on current exchange basis and upon compliance by Soviet other provisions Potsdam with respect to 10%. Both British and French feel that at least provisional allocations Soviet share necessary in order establish basis for offer current reciprocal deliveries and provide best possible defense against accusations arbitrary action and violation Potsdam. Apparently both British and French consider joint tripartite allocation preferable direct allocation by individual zone commanders although their position this aspect not maintained with particular force so far. USDel considers it advisable comply with British French desire this point if they press it and unless Dept has objection. USDel further believes that since current British proposal resembles so closely proposal advanced by US in March it will be extremely difficult insist now that there be no reciprocal deliveries even on current exchange basis. This point probably academic, however, since Soviets expected to reject offer current reciprocal deliveries even on current reciprocal deliveries [apparent garble] particularly when informed that delivery 10% to be indefinitely postponed. In any case plants offered for reciprocal deliveries would be subject careful selection by three military governments.

Regarding allocation and deliveries to IARA satellite nations British and French still favor full allocation and formal delivery. They expressed willingness to consider specific proposals regarding efforts regulate IARA allocations in such manner as to avoid allocations types plants which would significantly contribute satellite Soviet war potential although expressing doubts as to feasibility attempts prevent allocation all plants in any specified categories. French stressed point that there is no legal basis for denying allocations or deliveries to satellites and question our ability in all cases muster and maintain sufficient voting strength within IARA to guarantee Soviet [non] allocation objectionable plants. Any specific recommendations or additional thoughts which Department or Dorr can provide would be most useful.

General Clay believes Department’s formula satellite deliveries would be feasible but only if he is provided with list of specific plants and equipment or clean-cut definitive list of categories. He does not consider it practicable for him attempt to apply broadly expressed formula and does not wish to be placed in position of having to defend his interpretation and application such formula to satellite deliveries.

It would be helpful to have here lists of plants available for immediate allocation as suggested last paragraph Secdel 1570.4

Sent Department 1987; repeated Brussels for Dorr 78, and USPolAd Berlin 121.

Douglas

1 London telegram 1882, May 1, p. 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139].

2 Department telegram, April 30, p. 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137].

3 Department telegram 1601, May 4, p. 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 144].

4 Telegram 1689, Secdel 1575, May 10, to London, not printed, informed Ambassador Douglas of the Department of State’s general satisfaction with the new British proposal summarized here. The Department did express the view that allocation should be made through formal notices of availability from the individual zone commanders rather than through a formal tripartite allocation body which would be in conflict with the quadripartite mechanism for the administration of Germany. Furthermore, the Department was opposed to the allocation of 25% of the available plants to the U.S.S.R. to be delivered only on fulfillment by the Russians of specific conditions. The Department preferred an informal “set-aside” which would not include plants or items denied export licenses from the United States or likely to be especially useful for the European Recovery Program (740.00119 Council/5–748).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–1048: Telegram

[Document 148]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact London, May 10, 1948—4 p. m.

2017. Delsec 1725. Of the principal issues still remaining unsolved in the current talks on Germany, i.e. control of the Ruhr, political organization of Germany and security, it seems likely that agreement may be reached in respect of the first two early this week leaving only the question of security to be dealt with before the talks conclude. The French in particular are insistent that some agreement on security be announced as a result of these talks since otherwise it may be made to appear in France that they have made all concessions without compensation in the field so important to them. In the past few days there has been considerable publicity given to this French fear in the London press which also reflects a growing concern that the US is planning to reconstitute heavy German industry without adequate international control.

The security measures which the French have in mind may be divided into three major fields: disarmament and demilitarization including control of industry (prohibited industries and limited industries), continuation of Allied occupation and a treaty for consultation and guarantee among the Allies.

Under disarmament and demilitarization, the French expect to achieve tripartite agreement upon the prohibition of war industries as well as limitation of certain key industries. In this respect it might be possible to give satisfaction to the French if agreement could be reached here and announced regarding the establishment of some machinery to discuss and deal with this question of prohibited industries. The French also have asked for tripartite agreement that the General Staff and German armed forces should remain disbanded and that during the period of occupation an inspection service be established to carry out the necessary supervision and control of agreements reached. I should welcome your views as to the possibility of agreement in principle on the foregoing. The means of insuring compliance could be elaborated elsewhere.

With respect to the French desire to include permanent level of industry as a security measure, we have grave doubts as to the possibility or desirability or [of?] maintaining permanent economic controls over Germany and to fix its productive capacity for an indefinite future in which a wide variety of economic and technological developments cannot be foreseen.

It would be most helpful if in connection with the question of continued allied occupation we could agree to include in the final protocol or communiqué resulting from these meetings a reiteration of the assurances contained in the President’s statement of March 17 in respect of continued US occupation. Although the French are desirous of reaching agreement here and now upon occupation of the Rhineland and other critical areas in Germany after the general withdrawal of Allied troops, it would seem that this question was premature and should only be dealt with at the end of Allied occupation.

I shall request further clarification of the French desire to obtain some assurances in respect to a treaty of consultation and guarantee which in my opinion should more properly be dealt with in the overall arrangements for western European security. In this connection I assume however that the instructions contained in the Dept’s 691 February 281 still apply and that we may discuss the establishment of a military security board. Has the Dept any views in respect of the form of consultation envisaged in Delsec 1595 March 2.2

As we shall endeavor to conclude the discussions by May 13, leaving the communiqué to be prepared and issued over the week end, I should be grateful for the earliest possible expression of your views.

Douglas

1  Ante, p. 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67].

2  Ante, p. 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–1048: Telegram

[Document 149]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, May 10, 1948—5 p. m.

2019. Delsec 1726. At informal meeting between heads of delegations question was raised as to propriety and advisability of Benelux nations becoming actual parties to any general agreements which may be reached here and particularly the agreements regarding international control of Ruhr and future political organization for Germany. It is view of US/UK delegates that Benelux nations should not be parties to such agreements for reasons that their inclusion as parties would partake too much of nature of a peace treaty.1 If agreements were concluded as between three occupying powers this would preserve their nature as executive agreements, render them less vulnerable Soviet attack as violation of existing quadripartite agreements on Germany and avoid complaints of other countries that agreement with some characteristics of peace treaty had been authenticated by a few non-occupying powers to exclusion of other non-occupying powers.

Final views of Benelux not yet ascertained but some indication received that this would be acceptable to them. It is understood that their rights tinder agreements and in case of Ruhr agreement, nature and extent of role which they will play would not be affected.

Douglas

1 In telegram 1708, May 11, to London, not printed, the Department agreed with Ambassador Douglas’ position that the Benelux countries should, not become formal parties to agreements (740.00119 Council/5–1148).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–1148: Telegram

[Document 150]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, May 11, 1948—noon.

2032. Delsec 1728. At the meeting of the heads of delegation last night Massigli raised certain questions concerning security, the answers to which he said would greatly facilitate the agreement on this issue which is necessary for the conclusion of a general agreement in respect of Germany (refer Delsec 1725 May 101 ).

In discussing the length of allied occupation Massigli asked whether (1) in the opinion of the US and UK is continued occupation of Germany dependent upon Four Power agreement or would unilateral violation release other parties and if so is withdrawal by one of the three possible without consent of the other two; (2) would US and UK be prepared to agree not to withdraw their troops without prior (a) consultation or (b) agreement with France; (3) should the US and UK evacuate prior to the conclusion of a peace treaty would they agree to continued French occupation extended beyond present French Zone. Whereas I foresee it will be difficult to give categorical assurances in respect to the last two questions, any views you may send me urgently in this connection would be helpful. For example, might we indicate that US would agree to give assurances under (2) above for a specified period or until German peace treaty. In any event I should appreciate earliest reply to first question.

With respect to an agreement on consultation Massigli again asked whether some understanding in respect of Germany at this time could be reached and whether we could agree to consult with UK and France as to what steps might be taken if it appeared that Germany were developing an aggressive attitude or that there were a resurgence of German military strength.

I suggested the establishment of a military security board along the lines of Deptel 691 February 28,2 the general principles of which were acceptable to the French.

Douglas

1  Ante, p. 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 148].

2  Ante, p. 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–1148: Telegram

[Document 151]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, May 11, 1948—noon.

2035. For Lovett’s Eyes Only from Douglas. In the private conversations I have had with Massigli and Strang, the French are revealing a growing disquiet about the question of security. They are still apprehensive about Germany, and their apprehensions extend beyond such matters as prohibited industries as reported in Embtel 2017, Delsec 1725, May 10.1

Moreover, their preoccupation with security is heightened by their impression that we are growing cold about the general security problem. Their fears would, excepting for items such as prohibited industries, rapidly evaporate if they could get some assurance about the general security problem.

Are there any further developments? Can you give me any further advice?2

Douglas

1  Ante, p. 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 148].

2 In telegram 1707, May 11, to London, not printed, Under Secretary Lovett replied that “we are not in any sense ‘growing cold’ on general security problem.” Lovett explained that he had given the Senate Foreign Relations Committee a top secret account of Western Union developments and that Senator Vandenberg planned soon to have reported to the Senate a Committee resolution expressing the policy of the United States favoring regional and collective self-defense arrangements and the willingness of the United States to associate itself with such arrangements. Lovett further explained that the United States would soon begin talks in Washington with the British, French, and Benelux countries regarding general security, and that President Truman was prepared to authorize United States participation in London military talks aimed at concerting military plans in the event the Soviet Union resorted to aggression in Europe in the near future (840.00/5–1148). In telegram 1770, May 14, to London, not printed, Lovett transmitted the draft text of the Senate Resolution as worked out with Senator Vandenberg and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (840.00/5–1448). In telegram 1769, May 14, to London, Lovett authorized Ambassador Douglas to use the content and status of the Vandenberg Resolution set forth in telegram 1770 (840.00/5–1348).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/5–1048: Telegram

[Document 152]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, May 11, 1948—7 p. m.

1710. Personal for Douglas. Dept believes any tripartite agreement on German disarmament and demilitarization would be inadvisable since it might be construed as vitiating existing quadripartite engagements on this subject. (Delsec 17251 ) Dept shares your doubts re maintenance permanent economic controls over Germany and determination at this time of future productive capacity. As we understand it, one objective of Ruhr agreement was to provide that element of control necessary to insure that German resources would not be used for aggression. Under application of this control it is difficult to envisage that Germany could prepare for modern total warfare.

Dept recognizes depth of French feeling this subject and its internal political importance in France. We have given careful consideration to justifiable French security preoccupations about Germany and are prepared to give French reasonable satisfaction under the following sub-heads. Nevertheless present French tactics have some appearance of last-minute pressure campaign. We are confident you will meet it squarely and impress on French disastrous effects of failure of talks on security issue, which has far larger implications than Germany alone.

1. Dept agrees to reiteration and elaboration assurances in President’s statement Mar 172 re continued occupation, either in protocol or agreed communiqué. Please cable draft text this point.

2. You may point out to French that disarmament and demilitarization enforcement is one of powers reserved to miltary govt under projected occupation statute. These same matters will certainly be dealt with in any over-all settlement or German peace treaty.

3. We would agree to institution at any appropriate time of tripartite inspection and consultative board under mil govs dealing with German disarmament and suppression agreed prohibited industries (Deptel 691, Feb 283 ). Such board could be kept in continuous being or be convoked at request of one party. Along lines of inspectorate in Byrnes’ draft 40-year treaty, board could have authority to report and make recommendations, to govts through mil govs.

4. Separate telegram discusses general security situation. It can hardly be claimed that Germany under indefinite occupation can become danger pending development of a security system which will benefit by experience of devising procedures to meet far greater present threat to western Europe, including France.

Marshall

1 London telegram, May 10, p. 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 148].

2 The reference here is to a statement included in a Special Message to Congress on the Threat to the Freedom of Europe, delivered in person by President Truman to a Joint Session of Congress on March 17. For the text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Harry S. Truman 1948 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1964), item 52, p. 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 120], or Department of State Bulletin, March 28, 1948, p. 418.

3  Ante, p. 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–1248: Telegram

[Document 153]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, May 12, 1948—1 a. m.

2062. For Lovett’s Eyes Only from Douglas. Clay and Murphy returned from Berlin today when I discussed with both the language suggested in Delsec 1727, May 10,1 in connection with the paper on the international control of the Ruhr.

Clay and Murphy are vigorously opposed to the provision which requires the International Authority, during the existence of ECA and the OEEC, to make the division of coal, coke and steel in accordance with approved OEEC programs for the recovery of the participating countries, for the asserted reason that it relinquishes the US authority to exercise a dominant voice in regard to bizonal foreign trade.

The procedure which would be followed under the language to which Clay and Murphy take exception would be about as follows: The OEEC would prepare a program for the recovery of the participating countries into which Ruhr coal, coke and steel if any, for export would be fitted. Germany would be represented in the formulation of such a program. The vote for the bizonal area in OEEC in respect of all matters affecting foreign trade, including the export of coal, coke and steel if any, would be subject to the provisions of the Bizonal Fusion Agreement2 and JEIA subsequently be submitted to Washington where, in accordance with the procedure which I understand will be followed, it would be approved or modified by the Administrator3 at least as to the features of such programs which are associated with the expenditure of ECA funds. Thus in the first instance, the dominant voice of the US, through the Military Governor, would be expressed in the formulation of the program, and, in the instance, the approval of the US would be had through the action of the Administrator.

In event Administrator’s approval to the program, et cetera, is not required, Clay, being party to OEEC Charter and committed to participating in the formulation of such programs under Article 3, part I and other articles of the OEEC Charter, will have a dominant voice since: (a) Under Article 14 of part II of the Charter, decisions except in special cases must be made by mutual agreement; and (b) since in all matters affecting bizonal foreign trade US views are controlling.

When the substance of this procedure was explained to Clay and Murphy, the grounds for their objections were shifted; first, to the language of Article 14 of part II of the OEEC Charter under which that organization might make an exception in special cases so as to preclude bizonal representation from participating in the formulation of programs, thereby relinquishing US Military Governor’s control; and second, to the fact that the proposed language would, if Administrator’s approval is required, shift the final responsibility from the Military Governor in Germany to the Administrator.

As to the first point, it is not likely that the OEEC would invoke Article 14 of part II of the Charter to prevent bizonal area from participating in a program involving coal, coke and steel if any, for export to the other participating countries. It was not intended and can hardly be invoked for this purpose since determination of special cases must be by mutual agreement.

As to the second point, the language suggested in the third paragraph of Delsec 1727, May 10, provides that the Military Governors will proceed with the implementation of the findings of the international authority, subject to the terms of any agreements in regard to the extension of financial assistance to Germany which are now in existence or which may in the future be made; i.e., the present bizonal fusion agreement or any extension or modification thereof, or any trizonal agreement.

It is significant to point out that while the international control authority during the life of ECA, et cetera, must make allocations in accordance with approved OEEC programs, the Military Governors implement in accordance with the terms of any such financial agreement. This, it seems to me, protects the financial position of the US in any implementation of the findings made by the international control authority and submitted to the Military Governors in any circumstances and in all events, whether an OEEC program involving the export of coal, coke and steel if any, from Germany has been or has not been approved.

While Clay is disposed to concede that this is correct, he objects to it on the grounds that it might precipitate a conflict between the Administrator on the one hand and the Department of the Army or the Military Governor on the other. If, therefore, one examines Clay’s objections carefully, one finds it difficult to escape from the conclusion that his objection is not that the proposed language does not protect the financial interests of the US, but that it may on the one hand cause a conflict between him and the Administrator, or, on the other hand, shift the ultimate responsibility from him, as Military Governor, to the Administrator.

I do not have any pride of authorship in the language which has been suggested and have no doubt that it should be modified, but there is, it seems to me, much merit in the substance of the suggestion.

First, as to the authority of the international control board to allocate, in accordance with approved OEEC programs: (a) This seems to me to be a clear evidence that the US, through its position of responsibility in Germany, is prepared to do, in respect of the OEEC organization, precisely what we are suggesting that other countries do; namely, to play a part in the preparation of joint programs for the recovery of the participating countries. If we are not prepared to do this much, how can we expect other participating countries to do it?

(b) It has the effect of reducing the appearance, though not the fact, of US dominance to which I sense among the British, French and Benelux countries a growing apprehension and which the Communists will promptly use to confirm their previous assertions that the Ruhr has been turned over to American capitalists.

Second, as to the language which authorizes the Military Governors to implement the findings of the international control authority subject to the terms of any existing or future agreement regarding the extension of financial assistance to Germany; it seems to me that the US position is protected under all circumstances and in any event, and that it combines the US financial responsibility in Western Europe as a whole with our financial responsibility in Germany.

Clay at the moment is violently opposed to the proposal, particularly in regard to the OEEC, and is so advising the Department of the Army.

If you approve of the substance, however inadequately expressed in the language which I have suggested, I will continue to try to persuade Clay to go along.

While the content of the idea has not been formally presented to other delegations, a purely personal and informal discussion, which involved no commitment whatever, indicates that it will break the deadlock and result in agreement.

Would appreciate your advice.

Can you find any bug in this potato?

Douglas

1 Not printed.

2 The U.S.–U K. Bizonal Fusion Agreement of December 2, 1946 as amended December 17, 1947; for texts, see Germany 1947–1949, pp. 450–460.

3 The Administrator of the European Cooperation Administration.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–1248: Telegram

[Document 154]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, May 12, 1948—5 p. m.

2072. Delsec 1732. Informal meeting heads of delegations with principal advisers yesterday afternoon1 discussed paper on German political organization and draft letters on constitution and on powers of civil and military governments.2 Benelux Delegation also present, having been furnished copies three papers under discussion day before. Van Verduynen registered complaint against exclusion Benelux Delegation from preliminary talks. He felt problem German political organization was of vital interest to Benelux whose representatives were at decided disadvantage being brought in this late stage without background earlier discussions.

Strang explained subject dealing with government for three western zones was primary concern of three occupying powers, involving their relations vis-à-vis one another and German authorities. For this reason representatives of occupying powers had decided first consult together in drawing up preliminary papers and now welcomed Benelux observations. Strang reminded Benelux Delegation that he had some days ago given quite detailed story on progress of preliminary talks.

In reply to question re Soviet reactions to setting up government in Western Germany, Douglas stated USDel believes failure to proceed with next logical steps this direction would be construed by Soviets as sign of weakness and that we need not be concerned that our actions may provoke Soviets. As things are now we must think of arresting Soviets.

Massigli indicated he was not as convinced as Douglas that steps contemplated in papers under discussion were unrelated to Soviet reactions. He felt this question should be discussed later with reference particularly to timing of publication of decisions and mapping course of action in face of possible Soviet actions such as setting up government in Eastern Germany.

Meeting then discussed three draft papers with following results.

Paper on Political Organization: French continue to reserve position with respect to bracketed phrases in paragraphs 2 and 4. Massigli stated he was not refusing accept US–UK position on election as distinct from designation of members to Constituent Assembly but at the moment French Delegation preferred leave question in suspense.

Benelux were inclined to think designation by Laender governments was preferable. If it were decided that delegates should be elected, Benelux hoped ratification would be on basis of plebiscite.

Benelux also pointed out modifications of Laender boundaries might affect external boundaries as well. In view of well-known Benelux territorial claims they wanted understanding that any international boundary modifications would not prejudice such Benelux claims. It was agreed Benelux would put views in writing in letter to Chairman.

Robertson reported results his discussions with Clay and Koenig on interpretation of “people of affected areas” (paragraph 2) as it affected problem North Rhineland-Westphalen. He envisaged three possible recommendations by Ministers-President: (1) That North Rhineland be separated from Westphalen as separate Land; (2) that part of North Rhineland west of Rhine [be] separated from Westphalen and be joined to South Rhineland; and (3) that South Rhineland be joined to North Rhineland-Westphalen.3

In case (3) should be recommended, Military governments [Governors] should veto proposal unless there were general policy agreement that Western Germany consist of few large states. If (2) recommended, people of North Rhineland west of Rhine and people of South Rhineland should decide question by simple majority vote. If (1) recommended, people of North Rhineland would vote as well as people of Westphalen. If former were in favor of separation, separation would occur only if one-third total vote both areas approved, Massigli was opposed to principle that people of Westphalen should have any say in the matter and suggested it would be better to agree that separation would be authorized if two-thirds North Rhineland vote favored separation. British willing to set figure at 75%. US ready accept whatever figure British and French work out between them.

Draft letter on constitution: British and French accepted US proposed language for paragraph 1(C) on understanding military governments would endeavor agree prior to September 1 on exact nature police powers permitted federal government. All delegates agreed in principle that federal government would have to have limited police powers but felt it was unnecessary for purposes of draft letter on constitution to attempt go into details. (This draft letter is now agreed.)

Draft letter on powers of civil and military governments: (Discussion based on revised paper presented by Robertson after discussions with Clay and Koenig. (Following is text of agreed paper as it emerged from meeting. Letter now agreed except for French reservation re paragraph 3(D). French raised point in that connection that probably boundary changes crossing zonal lines may leave French zone commander without capital city and with, uncertain jurisdiction. Begin verbatim text.

[Here follows the text of document TRI/17 (Second Revise), May 11, 1948, not printed. For the definitive version of this paper, see document TRI/17 (Final), May 19, page 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170].]

Sent Department 2072, repeated USPolAd Berlin 126 and AmEmbassy Paris 212.

Douglas

1 This was the 2nd Informal Meeting of the London Conference on Germany.

2 The documents under consideration at this meeting were: document TRI/13 (3rd Revise), May 4, entitled “Political Organisation”, not printed (for the final version of the document, see TRI/13 (Final), May 31, p. 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205]); document TRI/15 (Revised), May 4, entitled “Letter of Advice to Military Governors Regarding German Constitution”, not printed (for the final version, see TRI/15 (Final), May 12, infra); document TRI/17 (Revised), May 7, entitled “Letter of Advice to Military Governors Regarding Powers of Civil and Military Governments”, not printed (for the final version, see TRI/17 (Final), May 19, p. 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]).

3 The proposals summarized here were subsequently incorporated in a Conference document (TRI/19 (Final), May 26) included as an annex to TRI/13 (Final), May 31, p. 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205].

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 118: File—TRI Documents

[Document 155]

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany 1

secret

TRI/15 (Final)

Letter of Advice to Military Governors Regarding German Constitution

1. The Governments of the three Occupying Powers recognise that there are several ways in which the decentralised Federal Government provided in TRI/13 (Final)2 can be obtained, and that it is impossible to determine if the Constitution satisfies the requirements of a decentralised Federal Organisation until it has been examined in its whole context.
However, the three Governments believe that a desirable governmental structure for Germany should, to the maximum extent possible, provide: a. For a bicameral legislative system in which one of the houses must represent the individual states and must have sufficient power to safeguard the interests of the states;

b. That the executive must only have those powers which are definitely prescribed by the Constitution and that emergency powers, if any, of the executive must be so limited as to require prompt legislative or judicial review;

c. That the powers of the Federal Government shall be limited to those expressly enumerated in the Constitution and in any case shall not include education, cultural and religious affairs, Local Government and Public Health (except, in this last case, to secure such coordination as is essential to safeguard the health of the people in the several States); that its powers in the field of public welfare be limited to those necessary for the co-ordination of social security measures; that its powers in the police field be limited to those approved during the period of the occupation by the occupying powers* and thereafter as defined by international agreement;

d. That the powers of the Federal Government in the field of public finance shall be limited to the disposal of monies including the raising of revenues, for purposes for which it is responsible; that the Federal Government may set rates and legislate on the general principles of assessment with regard to other taxes for which uniformity is essential, the collection and utilisation of such taxes being left to the individual States; and that it may appropriate funds only for purposes for which it is responsible under the Constitution;

e. That the Constitution should provide for an independent judiciary to review federal legislation, to review the exercise of federal executive power, to adjudicate conflicts between Federal and Land authorities as well as between Land authorities and to protect the civil rights and freedom of the individual.

f. That the powers of the Federal Government to establish federal agencies for the execution and administration of its responsibilities should be clearly defined and should be limited to those fields in which it is clear that state implementation is impractical.

2. The Military Governors are charged with the examination of the Constitution in terms of these guiding instructions bearing in mind that the purpose of such examination is to test the provisions of the Constitution as a whole to determine whether they guarantee a federal type of government.

London, 12 May, 1948.

1 This paper was agreed upon at the informal meeting of the London Conference on Germany on May 11; see telegram 2072, Delsec 1732, May 12, from London, supra. It was Annex H to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

2  Post, p. 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205].

*  The following understanding was reached on this subject:

The Military Governors must decide in detail what powers the Federal Government should have as regards police.

When the German Constituent Assembly presents its proposals for the Constitution, the Military Governors will disapprove the grant of any powers regarding police exceeding those which they have accepted by agreement among themselves as being necessary. [Footnote in the source text.]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/5–1348: Telegram

[Document 156]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret
us urgent Washington, May 13, 1948—7 p. m.

1746. Secdel 1576. 1. Dept’s preference for action by individual zone commanders re allocation plants to IARA (re Secdel 1575, May 101 and Delsec 1729, May 122 ) is based on reluctance to create new tripartite machinery in place of existing quadripartite machinery. Our general position has been that quadripartite machinery still exists and we do not wish to take the initiative in setting up rival organisms. We believe that proposals in Secdel 1575 provide for tripartite action in substance and should be acceptable to Brit and Fr. All we are concerned with is that formal action should be taken by individual zone commanders. Action by individual commanders is well recognized and lias precedent in reparation allocations (ref Deptel 1442, Apr 223 ).

2. Dept does not envisage any negotiations with Soviets for reciprocal deliveries except through quadripartite machinery in Berlin. If and when quadripartite discussions resumed Berlin, resuming deliveries to Soviets on basis Delsec 1722 May 74 cld be brought up for discussion after full consultation among military governors of three western zones.

3. We contemplate three governments would jointly issue public announcement, preferably at London, at end of your current discussions, along following lines: In view of the fact that the ACA in Berlin, through which allocations to IARA are normally made, is not functioning, the three governments have agreed to instruct their respective zone commanders in Germany as an interim measure to make available to IARA the 75% share of German reparations to which IARA members are entitled under the Potsdam Agreement. The zone commanders will also be instructed to set aside in Germany for future disposition an amount of equipment corresponding to what the USSR would have received under quadripartite allocation.

4. It will not be feasible obtain list specific plants and equipment not to be delivered to satellites in time for your use London.

5. Serial numbers plants UK and US Zones which have been cleared for allocation follow in separate tel.5

Sent London as 1746; repeated Brussels for Dorr as 712; repeated Berlin as 842.

Marshall

1 Not printed, but see footnote 4, p. 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 147].

2 Not printed; it asked why the Department objected to the creation of a tripartite allocation mechanism (740.00119 Council/5–1248).

3  Ante, p. 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130].

4  Ante, p. 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147].

5 The telegram under reference, 1749, Secdel 1577, May 14, to London, is not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–1348: Telegram

[Document 157]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, May 13, 1948—8 p. m.

2105. Delsec 1736. Informal meeting heads of three delegations this morning1 discussed trizonal fusion. Specific subject under discussion was proposal that trade with French zone should be brought under JEIA procedures by July 1 under general terms of JEIA charter. Strang indicated British delegation agreed but wanted make sure this would not impose additional financial obligations on Britain during period between July 1 and date of completion new trizonal fusion agreement. Douglas and Clay understood British concern regarding dollar drain in Britain during this period and indicated they would accept British reservation to this effect.

Alphand stated French were ready in principle to join JEIA but did not wish to be held to specific date for joining since they believed it would be necessary to settle conditions for joining in advance; military governors should therefore start at once to get agreement on financial and adminstrative conditions. Alphand indicated French also wanted to talk about representation on bipartite coal control at Essen as well as question of insuring availability to France, after joining JEIA, of fixed quantities of German products.

Clay pointed out that agreement on financial arrangements, including French Contributions to JEIA, was matter to be decided at govermental level, rather than by military governors; that French insistence on settling this question before joining JEIA would indefinitely postpone desired peddling of exports and imports. He had no objection, however, to discussing administrative matters such as French representation in JEIA and on bipartite board, which presumably could be satisfactorily settled before July 1.

Regarding French representation in coal control, Douglas felt this was quite separate issue not immediately concerned with common export-import control. It had to do with total fusion, which not now under discussion, but which would of course have to take place before or at time of formation of German Government. French participation in coal control at this time was also complicated by fact that body was closely linked with German bizonal structure.

Clay made point that French desire to ensure fixed amounts German products for France, did not have bearing on question under discussion; that trade with France would presumably be based on trade agreement just as with bizone at present; that occupying powers entering into such trade agreements do so on exactly same basis as other powers. He said that existing trade agreements would not be invalidated by France joining JEIA and suggested previse to this effect might be written into any agreement for common export-import control.

Alphand wanted to know whether there might be difficulty in reaching bipartite agreement between French zone and ECA administrator in event French postponed joining JEIA. He referred to something Douglas previously had told him to effect bilateral agreement might depend on French joining JEIA. Douglas replied that bilateral agreement was supposed to be negotiated by July 3, that ECA administration, in order insure most effective use of ERP funds, would undoubtedly require adequate controls over exports and imports in western Germany, that to this end he would undoubtedly favor consolidation of bizone and French zone exports and imports, and that French participation in JEIA would seem to offer best means of implementing this. Douglas emphasized he could not speak for ECA administration, but believed foregoing was logical approach to problem. He also said ECA administration would not be likely to put pressure on French to join JEIA, but that French agreement to do so by July 1 would have favorable effect on negotiation of bilateral agreement, whereas failure to do so might have adverse effect in sense that it might have bearing on amount of funds to be made available to French zone.

Alphand stated one point he wanted make absolutely clear was fact French could not be expected contribute to export-import pool more than they received from ERP for French zone; that if any deficit should be incurred in JEIA operations France could not assist in making up such deficit. Clay replied that JEIA operates on basis of funds contributed by governments, proceeds from exports and credit; it does not operate beyond its means and deficits therefore cannot be incurred.

As result of discussion, Strang proposed agreement be reached along following lines: (USDel accepted substance this proposal; French delegation will refer it to Paris.)

[Here follows the text of a draft paper on Trizonal Export/Import Policy. For the version of this paper as subsequently approved by the Conference, see document TRI/22 (Final), May 26, page 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192].]

There are no further German talks scheduled until May 18 when tripartite meeting on reparations and quadripartite meeting on political organization scheduled. There will be tripartite meeting May 19 to continue discussion trizonal fusion and quadripartite meeting to discuss Ruhr and security.

Sent Department as 2105; repeated Paris as 214, USPolAd Berlin as 131.

Douglas

1 This was the 4th Informal Meeting of the London Conference on Germany.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–1348: Telegram

[Document 158]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, May 13, 1948—9 p. m.

2107. For Lovett’s Eyes Only from Douglas. Your 1725, May 12.1 Discussed Ruhr problem with Harriman again today. He, while feeling that neither he nor the administrator should initiate the suggestion that the international control authority make allocations of coal, coke and steel if any, in accordance with approved OEEC programs, feels that it is a sound and valid way of dealing with the matter. He feels, too, as we all feel and as has frequently been stated to be our position, that the controlling voice of the US, arising out of its heavy financial contributions, should be preserved.

Clay and Murphy returned to Berlin this afternoon. Murphy, I think, almost convinced that the suggestion is good, and Clay in much more conciliatory and compromising frame of mind.

The talks are temporarily recessed over the week-end and Whitsun Monday,2 but will be resumed Tuesday morning.

Douglas

1 Not printed; it urged Ambassador Douglas to get in touch with Ambassador Harriman in Paris the “very soonest” in order to discuss the Ruhr problem (740.00119 Council/5–1248). Telegram 2085, May 13, from London, not printed, reported that Douglas already had held one conversation with Harriman on the Ruhr. (740.00119 Council/5–1348)

2 May 17.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–1348: Telegram

[Document 159]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, May 13, 1948—9 p. m.

2108. Delsec 1733. Yesterday’s informal meeting between heads of delegations including Benelux1 reached agreement on certain heretofore unresolved issues as follows:

First. Re interpretation of “people of affected areas” paragraph two paper on political organization, French withdrew objection British proposal for voting procedure on alternative (1) cited Delsec 1732.2 Robertson proposals thus agreed.

Second. Clay and Robertson who undertook to reconsider the wording of paragraph 3(D) of draft letter on powers of civil and military governments3 reached conclusion that until new Länder boundaries were known not enough data and information were at their disposal to enable them to define exact relationship between respective Military Govts [Governors] and German state govts. After new boundaries agreed respective military govts [Governors] will no doubt have to reach new agreement defining method and procedure for exercise of military government powers over new state governments. US Delegation feels that procedure agreed for exercising control over federal government should apply likewise to control of state governments and that there should be majority decision of three military governors or their deputies for any action taken by military government in any of Länder.

This principle is not acceptable to Robertson. French appear to support US view although they have not yet formulated their position. Therefore, discussion postponed until exact Länder boundaries are known. For the purpose of draft letter paragraph 3 (D) was replaced by following wording agreed upon by British and US Delegations. French Delegation requested additional time for consideration.

“When the military governors will have received recommendations from the Ministers President regarding revision of state boundaries, they will agree upon an organization of military government, in the states and approve the submission of these recommendations to the people in the affected areas.”

Third. At suggestion of US Delegation paragraph 1 (E) of draft letter on constitution4 was amended to authorize federal government to enact such measures of coordination in field of public health as are essential to safeguard health of the people in the several states.

Fourth. Re paper on protection allied interests (Delsec 17215 ) US delegation emphasized that it could not accept Benelux proposal to set up special intergovernmental committee to consider with military governors whether measures to safeguard allied interests were required and what form should take. US position had not yet crystallized. Problem of protection of foreign interests embraces important questions of international law, policy and vast variety of other subjects partly of very technical nature. USDel suggested therefore that each government first set up its own study group prior to establishment of intergovernmental committee to review problem and make recommendations to their governments.

In addition it was felt that term “allied” interest is misleading because technically US has no allied relations with any country and the British are technically allies of Soviets. On other hand, term, “United Nations interests” would exclude Swiss and Swedish interests. US proposal to substitute “foreign” for “allied” was accepted. Following changes were agreed in draft report (see Delsec 1721) which has now been approved: “(A) Agreed to following wording for paragraph one: ‘The Conference recommends that the principle of nondiscrimination against foreign interests in Germany be reaffirmed and that each government should promptly study the problem of safeguarding foreign interests in order that there may be subsequently established as close to 1 September 1948 as possible in intergovernmental group to review the question and make recommendations to their governments.’

(B) Agreed to change throughout the paper the expression ‘allied interests’ to ‘foreign interests’.

(C) Agreed to eliminate paragraph 3 of the paper.

(D) Agreed to give opportunity to Benelux countries to discuss with the military governors measures to be taken with view to resumption of normal management of their property interests in Germany.

(E) Agreed to contents of paragraph 5 which had now become paragraph 3 of the paper.”

Fifth. In connection with contemplated modification of German Laender boundaries in paragraph 2 paper on Political Organization Benelux representative circulated letter dated May 12 (quoted below) reiterating Benelux territorial demands and other economic claims which were embodied in CFM (D) (47) (G) 64 dated February 19, 1947.6

US delegate replied that in its opinion Article 2 of Paris Reparation Agreement7 prevents countries parties to the agreement from making financial and economic claims on ground that Article 2 A of said agreement provided for full settlement of all such claims by means of reparations. Very essence of reparations was to compensate the countries for all economic damage suffered as result of the war and occupation by Hitler Germany. Van Verduynen relied on subparagraph 3 of paragraph B of Article 2 and maintained that the settlement envisaged in paragraph A is without prejudice to “any political, territorial or other demands which any signatory government may put forward with respect to the peace settlement of Germany”. Discussion of Benelux letter will be resumed May 18 to give delegations time for study.

It is submitted that language in subparagraph three of paragraph B of Article 2 of Paris agreement gives certain support to Benelux contention. On other hand paragraph A would become meaningless if term “other demands” in paragraph B would enable signatory governments to put forward any claim against Germany and its nationals to extent that such claims are not satisfied by way of reparations. Your comments by Monday May 17 on interpretation of Article 2 of Paris Reparations Agreement would be appreciated. Please cable also any reference to the history of the Paris negotiations which might shed light on intention of signatory parties and on meaning of wording of Article 2 A and B.

Verbatim text of letter of May 12 from Dutch Ambassador.

[Here follows the text of Ambassador Michiels van Verduynen’s letter of May 12 to Strang (in his capacity as Conference chairman); regarding the letter, see telegram 2148, Delsec 1740, May 18, from London, page 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162].]

Introductory sentence and fourth point only repeated to American Embassy The Hague, Brussels (keep Luxembourg informed), Rome, Stockholm, Oslo and Copenhagen as Delsec 1737.

Sent Department 2108, repeated Berlin 132, Paris 215.

Douglas

1 This was the 5th Informal Meeting of the London Conference on Germany.

2 May 12, p. 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154].

3 For the version of the draft letter under reference here, ultimately approved by the Conference, see document TRI/17 (Final), May 19, p. 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170].

4 For the approved version of this paper, see document TRI/15 (Final), May 12, p. 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155].

5 Dated May 6, p. 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]. For the final version of the paper under reference here (TRI/18 (Final), May 31), see p. 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206].

6 The document under reference is not printed, but the salient points were included in the Report by the Deputies for Germany to the Council of Foreign Ministers, February 25, 1947, Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 40.

7 For the text of the Paris Agreement on Reparation, signed in Paris on December 21, 1945, see Department of State, Treaties and Other International Acts Series No. 1655, or 61 Stat. (pt. 3) 3157; for documentation on the negotiations leading to the conclusion of this agreement, see Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. iii, pp. 1169 ff.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/5–1448: Telegram

[Document 160]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, May 14, 1948—3 p. m.

1752. Personal for Douglas. In Deptel 17101 we sought to meet French security requirements by agreeing to establishment military security board during occupation period and by reaffirming President’s strong statement that we will keep our occupation forces in Germany until peace in Europe is secure. We thought this would be good enough. Re Delsec 1728,2 we can be of further help by agreeing to point 2 (a) in second para, namely, that US would not withdraw troops without prior consultation French and UK. Consultation and endeavor to reach agreement in this matter implicit in the developing US association with western European security. As regards point 3, unilateral French occupation of Germany has an unfortunate history and US can give no commitment in this regard.

Dept can but regret French legalistic approach to question of security against Germany which we are making every effort to resolve in terms larger responsibility re western Europe. Army Department observes that in view political instability of French Govts and certain doubts it entertains whether French will stick by US in Berlin, US Govt would be justified in demanding assurances of French.

Re your first question, we maintain that continued occupation does not depend on four-power agreement but upon fact of total defeat and unconditional surrender of Germany. (See legal memorandum in hands of Oppenheimer 3 ).

Marshall

1 May 11, p. 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152].

2 London telegram 2032, May 11, p. 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150].

3 Not printed.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/5–1748: Telegram

[Document 161]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)1 to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, May 17, 1948—8 p. m.

1149. Personal for Lovett from Murphy. Your 842, May 13.2 Department’s insistence on action by individual zone commanders in the allocation of plants to IARA and its stated reluctance to establish tripartite machinery for future allocation of plants to western claimants is puzzling to us here. After weeks of negotiations with UK, France and Benelux in London in which the USSR did not participate, it would appear that we are on verge of agreement regarding recommendations for establishment of a western German Government and an international control authority for the Ruhr. Important progress has been made towards trizonal fusion. In addition, three western powers have established and are participating in a western German Bank Deutscherlaender and an Allied Banking Commission on a tripartite basis. Furthermore, a currency reform on a tripartite basis is under active consideration. While inconsistency itself is not always undesirable I am exceedingly puzzled over the reasons for our reluctance to act in the reparations field in harmony with other features of our German policy, many of which are in the political, financial and economic fields of equal or even greater importance. If convenient I would appreciate more guidance from the Department on this point as there are obviously factors involved of which I am ignorant.

[ Murphy ]

1  Murphy had returned to Germany briefly during a lull in the London Conference on Germany.

2 The same as telegram 1746, Secdel 1576, May 13, to London, p. 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–1848: Telegram

[Document 162]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, May 18, 1948—10 p. m.

2148. Delsec 1740. Informal meeting territorial talks today1 discussed Benelux letter of May 122 which proposes setting up commissions to study Benelux territorial and economic claims on Germany and to submit recommendations before September 1.

Van Verduynen stressed these claims put forward in order seek legitimate compensation for war losses; that present plan to constitute German Government early date indicated importance reaching decision these claims soon as possible since Benelux had no confidence they would ever be met if left to German Government.

Massigli stated his government sympathized Benelux position and believed it was high time set up commission to examine Benelux claims on understanding final solution would await peace settlement. He too felt that longer compensation delayed less likely obtain satisfaction.

Strang mentioned various difficulties involved in considering these claims at this time when western Germany being integrated into western Europe under ERP. He felt question should be considered in light of these new circumstances and must also consider effect substantial territorial changes would have on German economy. Furthermore there is formal difficulty in having three powers take even provisional decisions affecting external boundaries of Germany.

Van Verduynen made clear he was not asking present meeting decide claims but merely set up commission to study claims which he felt had not as yet been given sufficient consideration.

Douglas indicated surprise that Benelux raised question economic military claims which not on agenda present meeting. He mentioned complications involved such as extra territorial rights and claims antedating war. Article 2 (A) of Reparations Agreement of 1946 was drawn up for purpose settling economic claims. He felt strongly they should not be discussed at present meeting. He had no objection discussing territorial claims, which were on agenda, but referred to Article 2 (B) of Separations Agreement which envisages possibility of submission of political, territorial or other demands in connection with peace settlement. Since we are not making peace settlement here in London he wondered whether it was appropriate to discuss such claims in detail.

Van Verduynen said he would have no objection to this if there were any immediate prospect of having peace settlement. He stressed relationship between economic and territorial claims, point which he recalled was clearly stated in Benelux claims presented to CFM Deputies. His government, realizing full compensation could not be met by cession of territory, had supplemented demands by certain economic claims. He made clear in reply to questions by Douglas that economic claims would increase if less satisfaction obtained on territorial demands and vice versa.

De Gruben believed recommendation (decision) taken here in London had definite bearing on peace settlement as they would later presumably be made part of that peace settlement with German Government. He too referred to close relationship between territorial and economic claims, both of which based on principle of compensation.

Douglas saw difficulty in dealing with territorial claims of Benelux only when certain other governments also had similar claims against Germany. He hoped Benelux would review demands for compensation in addition to reparations in light of new situation, particularly in light of passage of ERP. He made clear in this connection that effect of approving additional compensation by Germany would either (1) impose still heavier burdens US Government or (2) increase level of industry in Germany.

Van Verduynen replied that he understood situation but still hoped it would be possible to set up special commission to examine problem in all its aspects, taking into account not only interests of Germany, but interests of other countries.

Douglas stated he was principally worried regarding Benelux economic claims, which he was not willing to have studied by special commission. He had no objection considering question of setting up commission to examine territorial claims, if it were understood that no major modifications in western boundaries were involved. He indicated US Government could only approve minor frontier rectifications and then only if wishes of population of affected areas were taken into account.

Strang agreed with Douglas and meeting adjourned without reaching agreement. Question will be discussed further tomorrow.

Sent Department 2148. (Department please pass Moscow as 81); repeated USPolAd Berlin 133, Paris 218, Brussels 77 (Brussels please keep Luxembourg informed), The Hague 41, Oslo 38, Copenhagen 32, Stockholm 51 and Rome 131.

Douglas

1 This was the 6th Informal Meeting of the London Conference on Germany.

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of the Army (Royall) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–1848

[Document 163]

The Secretary of the Army (Royall) to the Secretary of State

top secret Washington, 18 May 1948.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I feel great concern after reviewing the proposals put forth by Mr. Douglas in London in regard to the agreement for the international control of the Ruhr. It had previously been agreed by State and Army that the United States predominant voice in German economic affairs would be largely safeguarded in the Ruhr authority by United States control of the German votes, and in the unlikely event that we should still be outvoted, the United States Military Governor would be able to prevent, under the fusion agreement, the implementation of undesirable decisions.

Mr. Douglas now proposes, and has informed other delegations at London that the United States will not exercise control in connection with German votes, and further has proposed, without prior consultation with Military Government or the Department of the Army, that the division of coal, coke and steel from the Ruhr shall be in accordance with OEEC programs, thereby effectually placing control of the German economy in the hands of OEEC, subject, to some degree at least, to the approval of the ECA Administrator.

At the present time, the United States majority voice in Germany is exercised by the Military Governor in all matters relating to foreign trade. The Douglas proposal would shift this voice to the ECA Administrator, as regards the vital Ruhr production, and merely by the physical displacement of authority from Berlin to the United States the exercise of the United States majority voice would be made complicated and cumbersome. The division of responsibility between the Military Governor and the Administrator would hardly be satisfactory to either one. The Department of the Army does not consider that it can discharge its direct responsibilities for the economic rehabilitation of Germany if the ultimate decision as to the disposition of German industrial production is to be made by another agency of the Government.

This is inconsistent with the understanding with the British at the time we took over the major part of their financial obligations in the bizonal area—and inconsistent with the information which we gave Congress at the time they appropriated the additional funds made necessary by the British failure to contribute their part.

As a matter of fact, the Congressional situation seems to me a serious one. Both in connection with the assumption of the British obligation as well as in connection with the occupation program in general, both the Army and the State Departments have repeatedly assured the Appropriations Committees as well as other Committees of Congress that General Clay would have the predominant voice in the control of German foreign trade. Such appropriations as were obtained were, at least in part, based upon this assurance. Therefore, if the new proposal should be finally adopted, we would, of course, have to inform the Chairmen of the Appropriations and other Committees concerned that this change had been made in the policies which we announced to the Committees.

It should be clearly understood that there is not the slightest intention on the part of the Army Department or Military Government to slight the obligations of Germany to support actively the work and recommendations of OEEC. On the other hand it cannot accept an arrangement where OEEC is given a voice which may well be decisive in German internal affairs, particularly when such an arrangement is designed to overcome the objections of our British partner to the “predominant United States control” which is an established policy of our Government.

Furthermore, the prestige and position of Bizonal Germany as a full member of OEEC will be seriously impaired if she is placed in the uniquely unfavorable situation of having her internal economy regulated by decisions of OEEC whereas the other participating countries retain full sovereignty over their domestic production.

The following language should achieve the objective of insuring full coordination of programs under ERP while avoiding the difficulties envisaged above: “The international authority, in making its findings, shall give every consideration to the approved programs of OEEC for recovery of the participating countries.”

While I realize that this matter is being discussed in London, I feel I should make clear to you the position of the Department of the Army. Your agreement to this language and to the principle that the United States shall control the German vote on the international authority is requested.

Sincerely yours,

Kenneth C. Royall

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/5–1048: Telegram

[Document 164]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, May 19, 1948—7 p. m.

1817. For Douglas from Saltzman. As you know, Dept has been prepared to approve your position as outlined in Delsec 1727 May 101 and urtel 2062 May 12.2

Although we prefer your language in Delsec 1727 on coordination of Ruhr allocations with OEEC programs, we have no objection to following: “The international authority, in making its findings, shall give every consideration to the approved programs of OEEC for recovery of the participating countries.”

We understand US Delegation is insisting on some form of agreement to express principle that US shall control German vote on Ruhr authority. Please wire text. Are we correct in understanding that it represents a reversal of USDel position expressed in Delsec 1727 May 10?

If agreement re Ruhr cannot be obtained on basis above proposals, please refer matter to Dept for further consideration. [Saltzman.]

Marshall

1 Not printed.

2  Ante, p. 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 153].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–1948: Telegram

[Document 165]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent London, May 19, 1948—7 p. m.

2163. Delsec 1741. Given below is text of proposal put forward by USDel in tripartite meeting on reparations yesterday afternoon in effort to adapt British proposal1 to major requirements of US position. US proposal made prior receipt Department’s cable 1781, May 17, and UK and French delegations showed willingness accept US proposal. USDel considers these most favorable terms attainable and urgently requests authority conclude agreement on this basis if possible. Recognize possible conflict with Department’s instructions prohibiting any negotiations with Soviets regarding reparations outside ACA but wish point out that Department’s proposal this point could be construed as pressure by Western powers for revival of quadripartite machinery concerning which we had understood US would not take initiative. Following is text: 1. The three commanders-in-chief will, immediately after this proposal is approved by their governments, proceed with allocation of reparations equipment in three western zones in interests of ERP and to bring reparations program to speedy conclusion. (1) 25 percent of all equipment in each broad industrial category declared for reparations will be provisionally selected and held for future delivery to USSR.

(2) The three currently advise Soviet commander-in-chief (a) that three governments have instructed their respective commanders-in-chief in Germany to make available to IARA the 75 percent share of German reparations to which IARA members are entitled, and to set aside in Germany for future disposition amount of equipment corresponding to what USSR would have received under quadripartite allocations; (b) of list of equipment set aside for USSR and that the 15 percent share of reparations to which USSR would have been entitled on basis of reciprocal deliveries against Soviet undertaking to supply to western zone commanders reciprocal deliveries to equivalent value over reasonable period of time corresponding to delivery of capital plant (it is understood that deliveries to USSR will exclude any items of equipment prohibited from export to USSR and its satellites by policies of any of three governments; when such items are excluded, substitution of other items will be made to fullest extent feasible); and (c) that remaining 10 percent share of reparations will be withheld pending fulfillment by Soviet authorities of Soviet obligations under Potsdam Agreement.

2. In making the informal tripartite allocations, three commanders-in-chief will take note of French and Anglo-American reparations lists. All equipment enumerated on these lists except that which three Allied governments concerned may wish to exclude temporarily pending final agreement upon recommendations made by US Government will be allocated as soon as possible.

3. The Inter-Allied Reparations Agency will be requested to sub-allocate within 50 days such equipment as may be allocated to it.

4. The three commanders-in-chief will cause to be quickly dismantled all equipment which may be allocated to IARA within their respective zones. Equipment provisionally allocated to USSR may be dismantled or left standing at administrative convenience of commanders-in-chief concerned pending agreement with Soviet element as to its disposal.

5. The three commanders-in-chief will enforce whatever priority in allocation of materials or services may be necessary to smooth and speedy execution of reparations programmes in the three western zones.

6. The three commanders-in-chief will accept suballocations made by Inter-Allied Reparations Agency, and will be responsible for delivery to recipient countries.

7. Consideration will be given to means, compatible with terms of Paris Act on reparations, of preventing allocation or delivery to Albania, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia of items referred to in subparagraph (2) of paragraph 1 above.

Sent Department 2163; repeated USPolAd Berlin 135; Brussels for Dorr 78.

Douglas

1 In his telegram 2104, Delsec 1735, May 13, from London, not printed. Ambassador Douglas transmitted the gist of a paper, circulated that day by the British Delegation at the London Conference on Germany, setting forth a proposed procedure for dealing with future allocations and deliveries of reparations. The paper presented in detail some of the proposals reported upon in telegram 1987, Delsec 1722, May 7, from London, p. 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]. (740.00119 Council/5–1348) In telegram 1781, Secdel 1578, May 17, to London, not printed, the Department offered detailed commentary on the British proposal (740.00119 Council/5–1748).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–1948: Telegram

[Document 166]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent London, May 19, 1948—8 p. m.

2165. For Lovett’s Eyes Only from Douglas. In general discussion among heads of delegations this afternoon, Massigli for the French said that in view of the apparent softening of Soviet policy, the time for the establishment of the provisional government might perhaps be delayed, depending upon our estimate of the Soviet reaction. I took the responsibility of replying to the effect that delay on our part beyond the dates previously suggested would be, on the one hand, construed by the Soviet to be evidence of weakness and might inspire them to take the initiative, and on the other hand, delay would have an unfortunate effect on the morale of the Germans. Is it our view that the risks of proceeding with the establishment of the provisional government, according to the time schedule agreed, are less than the risks, of further delay?

Massigli indicated that his government might even suggest discussing at a ministerial level the question of delaying the establishment of the provisional government. Would appreciate urgently your advice.

Douglas

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–1948: Telegram

[Document 167]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, May 19, 1948—10 p. m.

2167. A meeting of heads of delegations was held this afternoon to discuss security. The British first proposed that a working party be established to reach agreement on a three-power basis on a list of prohibited industries and restricted industries in Germany. When I pointed out we were not prepared to agree to establishment of a permanent level, of industry, the French asked whether we could agree that there should be no change in the level of industry except by international agreement. I replied that during the period of occupation the level of industry in the three zones must be one fixed by agreement among the occupying powers and that we might agree that during the life of the occupation statute any change in the level of industries would be a matter of international concern but we could not accept that any such permanent restrictions should be maintained in the peace settlement. This was a matter for determination at that time but it would only be fair to state that at present we were opposed to such permanent restrictions.

To endeavor to meet the French preoccupations with regard to security, I stated that the US was prepared at present to reaffirm the President’s statement of March 171 either in the communiqué or protocol to agree there should be no withdrawal of American occupation forces without consultation with French and the UK and to consult with the others regarding any threat of the resurgence of German military might for the purpose of determining what measures might be taken in the light of this situation.

In our view these measures were contemplated as providing security against Germany but with respect to the more important and immediate general question the answer to the greater threat was contained in the projected Senate resolution (re Deptel 17702 ) the text of which I communicated to the other Delegations with the understanding that it would be regarded for the present as secret. This assurance which I explained was still only under consideration gave great satisfaction and comfort.

Reverting to the question of security against Germany, Massigli asked whether the US would be prepared to agree to a limited occupation of certain areas after termination of general occupation, to which I replied that the appropriate time to consider this would in my opinion be when we consult with the other powers regarding withdrawal. This answer apparently was satisfactory.

Strang then pointed out that he understood whereas it was not possible to foresee the exact stipulations to be inserted in any peace treaty, nevertheless he could conclude there was agreement in principle upon the following assurances with respect to security which would remain in force subsequent to the termination of occupation.

1. Control of the Ruhr.

2. Prohibition on certain industries.

3. Disarmament (no creation of German armed forces or general staff).

4. Some form of inspectorate.

5. Whereas it was understood that there is no decision possible now with respect to continued occupation of certain areas after the peace treaty, nevertheless the present position of the UK, French and Benelux Governments was that this would be desirable.

6. Agreement as to consultation after signature of the peace treaty to determine in the event of a threatened resurgence of German military power what remedies might be adopted.

With respect to an inspectorate during the period of occupation the British proposed in line with the suggestion I made some days ago that a Military Security Board advisory to the Military Governors be established for the western zones of Germany to ensure the maintenance, of disarmament and demilitarization in the interests of security. The scope of the Board’s responsibilities would cover the whole field of German disarmament and demilitarization and would in particular recommend measures to the Military Governors to “(A) prevent the revival of military or para-military organizations; (B) ensure that no arms, arms materials and any other materials the manufacture of which may be prohibited by agreement among the contracting parties are produced in, or imported into, Germany; (C) prevent the infringement by the German authorities of any restrictions agreed among the contracting parties in respect of certain industries; (D) ensure that any military buildings or structures or any factories capable of producing armaments which may be retained in Germany are used for peaceful purposes only; (E) ensure that such scientific research as may be permitted in Germany is not directed to warlike ends; (F) inspect and supervise (I) shipbuilding, (II) the operation of civil airlines.”

It was tentatively agreed that subject to further examination this proposal would answer present requirements for an inspectorate.

A report covering the points discussed at this meeting will be drafted for submission to the governments. It was agreed, however, that this report should deal only with security against Germany and make no reference to the general question or to the projected Senate resolution.3

Douglas

1 Regarding the statement under reference here, see footnote 2 to telegram 1710, May 11, to London, p. 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152].

2 Not printed, but see footnote 2 to telegram 2035, May 11, from London, p. 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152]. Additional documentation regarding the Vandenberg Resolution and the attitude of the United States toward the Brussels Pact and possible Western European Union is included in volume iii .

3 Telegram 2186, May 20, from London, not printed, transmitted the text of a draft report on security that had been prepared (740.00119 Council/5–2048). For final text of the report, as amended and approved on May 26, see p. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/5–1948: Telegram

[Document 168]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, May 19, 1948—7 p. m.

1818. For Douglas (Eyes Only) from Lovett. Urtel 2165.1 State and Army consider participating Govts should hold to agreed time schedule for establishment provisional Govt in western Germany and we agree with the reasons you presented Massigli. So-called apparent softening of Sov policy does not permit conclusion that Sovs will cooperate in formulation of a German policy essential to needs of free countries of western Europe. We confirm view that risks of proceeding with establishment provisional Govt are less than risks of further delay. We strongly urge that if French insist on reservation re time schedule, conference should nevertheless proceed with completion of plans on form of provisional Govt and with conference work on other important matters so that positive results may be achieved at this session on substantive questions. [Lovett]

Marshall

1 Dated May 19, p. 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/5–1948: Telegram

[Document 169]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret
urgent Washington, May 19, 1948—8 p. m.

1820. Secdel 1581. Uriels 2108, May 13, Delsec 1733, and 2148, May 18, Delsec 1740.1 Dept considers that Benelux claims advanced in letter of May 122 and CFM (D) (47) (G) 64, Feb 193 and earlier submissions there cited can be dealt with as follows: 1. Territorial claims. Dept recognizes logic argument external boundaries be fixed prior to or concurrently with creation German provisional govt. If Benelux press strongly for action Dept would not object boundary commission, to include German as well as appropriate Allied representatives, be created to examine claims and make recommendations, if possible, prior to meeting constituent assembly, provided such commission has adequate technical preparation and expert help for complex problems involved in some Benelux claims. For your info Dept rejects principle territorial claims can be properly justified on war loss or similar reparation basis. Would be prepared give sympathetic consideration to minor rectifications if clearly established that they conform sound geographic and economic principles and interests populations concerned. Any changes would be considered provisional and subject to confirmation or modification in final peace settlement.

2. Economic Claims and Demands. Dept has analyzed these claims on basis Benelux submissions and has reached conclusion that no special commission regarding them should be established for reasons indicated below. Claims under this heading appear to fall under the following sub-headings: (a) Benelux claims to mining facilities and several to petroleum facilities are in the areas claimed for cession by Germany. If any such areas ceded, future ownership rights with respect state, quasi-public and private property interests might be determined through subsequent negotiation or in final peace settlement.

(b) There are a number of claims for the exclusive right to operate and to exploit the production of mines and mineral concessions in areas which are not subject to Benelux territorial claims. Dept regards such claims as raising basic questions regarding sources of reparation and control over German export resources and is not prepared to consider departing from agreed basis that reparation be confined to capital removals, ships and German external assets. Dept believes no changes in basic reparation policy can be considered except in connection with final peace settlement.

(c) Claims with respect to certain rights and privileges in connection with the operation and exploitation of Benelux-owned property interests in Germany. Dept would be willing to agree that such matters may be considered by working group already agreed upon to consider general questions of foreign property interests in Germany.

(d) Certain miscellaneous economic demands. Dept understands these demands to include elimination of discrimination against use of Low Country ports and Rhine facilities; prohibition of construction of new German canals permitting diversion of traffic from above ports to North German ports; and general problems of exchange discrimination affecting important Benelux entrepot trade. It is believed necessary to distinguish between such restrictions as may be suitable for peace settlement and such measures as may be taken in near future to minimize discrimination without excessive cost to US through increased need for assistance. It is our hope that forthcoming negotiations regarding use of Low Country ports will provide interim solution for first problem, second is academic for present since no plans exist (Gen Clay should confirm) to construct new canals, and third should be alleviated by measures of currency reform and establishment of exchange rate which are under consideration. Occupying authorities have endeavored to eliminate discriminating foreign exchange and foreign trade practices employed by Germans in pre-war and war periods. Currency reform and establishment single conversion factor between mark and foreign exchange prices should further ameliorate situation. Dept expects that substantial progress can be made in OEEC and by bodies considering customs union to remove Benelux complaints even before time for peace settlement.

Dept agrees strongly with USDel position re procedure for exercising control over state govts outlined in item 2, and hopes you will maintain firm stand on this issue.

Marshall

1  Ante, pp. 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159] and 249.

2 Not printed.

3 The document under reference here is not printed, but its salient points are included in the Report of the Deputies for Germany to the Council of Foreign Ministers, February 25, 1947, Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 40.

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 118: File—TRI Documents

[Document 170]

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany 1

secret

TRI/17 (Final)

Letter of Advice to Military Governors Regarding Powers of Civil and Military Governments

1. —With reference to paragraph 10 of TRI/13 (Final):2 The Governments of the three occupying powers recognise that the establishment of a constitutional German Government will necessitate a definition of the relationship between this government and the Allied authorities. The Military Governors will accordingly grant legislative executive and judicial power to German governments and reserve to themselves such powers as are necessary to ensure the fulfilment of the basic purpose of the occupation. Such powers are those necessary to enable the Military Governors to:— (a) Conduct or direct Germany’s foreign relations until such time as she may be permitted unrestricted foreign relations;

(b) Exercise the minimum control over German foreign trade, and over internal policies and measures which could adversely affect foreign trade, necessary to ensure respect by the German authorities for obligations entered into by the Occupying Powers in regard to Germany and the proper use of funds made available to Germany;

(c) Exercise such controls as have been or may be agreed upon, as for example, regarding the international authority for the Ruhr, reparations, the level of industry, decartelisation, disarmament and demilitarisation, and certain aspects of scientific research;

(d) Protect the prestige and ensure the security of the Occupation Forces and the satisfaction of their requirements within defined limits agreed upon between the Military Governors;

(e) Ensure the observance of the Constitutions which they have approved.

2. The Military Governors shall resume their exercise of their full powers in an emergency threatening security, and if necessary to secure compliance with the Constitutions or with the Occupation Statute.

3. The Military Governors shall exercise the above-mentioned controls according to the following procedure: (a) Any amendment to the Constitutions shall be submitted to the approval of the Military Governors.

(b) In the fields mentioned in article I (a) to (e), the German authorities shall comply with the decisions or directions of the Military Governors.

(c) Whenever not otherwise provided, in particular for implementation of paragraph (b) above, all laws and regulations from the German Authorities shall come into force automatically within 21 days, unless disapproved by the Military Governors, after a majority vote whenever Federal Government is concerned.

(d) When the Military Governors have received the recommendations of the Ministers President regarding the revision of the State boundaries, and before approving the submission of these recommendations to the people of the affected areas, they (Military Governors) will agree upon an organisation of Military Government in the States.

4. The Military Governors shall have a special responsibility to observe, advise and assist the Federal and State Governments in regard to the democratisation of political life, social relations and education. This shall not imply any restriction of the legislative, executive and judicial competence accorded to such Governments in these matters.

5. The Military Governors are hereby authorised to transmit to the Ministers President the broad principles embodied in the foregoing for their observations. They will then communicate these broad principles, modified as they may then agree, to the Constituent Assembly as a guide to that body in its work of preparing the Constitution and will receive from it the observations which it may wish to put forward. When the Military Governors announce their approval for the submission of the Constitution to the States, they will publish simultaneously an Occupation Statute, incorporating these principles as finally modified by them, in order that the people of the States may understand that they accept the Constitution within the framework of this Occupation Statute.

London, 19 May, 1948.

1 This paper was agreed upon at the 7th Informal Meeting of the London Conference on Germany, May 19; see telegram 2171, Delsec 1742, May 20, from London, infra. It was Annex I to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

2  Post, p. 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–2048: Telegram

[Document 171]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, May 20, 1948—2 p. m.

2171. Delsec 1742. Informal meeting yesterday among four delegations1 discussed remaining points disagreement on political organization papers and Benelux letter re territorial and economic claims. Draft letter to military governors re powers of civil and military governments2 was approved when French withdrew reservation on proposed substitute paragraph 3(d) which has now been revised to read as follows: “When the military governors have received the recommendations of the Minister-President re revision of state boundaries, and before approving submission of these recommendations to people of affected areas, the military governors will agree upon an organization of military governments in the states.”

Remaining point at issue in basis political organization paper3 (bracketed phrases in paragraphs 2 and 4) was then discussed at some length without definite agreement. Am still hopeful, particularly after yesterday’s discussion, matter will soon be resolved to meet US/UK views.

Massigli stated French Government unhappy about proposal to hold elections for Constituent Assembly, procedure which would incur greater risk than having delegates chosen by existing Landtage. He is fearful of alleged nationalist trends in Germany.

De Gruben also expressed fears that electoral campaign for Assembly would let loose nationalist forces. Furthermore, best way to insure federal type government would normally be to recognize political bodies already organized as competent to draft constitution, in same way US and Swiss constitutions drawn up.

Douglas, Clay and Strang pointed out importance of having German people assume responsibility for decision whether government for west Germany should be set up and type of government to be created. If delegates were appointed rather than elected we would be open to accusation that constituent body was non-representative or even collaborationist, and hence that constitution did not reflect will of people but was imposed. There were risks involved in either course, but risks of nationalist sentiments arising were less than risks of opening ourselves to criticism of imposing constitution. We already face criticism that we are responsible for dividing Germany but we can at least mitigate if not eliminate such difficulties if we make sure Germans accept responsibility for decisions. Clay was not worried by nationalist trends which he felt better emerge now, when military governments in a position to suppress such movements, than later.

De Gruben was concerned because letter to Military Governors on German constitution4 was not clear how agreed principles in that paper would be made known to Germans. He was afraid Germans might proceed with constitution without taking into account these principles.

Douglas and Clay assured him that there was complete understanding among Military Governors, even though this was not stated in letter on constitution, that their representatives would follow work of Constituent Assembly closely, giving advice and guidance where necessary. This procedure had worked well with Laender constitution in US zone. There was no point in intervening with Germans if they were proceeding along right lines; only when they appeared to deviate would it be necessary to make known agreed principles which they would be required to follow. In practice, no difficulty foreseen, as Clay was convinced on basis his experience Germans anxious to protect powers of states (as indicated by German opposition to limited powers of Upper House in Bizonal Economic Administration). Furthermore, high degree of German cooperation was likely as long as Red Army was just across Elbe.

Meeting agreed to appoint working party to begin preparation of communiqué. Important matters to be covered will be treated approximately as follows: (1) Very general announcement on political organization along lines used in communiqué issued March 6,5 with possible addition to the effect that announcement of decisions through Minister-President would be made at an early date; (2) probably several points on security, depending on results yesterday’s meeting;6 and (3) quite detailed information on Ruhr paper giving main highlights, including possibly excerpts from paper itself.

Meeting then considered Benelux letter re economic and territorial claims.7

Douglas pointed out, lest there be any misunderstanding, that Benelux claims appear to rest on theory of compensation and that he could not accept that principle. On other hand he was prepared have a group appointed to examine territorial adjustments, provided terms of reference clearly indicate any changes recommended must be minor in nature, designed to iron out local anomalies, and improve communications and take into consideration wishes of population affected. He was quite ready to have group start work at once but could not agree that there was any relation between territorial problem and setting up German Government; therefore we could not countenance postponing establishment of such government until decisions on territorial matters made.

Strang agreed with Douglas and Massigli raised no objection.

Van Verduynen stated that although this did not meet Benelux wishes he would submit proposal to Benelux governments. He raised question whether other delegates would be willing to submit to their governments recommendation to have Benelux claims studied and answer made to Benelux governments who had long been awaiting action.

In order to obtain agreement on limited program suggested by him, Douglas indicated he personally was willing to make such recommendation to his government. He wanted it understood that this action would be taken outside framework of present meetings, which were not empowered to discuss Benelux claims for compensation. Strang and Massigli agreed to take similar action.

It was agreed that draft terms of reference would be drawn up along the lines suggested by Douglas to guide work of the body to be set up to study territorial adjustments.8

Sent Department as 2171, repeated Berlin 137; Paris 220.

Last five paragraphs this message repeated as Delsec 1746 to Moscow, Brussels, The Hague, Oslo, Copenhagen, Stockholm and Rome.

Douglas

1 This was the 7th Informal Meeting of the London Conference on Germany.

2 See document TRI/17 (Final), May 19, supra.

3 See document TRI/13 (Final), May 31, p. 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205].

4 See document TRI/15 (Final), May 12, p. 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155].

5  Ante, p. 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94].

6 See telegram 2167, May 19, from London, p. 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], for a report on the meeting under reference here.

7 Not printed.

8 Telegram 1868, Secdel 1584, May 21, to London, not printed, instructed that the terms of reference of the body to be set up to study territorial adjustments should explicitly state that the recommendations would be confined to tentative and provisional readjustments, subject to the confirmation or modification in the final peace settlement. The Department regarded this as essential to avoid the possibility of a Soviet claim that the action in the west provided justification for unilateral determination of the eastern German frontier. (740.00119 Council/5–2048)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/5–1948: Telegram

[Document 172]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret
us urgent
niact Washington, May 20, 1948—8 p. m.

1843. Secdel 1583. Dept appreciates skillful USDel work reflected in proposal reported Delsec 1741, May 19.1 Subject to following points you are authorized conclude agreement on basis this proposal: 1. Dept is prepared to abandon its previous position that resumption ACA activities generally is a condition precedent to reparation discussions with Sovs, but it understands that after notification to Sovs as indicated para 1 (2) urtel, initiative will be left with Sovs to react to proposals on set aside and reciprocal deliveries.

2. There is a possibility Sov response may include demand for reactivation ACA allocation machinery which we should probably have to discuss. This would delay IARA allocations. Hence Dept considers it essential to ensure that allocations to IARA have become to maximum extent accomplished facts before whole reparation issue becomes involved with resumption ACA activities, which though unlikely must be considered possible. This can best be done by immediate agreement that plants on lists one thru four be allocated by zone commanders.

3. Appears from Delsec 1743, Embstel 2164, May 192 that USDel has misunderstood situation re these lists. Plants listed in Secdel 1577 are plants on lists one thru four as notified Secdel 1576.3 As stated Embstel 1417 [1487?] of Apr 10,4 and in minutes of Tech Mission discussions at London these lists were shown to Brit and Fr and produced favorable reaction rather than suspicion. They have also been discussed on several occasions with Brit and Fr in Washington. If no agreement for action on basis these lists, you shld appreciate that no plants can be allocated until further discussion of Tech Mission. It has always been anticipated, and has been so presented to Brit and Fr in Wash, that plants wld be cleared in groups in effort avoid complete stoppage of flow until all plants had been finally considered by Cabinet Group. Hope to have additional lists of plants cleared for allocation in two–three weeks.

4. If 75–25 division plants these lists desired by Brit-Fr, concept of broad industrial category your para 1(1) does not appear wholly applicable and some arbitrary basis division shld be followed in interest of speed.

5. Prohibited list airmailed May 17 as stated Secdel 1575.5 If not yet recd advise Niact and list will be telegraphed.

6. We understand from you Clay concurs. On this understanding, Army concurs but (a) points out its belief that exclusion of items of equipment prohibited from export will be very difficult for zone commanders to implement and (b) makes strong recommendation that Soviet be required make reciprocal deliveries already due before any additional capital equipment delivered.

Marshall

1 London telegram 2163, p. 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 165].

2 Not printed; it reported that British and French representatives were seriously concerned over the uncertainty regarding the contents of the lists of items, shipment of which to the U.S.S.R. and the Soviet satellites would be prohibited. They were also concerned regarding American views on deletions from lists of plants available for reparations. (740.00119 Council/5–1948)

3 Telegram 1749, Secdel 1577, May 14, to London, is not printed. For telegram 1746, Secdel 1576, May 13, to London, see p. 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156].

4  Post, p. 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445].

5 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–2148: Telegram

[Document 173]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   niact London, May 21, 1948—8 p. m.

2214. Re mytel 2186, May 20.1 At the resumption of our discussion on the security report Massigli this afternoon informed us of the two notes which the French Government handed to the American Embassy in Paris last night. I assume the text of both of these notes has already been communicated to you. The first is joint note to the British and American Governments on the tripartite talks on Germany which suggests postponement of announcement and application of certain aspects of the German program notably convocation of the constituent assembly. The note which is based on certain erroneous assumptions and conclusions, likewise maintains the French opposition to the election of members to the constituent assembly.2 The second note addressed to the US Govt, a copy of which was handed to the British Foreign Office this afternoon, deals with the necessity of a coordination of political policy and the unity of action in the face of the growing Soviet menace on the part of the British, French and American Governments and promises that the three governments concerned take stock of the present situation through consultation among themselves before determining what measures should now be envisaged, including timing of policy with respect to Germans.3

In the light of these communications, a meeting of the heads of the three delegations was held this afternoon to examine the situation and determine the future course of our work as it seemed to place an entirely new aspect upon our discussions here. Massigli explained that the French note was only an expression of the grave concern felt by the French Government that the allied governments had not given sufficient consideration to the serious implications of the present situation, at the same time that a German policy was being formulated which might have very unfortunate consequences and be regarded by the Soviet Union as a threat which would provoke action. France felt not sufficient attention has been paid to the measures to be taken to counteract such action. The French Government does not wish to follow any course which might be provocative, particularly as in recent days it has learned through the French Ambassador in Washington that for some months to come, in spite of the good will of the US Government, the US, in the event of any emergency, could not bring to the western governments any material support. The French Government is fully committed to the policy of building western Europe but before reaching final decision with respect to Germany it is important to consult and to examine this whole problem at the highest level to see where we are going.

In response to my inquiry why this question is raised now when the situation is not more serious than it was in February or March or middle April, Massigli replied that France had realized since February that the military situation of the western powers was worse than then thought. Particularly during the coming months before the winter sets in, in its opinion, are the most urgently critical [apparent garble]. During this period appearance of provocative action should be avoided. I pointed out that I could not understand why, when the situation for the western powers had been materially strengthened by the European Recovery Program, by the Brussels Pact, by certain conversations regarding its implementation which have recently been held among signatory powers, by the President’s statement of March 17, and by his statement of support of the Brussels Pact, this note should be presented at this late stage and asked whether the situation would ever be ripe for the opinion of the French Government to proceed with the organization of a government in western Germany.

Strang then pointed out that whereas this conference could not, of course, express an opinion upon the French communication nevertheless it raised a question beyond that of merely suggesting that the governments look at the program as a whole and proposed a revision of a program already prepared here. It had been assumed that the recommendations of this conference were to be looked at as a whole and the French Government now has some objections to a part of the program, notably the questions of timing which had been regarded as an essential element. He pointed out that the question of the Ruhr and security depended upon agreements on the establishment of a German Government.

I pointed out that if it were a question of provocation the establishment of the Ruhr authority was as provocative to the Soviets as any other phase of the program and that currency reform itself would similarly be resented.

Massigli replied the French Government did not wish to bargain but to weigh the advantages and risks, particularly as the German policy was full of risks in itself and the risk from the Soviet Union seemed clearer and clearer each day.

Both Strang and I declared that any failure to proceed now would have extremely adverse effects as it would be interpreted by the Soviet Union as a weakness to be exploited and by Germany as a weakness which made it unreasonable for her to rely upon the western powers. The risks of doing nothing were substantially greater than those involved in carrying out this program.

Although Massigli urged that we continue to consider the recommendations to be submitted to the governments, both Strang and I felt that it was necessary that we should seek instructions before agreeing to this procedure and have suspended talks at least until Monday although the press will receive impression that work will continue.

In view of the foregoing, it is our unanimous opinion that while the French position may have been inspired by real apprehensions, they are probably seizing this occasion to force a postponement of the establishment of the provisional government in Germany on the one hand, and are also on the other hand probably using this as an opportunity to trade for armament from US, to obtain ministerial meeting and further concessions in regard to permanent limitations in regard to steel production and one or two other items.

It is the unanimous judgement of General Clay, Ambassador Murphy, Mr. Reber and myself that our position should be as follows: First, that we should persuade the British to join us in informing the French, when we meet again, that we are prepared to finish the work of the discussions on the clear understanding that if the French continue to oppose the time schedule for the establishment of the provisional government, we, that is the British and ourselves, will proceed, notwithstanding, in the bizonal area to follow the US–UK previously agreed program for the immediate establishment of a provisional government, and that we would express reservations as to the Ruhr and security considerations qua Germany pending clarification of the French position. We make this recommendation, because we are of the opinion that if we agree, without qualification, to the Ruhr paper and to the security document, we will have lost our trading position with the French. Moreover, any results of this conference which do not cover adequately, political developments in Germany, will give them a purely punitive character which would be disastrous to our policy in Germany. Finally, after all the publicity which has gone out, postponement of the establishment of a provisional government in the bizonal area, if not in western Germany as a whole, would be seized upon by the Soviet as an evidence of grave weakness on our part and would have adverse effects upon the morale of the Germans and on our prestige in western Europe.

It is also almost certain that in view of the publicity which has occurred, a failure to go ahead now in Germany would make almost impossible the task of German rehabilitation, so that it could participate in European recovery.

Second, we further recommend that through Washington and Paris we attempt, by the arts of persuasion, to convince the French that they should agree to the time schedule.

Finally, we suggest that if the British are not prepared to follow this course of action with us, the present talks be recessed until the whole situation can be reappraised.

We recognize that these recommendations are tough medicine, but we doubt that any milder treatment will produce the result which presumably we seek. The moment calls for vigorous though not provocative action.4

Sent Department as 2214, repeated Paris (personal for the Ambassador’s Eyes Only) 224; USPolAd (personal for Murphy) 138.

Douglas

1 Not printed, but see footnote 3, p. 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168].

2 The text of the French Foreign Ministry note of May 20 under reference here was transmitted to the Department of State in telegram 2724, May 21, from Paris, not printed (740.00119 Council/5–2148). The note gave expression to a grave French apprehension that the proposed Western measures to rebuild the German political organization could cause a dangerous Soviet reaction. Telegram 2723, May 21, from Paris, not printed, reported that when he handed the note to Ambassador Caffery, Foreign Minister Bidault indicated French trepidation over the Western military weakness in Germany in the face of possible Soviet military aggression. The French felt that the Soviet Union might retaliate against the establishment of a government in West Germany by driving the Western powers out of Berlin (740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–2148).

3 The translated text of the French Foreign Ministry note of May 20 summarized here was transmitted to the Department in telegram 2720, May 21, from Paris, not printed (740.00119 Council/5–2148).

4 In telegram 2730, May 22, from Paris, not printed, Ambassador Caffery concurred in the position set forth here (840.00/5–2248).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–2148: Telegram

[Document 174]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact London, May 21, 1948—9 p. m.

2215. The principal erroneous conclusions and assumptions of fact contained in the French note referred to in my 2214, May 21,1 are: (1) It is stated the Germans are reticent about the immediate constitution of a Government in western Germany—eight minister presidents have unanimously requested a constitution.

(2) It is felt there is a resurgence of nationalism. The vote in Hesse was local, to a large extent spurious and has no national significance.

(3) It is alleged the London proposals involve five appeals to the ballot box in less than one year. All five questions involved could be resolved by two elections.

(4) It is claimed there has been no progress in respect of security. French security demands have largely been met by the report on security and Massigli himself declared he derived great satisfaction from US proposals on this subject. (See mytel 2167, May 19.2 )

(5) It is assumed the greatest provocation to the Soviet Union would be the announcement of a constituent assembly. The Ruhr proposals, excluding the Soviets from the international authority, which the Soviets have already protested, and currency reform in the western zones, would be equally, if not more resented by the Soviet Union.3

Douglas

1  Supra.

2  Ante, p. 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167].

3 In telegram 2216, May 21, from London, not printed, Ambassador Caffery observed that the American Delegation had attempted to meet almost every French demand at the London Conference. Douglas observed further that if the French were seriously apprehensive about provoking the Soviet Union, a meeting on the ministerial level in the current circumstances would be especially provocative. (740.00119 Council/5–2148)

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Tinder Secretary of State (Lovett) 711.61/5–2148

[Document 175]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Tinder Secretary of State (Lovett)

top secret [Washington,] May 21, 1948.

Participants: The French Ambassador

The Under Secretary

Mr. Achilles, WE

The Ambassador, who was leaving for Paris this evening, called to inquire about three matters: the Smith–Molotov–Wallace–Stalin communications, the Vandenberg Resolution, and Germany.

In response to his query as to the present status of US–USSR relations in the light of the recent interchanges, I told the Ambassador that our various public statements made the situation perfectly clear and that we considered the matter closed with the Secretary’s statement of May 19.1 I said our purpose had been solely to make clear to the Soviet Government that we had no aggressive intentions but that we intended resolutely to follow our present policies. In response to his question as to whether further conversations would have been held in Moscow had the Soviet Government not taken the matter to the radio, I replied that we had a number of bilateral questions to discuss with the Russians but that we had no thought of discussing multilateral questions other than in the appropriate forums, such as the United Nations, the CFM or the Control Council in Berlin.

I said that the Vandenberg resolution was literally in the lap of Congress and that we could not plan further steps at least until we have seen what the House Foreign Affairs Committee had in mind. The Ambassador inquired whether any further legislation on this subject was contemplated before the next session and I replied that it was not. He intimated that there was a feeling of disappointment in France that we were not acting more quickly in support of the Brussels Treaty countries. I reminded him that there was no basis for any disappointment on the part of his government in as much as we had repeatedly made clear the necessity for the Brussels Treaty countries to formulate, develop and begin carrying out their own plans for their integrated defense before seeking our help. I told him that in my conversations on the Hill I had encountered a growing feeling of exasperation that we were being called upon to do everything for Europe, not only to spend more than 15 billions to aid in its recovery, but to rearm Europe as well as ourselves. I added that the two worst things that could happen in this country, from the European point of view, would be for us to run into a period of deficit financing which would cause immediate abandonment of ERP or for us to become so disgusted that we would revert to isolationism. I reiterated that the best thing the Europeans could do from the point of view of American public opinion would be to push forward energetically on both recovery and defense in order to show that they were relying primarily on their own efforts rather than on help from us. He asked whether it was correct to assume that, aside from some possible discussions, there would be no concrete developments in U.S. support for Western Europe for at least eight months. I said that there was insufficient time left in the present session for anything beyond the Vandenberg resolution but that Congress might recess rather than adjourn and that, should a military emergency arise, Congress would naturally be reconvened at once.

On Germany I said I had just come from a teletype conversation with Douglas which had been badly garbled but which indicated that eleventh hour demands by the French were threatening all the good work accomplished in the London talks. I said we could hardly look with pleasure on such a result being caused by French theoretical demands. The Ambassador said that he knew that two notes had been presented to Ambassador Caffery and Harvey in Paris yesterday but did not know what they contained. He thought one related to the German talks and the other to the general security problem. I said that one thing which was having an increasingly exasperating effect in Congress was our having to pay 1,200,000,000 dollars for the support of British and French troops in Germany as well as our own and for the German civilian population. That money could better be spent in assisting the British and French recovery. The sooner German industry could be increased from its present 40% production rate the letter it would be. The German burden must be taken off our backs and the Germans made self-supporting. We were determined that Germany should not again become a menace but felt that if it did not become self-supporting it would become a cesspool into which all the evil of Europe could flow and which the Russians could easily take over. Surely the French did not want that. Bonnet indicated a measure of agreement but referred to French psychological difficulties and their need for reassurance on security in general. He intimated that French worries over Germany were not unrelated to disappointment over lack of progress on American support for the Brussels Treaty. I said we were aware of the French psychological problem but that they would do well to bear American psychology in mind as well.

R[obert] A. L[ovett]

1 For additional documentation on the interchanges under reference here, see volume iv .

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/5–2148: Telegram

[Document 176]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, May 22, 1948—2 p. m.

1877. For Douglas from Lovett. Proceed along lines indicated urtel 2214,1 endeavoring to persuade French and checking British position re your suggestion concurred in by Clay, Murphy and Reber. Do not commit us as we need time to get top level clearance here.

Assume Clay has taken into account that announcement concerning provisional govt may give Soviets excuse to intensify pressure in Berlin, also that US and British Delegations feel danger of delay in Germany is greater than risks involved in Soviet reaction.2 [Lovett.]

Marshall

1 May 21, p. 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173].

2 In telegram 2233, May 24, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas confirmed that the assumptions stated here were correct (740.00119 Council/5–2448).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–2448: Telegram

[Document 177]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact London, May 24, 1948—1 p. m.

2228. For Marshall and Lovett from Douglas. Had a long discussion this morning, first with Strang and later with Bevin in Strang’s presence. The French position was reviewed in considerable detail.

Bevin’s program consists of the following four points: 1. He will see Massigli today so as not to give the impression of going around him.

2. He will send a personal not a formal communication to Bidault in which he will say that he hopes the French will not place him in a position where he will find it necessary to proceed with the US in the bizonal area; that he much prefers to move forward with the three govts together.

3. The meetings in London should be pushed to a successful conclusion.

4. He will not agree to a meeting on a ministerial level at the present time. He feels that such a meeting would be a definitive substitute for the Council of Foreign Ministers, would be a most provocative act, would tend to freeze positions and would not provide the same opportunity for face-saving proposals that discussions at the present level provide.

In order to avoid the impression that the conference has been suspended, there will be an informal meeting of the heads of the three delegations this afternoon.

Sent Department as 2228, repeated Paris (for Caffery) 228, repeated USPolAd Berlin (for Murphy and Clay) 141.

Douglas

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–2448: Telegram

[Document 178]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

secret Paris, May 24, 1948—6 p. m.

2755. In further explanation of why Bidault gave me the two notes (mytel 2720 and 2724 May 211 ), Chauvel gave me to understand that Bidault is in a panic over the attitude of the non-Communist French press during the past two weeks in regard to the London conversations and is especially concerned over the attitude of the Socialists whom he expected to be friendly to his position. (He was not referring to very recent articles obviously inspired by the Quai d’Orsay. I have referred to these articles and let the French Government know in plain terms what I think of them.)

In other words Bidault now fears that he has gone too far to meet us at London and is trying to find a way to crawl out.

Sent Department 2755; repeated London 426 and Berlin 241.

Caffery

1 Neither the notes nor the telegrams under reference here are printed, but see telegram 2214, May 21, from London, p. 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], and footnotes 2 and 3 thereto.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/5–2048: Telegram

[Document 179]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, May 24, 1948—7 p. m.

1885. Following are Dept’s views urtels 21671 and 2186.2 In view great importance of security question which will require later detailed consideration by US Govt, you will appreciate Dept’s comments are submitted by way of informal guidance.

Section of draft report on security dealing with occupation period appears generally acceptable. Re (3) “disarmament and control of industry” we suggest that “mil govs should exercise agreed controls, etc.” Reference to “such controls as have been agreed” seems undesirable in view existing deviations from ACC provisions which have been made necessary by Sov opposition to evolution of controls already instituted. Re (5) “military occupation” possible refinement would be “It was agreed that the occupation of Germany would presumably have to continue for a long period of time.”

Dept concerned about section dealing with post-control period, in particular points (1) and (3) on demilitarization and disarmament and control of industry. We should have preferred treating these as matters for peace treaty decision (par 2, Deptel 17103 ). Present text in absence of reference to general security system or measures for preservation German territorial integrity could be literally construed to mean Germany would be left defenseless against possible eastern pressure. We do not believe this is what French intend. We remain firm in our resolve to prevent German future aggression as you may stress by our agreement on need for consultation. At the same time it is impossible for us to undertake hard and fast unrelated commitments of the nature specified in draft report concerning post-occupation period. We would be prepared to accept statement expressing expectation that controls in that period would evolve from present controls on basis of consultation. Peace settlement will presumably provide for demilitarization, disarmament, control of industry, inspection and enforcement, and in such a way as to be related to disposition of United Nations acting through regional arrangements as provided in Article 53 of the Charter. We envisage that regional arrangements would also eventually provide for defense against attack by or through Germany which would necessarily include measures for German territorial integrity.

In view importance which concluding communique will assume at this juncture please cable us draft text before issuance.

Above is submitted in specific reply to your inquiries as distinct from change in general position created by French.

Marshall

1 May 19, p. 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167].

2 Not printed; it transmitted the text of a draft report on security that had been prepared by the London Conference (740.00119 Council/5–2048). For the final text of the report, see p. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194].

3 May 11, p. 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/5–2448: Telegram

[Document 180]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, May 24, 1948—10 p. m.

1893. For Douglas from the Secretary and Lovett.

1. We confirm your opinion that with a full understanding of the risks involved it is essential to proceed with completion of agreement at London on basis projected, including adherence to time schedule for provisional Govt.

2. Ascertain specifically from Brit their willingness to go ahead with provisional Govt for bizonal area on proposed time schedule, without the French if necessary, which we are prepared to do. Please advise immediately if Brit will definitely commit themselves.

3. Continue to persuade French, impressing them we are convinced that German Govt organization is required for success of ERP, that any hesitation or rift in allied front will be exploited as sign of weakness to detriment our position in Berlin and that French defection is likely to provoke strong Congressional reaction. If French do not yield they may then be informed that US can undertake no commitments regarding Ruhr arrangement and security against Germany. Have French considered that absence of Ruhr settlement restricting control to neighboring interested countries may leave Ruhr area open to later Sov claim to participate in affairs of that area?

4. In order to anticipate and counter in advance Sov propaganda, you may discuss, initially with Bevin, desirability of having communiqué dealing with conference work include as a preamble explanation of the circumstances which impel western nations to set up governmental arrangements in western Germany, their purpose and their provisional character pending a final settlement on basis of German economic and political unity. Statement could mention hitherto unsuccessful efforts to reach comprehensive decisions on German Govt and could express view that progress achieved respecting western Germany would not only not preclude but should facilitate eventual attainment of four power agreement on Germany as a whole. Communiqué might be presented to Sovs immediately prior to public release.

5. In your discretion you may urge upon Benelux representatives same considerations presented to French respecting our judgment on need for establishment western German provisional Govt.

6. If French maintain their opposition, as we earnestly hope they will not, discuss with Berlin possibility of achieving agreement at least on immediate currency reform throughout trizonal area and other economic measures which will facilitate operation of ERP.

Please inform Clay and Murphy regarding this message.

For Caffery—Please urge upon Bidault pertinent considerations set forth above.

Sent London as 1893; repeated to Paris as 1786.

Marshall

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Council/5–2148: Telegram

[Document 181]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

top secret   us urgent Washington, May 25, 1948—5 p. m.

1791. Embtel 2720 May 21.1 Pls reply to Bidault along following lines:2

U.S. Govt has in recent months received a number of indications of French Govt’s concern at state of international situation. While many unfavorable developments have taken place during past two years, there have of late been increasing indications that firm policies of Free Powers have already had stabilizing effect and tended to reduce tension.

U.S. Govt is convinced it can best contribute to further stabilization and improvement of situation by continuing calmly and resolutely to follow this same firm course. It has endeavored to make clear to all concerned both its determination to do so and fact its policies can in no sense be justifiably taken as provocation by any one. These considerations apply equally to U.S. efforts to strengthen free countries of Europe, both through ERP and through eventual military support of some type which President has made clear will be provided with determination equal to that of free Europeans to defend themselves and for which broad nonpartisan public approval is being progressively gained. In this connection, French Govt has doubtless noted resolution unanimously recommended to U.S. Senate by Foreign Relations Committee on May 19. That resolution provides a powerful bipartisan initiative looking toward implementation of President’s March 17 declaration.

U.S. Govt fully agrees on desirability of maintaining unity of policy in action between three Western Powers and trusts that French Govt, as well as Brit Govt, agrees as to soundness of position expressed above. While spectacular high-level meeting at this time might well have unfortunate repercussions, direct consultation between them is currently taking place in London. U.S. Govt hopes this consultation will further consolidate such unity. Should it fail to do so, effect on public opinion in a number of countries, including U.S., would indeed be unfortunate.3

Mr. Marshall has asked me to express his earnest personal hope that French Govt can see its way clear to approving program for Western Germany formulated in London talks. After reviewing all aspects of problem, Mr. Marshall is convinced dangers of delay are more serious than those involved in implementing it promptly.

In larger field of security, U.S. Govt desires to strengthen ability of free nations of Europe resolutely to resist aggression and their confidence that they can successfully do so. It contemplates doing so in association with signatories of Five-Power Treaty and other nations in accordance with Senate resolution. It also desires to contribute toward maintenance of peace by making clear that, while its policies threaten no one, any armed attack affecting its national security will be met by immediate exercise of right of individual or collective self-defense recognized by Article 51 of Charter. When Senate resolution has been passed, form and extent of U.S. association with parties to Five-Power Treaty of March 17 will be developed in consultation with parties to that Treaty. U.S. Govt will be motivated by desire to achieve objectives stated above and will give careful consideration to views of French, Brit, and Benelux Govts as to best means of achieving them.

Sent Paris as 1791; rptd London as 1906, Berlin as 910.

Marshall

1 Not printed, but see footnote 3, p. 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 173].

2 On May 26 Ambassador Caffery gave Foreign Minister Bidault a communication along the lines outlined here.

3 Telegram 2816, May 27, from Paris, not printed, reported that Bidault accepted the decision that a meeting of foreign ministers would be inopportune and affirmed hopefulness over the outcome of the London Conference (740.00119 Council/5–2748).

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary General of the French Ministry for Foreign Affairs (Chauvel) Paris Embassy Files: 1948: File—800

[Document 182]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary General of the French Ministry for Foreign Affairs (Chauvel)

informal and secret Paris, May 25, 1948.

My Dear Colleague: Following our recent conversation on the German situation, I venture to give you frankly and informally my opinion at this juncture.

The French notes of May 20, 1948,1 with regard to the general international situation and to the conversations in London concerning Germany, are disquieting, since the action with regard to Germany recommended therein cannot fail to have unfortunate effects beyond the German situation itself.

If the concern expressed by the French Government is based on the effect which the measures proposed at London would have upon the Soviets, it must be pointed out that a meeting of the three Ministers at this juncture, as suggested by the notes under reference, might well be considered by the Soviets as an especially provocative act.

Assuming, therefore, that the questions at issue can best be resolved through the means of the present conversations at London, I feel it essential to point out that if these negotiations, which have gone on for several months and whose general scope has become widely known, should now produce only so partial a solution as that suggested by the French Government, not only would the prestige of the Western powers be severely damaged, but this demonstration of their inability to agree among themselves would greatly encourage and strengthen the obduracy of the Soviets which, up to now, has been more and more thrown on the defensive by the evidences of the determination and unity of the West.

The United States Government is doing everything possible at this time to demonstrate its support of its Allies in Western Europe. In addition to the broad scale assistance of the Marshall Plan, the United States is seeking in particular to bolster the position of France. The recent additional shipments which have made possible the increase in the French bread ration is one such action. The favorable report of the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee on the question of American association with the security arrangements of the Western European powers is another manifestation of the unchanged intent of the American Government and people to use their resources effectively to strengthen Western Europe.

If the French Government, casting aside the progress made in recent months, should now insist on retreating to so limited a program as the mere announcement of currency reform, pooling of foreign trade, and revision of internal frontiers, not merely would European belief in the force and unity of the Western powers suffer a severe blow, but the confidence of the American people in Western Europe would sustain an even greater shock.

Very sincerely yours,

Jefferson Caffery

1 Neither printed, but see telegram 2214, May 21, from London, p. 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–2548: Telegram

[Document 183]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, May 25, 1948—9 p. m.

2270. Delsec 1755. While we agree that it would be preferable to deal with demilitarization, disarmament and control over industry in the final settlement (reDeptel 1885, May 241 ), nevertheless it is necessary, in our opinion, at this time to indicate that some form of controls will be included in the final settlement. For this reason, we had previously suggested general language to indicate that some prohibitions upon German armed forces and upon war industry would be maintained without, however, committing ourselves, in any way, at this time to the specific failure of these controls or the specific limitations to be placed upon German armed forces or prohibited industries.

During a discussion of the draft report on security2 today, it was agreed for the first period that the military governors should exercise “controls” with respect to disarmament and demilitarization (re paragraph three). The words “as have been or may be agreed” were omitted as agreement on this subject among the military governors was implied in the powers reserved to them under the occupation statute (TRI 17 revised3 ). It was agreed that the paragraphs relating to military occupation and consultation in the first section of the report as well as paragraph 6 in the second section should be consolidated and inserted in a separate chapter relating to general provisions.

I did not suggest insertion of the word “presumably” in paragraph 5 because at this junction to do so might have increased the difficulties. If, however, you think the conference should be jeopardized even more than it is at present by insistence on this word, I shall of course offer it.

In order to meet the French requirements in respect to demilitarization and disarmament during the second period and at the same time to take care of Department’s concern, it was tentatively agreed that this section should be redrafted along the following lines:

A general statement would be inserted to the effect that it was agreed that Germany must not be permitted again to become an aggressive power and that prior to the removal of the forces of occupation, agreement will be reached among the governments concerned with respect to the necessary measures of demilitarization, disarmament, control of industry, and occupation of key areas.

Paragraphs dealing with the international control of the Ruhr, would remain as it reads in section two the earlier draft (re mytel 21864 ). The provision relating to inspection might be retained as well.

This simpler form of drafting was tentatively accepted by the heads of delegations who will examine a new text prepared by working party tomorrow. I should appreciate as early an indication as possible whether this approach is satisfactory to you.5

Douglas

1  Ante, p. 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179].

2 For the final text of the Report on Security, May 26, see p. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194].

3 See document TRI/17 (Final), May 19, p. 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170].

4 Dated May 20, not printed; it transmitted the draft text of the Report on Security (740.00119 Council/5–2048). For the final text of the Report, as amended and approved on May 26, see p. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194].

5 Telegram 2282, Delsec 1757, May 26, from London, not printed, reported that the Conference had accepted the working party redraft of the Report on Security. Ambassador Douglas pointed out at the May 26 morning meeting of the Conference, that American agreement to the Report on Security was to be viewed in the light of the expressed interest of the United States Government in support of the security of the Western European Union (740.00119 Council/5–2648).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–2548: Telegram

[Document 184]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, May 25, 1948—9 p. m.

2271. Delsec 1754. Massigli informed us today that the French Government had now decided to go ahead with the German program but as I understand it, before giving final agreement to putting into effect and timing of the various recommendations the French Government considers it necessary that these recommendations be discussed at a secret meeting of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Assembly and that approval of this new policy as regards Germany must be sought by means of a general debate along broad lines on the floor of the Assembly.

Such course of action would, of course, be exceedingly dangerous as it would mean public consideration of all of the issues, including the secret draft instructions to the Military Governors regarding the principles to underlie the occupation statute and the German constitution. On the latter case, this would mean public discussion outside Germany before the agreed recommendations had even been submitted to the Minister Presidents. Such procedure would create the impression that we are imposing a form of government on Germany rather than requiring the Germans themselves to take the initiative. The matter likewise involves public discussion of disarmament [apparent omission] as regards security measures without any consideration of these by the appropriate bodies in the US.

We understand that, of course, in the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Assembly there are Communist members who could make capital out of such discussion. I should appreciate your comments in general and in particular as to what effect this might have in the Senate.

Sent Department as 2271, repeated Paris 232 for the Ambassador Eyes Only.

Douglas

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–2548: Telegram

[Document 185]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Paris, May 25, 1948—10 p. m.

2780. I talked very frankly to Bidault this evening regarding the French position on Germany and he was very conciliatory. He said “Far from wanting to break with you we want the success of the London Conference and we will go along with you, but don’t make it too hard for me. I’ll have to face the Assembly and given the attitude of the Communists, the Gaullists, and the Socialists, I don’t know how we will come out. Everyone will ask me if the Russians take aggressive action at Berlin, what will the Americans do. In the long run if war comes, the victory on your side is certain but what will happen to us in the meantime. We know that you will do your best but what can I say to my critics who do not want to see France overrun by the Russians?”1

Sent Department 2780; repeated London 430, Berlin 245.

Caffery

1  In telegram 2867, May 28, from Paris, not printed, Ambassador Caffery reported further on Bidault’s views: “Bidault told me again this afternoon that ‘the London Conference must succeed.’ He said: ‘Of course my people at London must defend our interests the best they can.’ We discussed again the over-all Western European interest and he said: ‘Tell your government I am on your side and in the long run I am sure we will work something satisfactory out, but at the same time I must think about our public opinion here.’” (740.00119 Council/5–2848)

The Under Secretary of State (Lovett) to the Secretary of the Army (Royall) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–1848

[Document 186]

The Under Secretary of State (Lovett) to the Secretary of the Army (Royall)

top secret [Washington,] May 25, 1948.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I have your letter of May 18, 1948,1 in which you have expressed concern regarding proposals put forth by Ambassador Douglas in London relating to the agreement for the international control of the Ruhr. I understand that the points at issue are being worked out satisfactorily within the United States Delegation.

Whatever final wording may be agreed upon at London, I am convinced that, with respect to the Ruhr control authority, protection of United States financial responsibility in Germany during the period of the Economic Recovery Program should be sought through coordination of any special arrangements for the Ruhr with the over-all recovery program and its administration. We must not forget that this Government’s position with respect to Germany as formulated at the time of the conclusion of the amended Bizonal Agreement must now be understood in relation to the subsequent and over-riding policy of the President and Congress as expressed in the Economic Cooperation Act which covers the European economic problem as a whole.

Sincerely yours,

Robert A. Lovett

1  Ante, p. 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/5–2648: Telegram

[Document 187]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent Washington, May 26, 1948—5 p. m.

1918. Personal for Douglas. We had assumed that continuing consultation re consequences resulting from institution of program for western Germany was implicit in maintenance joint front. Accordingly we are agreeable to Massigli’s suggestion first par. urtel 2245.1 As regards consultation on local military situation, suggest direct talks between military commanders who would keep their Govts advised. Appropriate secrecy would of course be observed consistent with aim to avoid provocation to Sovs.

Dept has no strong views on method nomination to constituent assembly although we believe this should, if possible, accord with responsible German opinion and we agree direct elections preferable. Inconceivable that conference could break down on this issue and your two suggested formulae acceptable to us, if concurred in by Clay.

Appreciate your proposal re treatment of French note and will act accordingly.

Marshall

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–2648: Telegram

[Document 188]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, May 26, 1948—6 p. m.

1812. Personal for Caffery. Re French suggested debate of German program by Assembly Foreign Affairs Committee (Douglas’ 232 to you1 ) we can conceive of nothing that would more effectively destroy basis of conference if such debate took place before agreement at London and we assume French will have perception to abandon any such idea. Pls advise to what extent London agreement if reached will require Assembly approval before announcement of final French Govt approval and your estimate of effect such debate, if any, on implementation of program.

Repeated to London as Deptel 1924.

Marshall

1 Same as telegram 2271, Delsec 1754, May 25, from London, p. 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–2148: Telegram

[Document 189]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

secret
us urgent Washington, May 26, 1948—7 p. m.

1821. Urtel 2724, May 21.1 Please deliver to FonOff note along following lines, if you have no objections in light your latest conversations with Bidault:

US Govt received with surprise note delivered by FonOff to Am Ambassador, May 20, re London tripartite talks on Germany. US Govt notes that many issues raised in French communication are being dealt with in continuing discussions at London, but has following observations to make on several points: 1. It is not believed correct that the Germans have been reticent about the immediate constitution of a Govt in Western Germany. Eight Ministers President of Western German states have unanimously requested a constitution.

2. Vote in Hesse was local, with no national significance. It may be expected, however, that further stagnation of conditions in Germany and delay in governmental development will promote the revival of German nationalist elements.

3. London proposals do not involve five appeals to ballot box in less than year. Five questions involved could be resolved by two elections.

4. Reference to failure of London talks to make progress with respect to question of security against Germany must have been composed prior to receipt of report on security prepared by delegations May 20 which indicates marked progress.

US regards delay with respect to organization of federal government in Western Germany as fundamentally contrary to successful fulfillment of whole program formulated in London talks. Moreover, maximum German contribution to European recovery cannot be obtained without establishment of political organization of Western Germany. Delay would also be detrimental to desired process of integration Western Germany into Western Europe. So much publicity has been given exact details of proposed time-table that failure to proceed therewith would appear to Soviets as sign of weakness, and to other peoples, including Germans, as appeasement. US Govt not moved at all by desire to anticipate Soviet initiative. While appreciating French concern, US Govt does not believe that western nations can permit themselves to be deterred from actions they regard as right by consideration of possible Soviet objections.

US Govt hopes that French Govt will not permit substantial progress toward agreement achieved during talks to be endangered. US Govt believes that common interest lies in loyal pursuit of common objectives for Western Europe with respect to which prospective agreements of London talks on Germany are essential part.2

Sent Paris as 1821; repeated to London as 1931, and USPolAd Berlin as 928.

Marshall

1 Not printed; it transmitted the text of the French Foreign Ministry note of May 20. For substance of note, see footnote 2, p. 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173].

2 In his telegram 2822, May 27, from Paris, not printed, Ambassador Caffery observed that since he had already delivered communications to Foreign Minister Bidault on May 25 and 26 in pursuance to earlier Department instructions, a further note would be a tactical error. Caffery instead proposed that he keep after Bidault and other Cabinet ministers and continue to drive home to them verbally the overall American views (740.00119 Council/5–2748). In telegram 1850, May 28, to Paris, not printed, the Department concurred in Ambassador Caffery’s suggestion (740.00119 Council/5–2848).

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 118: File—TRI Documents

[Document 190]

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany 1

secret

TRI/16 (Final)

International Control of the Ruhr

Whereas international security and general economic recovery require:

—that the resources of the Ruhr shall not in the future be used for the purpose of aggression but shall be used in the interests of peace;

—that access to the coal, coke and steel of the Ruhr, which was previously subject to the exclusive control of Germany, be in the future guaranteed without discrimination to the countries of Europe cooperating in the common economic good;

Whereas it is desirable for the political and economic well-being of these countries and a democratic Germany that there be close association of their economic life;

Whereas it is important that trade between the countries mentioned in the preceding paragraph should be facilitated by lowering trade barriers and by any other means,

The Governments of the United States, United Kingdom and France, after consultation with the Governments of the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg, have agreed as follows: 1. An international control shall be set up in the Ruhr and exercised by an International Authority for the Ruhr (hereinafter called the International Authority); the International Authority shall be organised forthwith and shall begin to exercise its functions at a time to be determined by the contracting Governments, and in any case before the establishment of a provisional German Government.

2. The International Authority shall be composed of representatives of the United States, United Kingdom, France, Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg and Germany.

3. The International Authority shall take its decisions by majority vote. The United States, United Kingdom, France and Germany shall have three votes each, and the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg one vote each.

4. Until the contracting Governments decide otherwise, the representative of Germany shall be designated and the vote for Germany exercised by those Powers which share the responsibility for the economic administration of that part of Germany which includes the Ruhr (hereinafter called “the Occupying Powers concerned”).

5. The functions of the International Authority shall, subject to existing or future international agreements among the Contracting Governments concerning the allocation of coal, coke and steel, be as follows:— (a) subject to the provisions of Article 6 below, to make the division of coal, coke and steel from the Ruhr as between German consumption and export, in order to ensure adequate access to supplies of these products, taking into account the essential needs of Germany

(b) to ensure that the German authorities do not institute, carry out or permit artificial measures or discriminatory practices which would distort the movement of Ruhr coal, coke and steel in international trade, except for measures of protection approved by the International Authority

(c) to exercise, in the circumstances envisaged in Article 10(b) below, the powers described in Article 9(b) below.

(d) During the period in which the Occupying Powers concerned exercise supreme authority (which period is hereinafter called “The Control Period”) to bring to the attention of the occupation authorities concerned measures which would ensure, and thereafter itself to ensure, safeguard and protection for coal, coke and steel enterprises in the Ruhr involving foreign interests, within the framework of existing or future agreements between the Allied Governments represented on the Authority.

6. (a) The findings of the International Authority under the provisions of Article 5(a) shall be consistent with the programmes of the C.E.E.C. for the recovery of the participating countries.

(b) During the Control Period, or until such earlier time as may be agreed upon by the Contracting Governments, the findings of the International Authority under the provisions of Article 5(a) will be transmitted to the Military Governors for implementation. The Military Governors will proceed with the implementation of these findings (1) to the extent consistent with any agreements relative to the provision of financial assistance to Germany which are now or may come in effect between any two or more of the Contracting Governments; and (2) in accordance with the terms of any existing international agreement among the Contracting Governments, or extension thereof, with respect to the allocation of coal and coke.

7. The International Authority shall have the right: (a) to receive regular reports on production, distribution and consumption of Ruhr coal, coke and steel;

(b) to demand additional reports on these subjects whenever necessary;

(c) to verify the information at its disposal by enquiries on the spot and by subpoena and examination of witnesses;

(d) to call for information about supplies of coal, coke and steel from sources other than the Ruhr.

8. During the Control Period the occupation authorities concerned will maintain adequate control over the management in the Ruhr coal and coke industry.

9. During the Control Period, or until such earlier time as may be agreed upon by the Contracting Governments, the occupation authorities concerned will maintain (a) such powers in respect of the coal, coke and steel industries of the Ruhr as will enable the International Authority to perform the functions and exercise the rights assigned to it in Articles 5 and 7 above, and as may be necessary to ensure that the decisions with respect to the export of these products from Germany are carried out:

(b) such further powers as may be necessary to enforce the disarmament of Germany, including power to control the supply of Ruhr coal, coke and steel to any industries which may be prohibited or limited in the interests of security by agreement among the Contracting Governments or under the terms of any international agreement to which they shall become party.

10. (a) When the occupation authorities concerned relinquish the powers referred to in Article 9(a) the German authorities shall be responsible to the International Authority for enabling it to perform the functions and exercise the rights assigned to it in Articles 5 and 7 above and shall take such measures as may be necessary to ensure that the decisions of the International Authority are carried out. (b) When the occupation authorities concerned relinquish the further powers referred to in Article 9(b) these powers shall be transferred to such international body as may be designated for these purposes by the Peace Settlement or by any international Agreement to which the Allied Governments represented on the Authority are parties, and the Authority shall co-operate with that international body in such ways as shall be prescribed by the Peace Settlement or by such international agreement. If no such international body is set up, these powers shall be transferred to the Authority but shall be exercised only by the Allied representatives on the Authority.

11. Should the German Government not carry out the decisions of the International Authority, the latter may, by a majority vote of the Allied representatives, find that the German Government is in default on its obligations and recommend, to the occupation authorities during the Control Period, and thereafter to the Allied Governments represented on the Authority, the application of the necessary enforcement measures, provided however that before such enforcement measures are applied the German Government shall be given a reasonable opportunity for a hearing. At the expiry of the Control Period, these enforcement measures shall be applied in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Peace Settlement or any international agreement to which the Allied Governments represented on the Authority are parties.

12. This Agreement constitutes a statement of principles which shall form the basis for a more detailed agreement setting up the International Authority.

London, 26 May, 1948.

1 This paper was approved at an informal meeting of the London Conference on Germany on the afternoon of May 27. Agreed interpretations of various articles of this paper were set forth in document TRI/23 (Final), May 26, p. 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]. Telegram 2269, May 25, from London, not printed, reported that Ambassador Douglas had made clear to the Conference that the United States reserved its position on this paper subject to consideration of the entire work of the Conference (740.00119 Council/5–2548). Telegram 2295, May 27, from London, not printed, reported that Douglas had restated the American reservation at the informal meeting of May 27 (740.00119 Council/5–2748). This paper was Annex C to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 118: File—TRI Documents

[Document 191]

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany 1

secret

TRI/20 (Final)

Provisional Territorial Arrangements

A Working Party shall be set up consisting of representatives of the United States, France, the United Kingdom, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg. The Working Party shall conclude its report and recommendations as soon as possible and in any case in sufficient time to allow the Governments concerned to reach decisions on these recommendations before the 1st September.

The Working Party shall make a preliminary study of any proposals which may be put forward for the adjustment of the present western frontiers of Germany and shall only examine and report on those proposals which involve no appreciable loss to the German economy and which, being of a minor character only, can be regarded as desirable to eliminate local anomalies and improve communications.

It is understood that the recommendations of the Working Party shall be confined to provisional readjustments which shall be subject to confirmation or modification by the terms of the final settlement with Germany and that such recommendations shall not be regarded as commitments on Governments, either as regards provisional acceptance or support at the final settlement.

The Working Party shall in addition examine and report on the boundaries of the Saar.

Any decisions reached by the Governments on the basis of the Working Party’s recommendations shall be provisionally implemented without delay.

The establishment of this Working Party shall be without prejudice to the rights of the Governments concerned to raise their economic and territorial claims at a later date and (at any rate before the final settlement with Germany.

The existence and terms of reference of this Working Party shall remain secret.

London, 26 May, 1948.

1 Telegram 2285, May 26, from London, not printed, reported that this paper was agreed upon at informal meetings of the London Conference on Germany held on May 25 and 26 (740.00119 Council/5–2648). It was Annex K to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 118: File—TRI Documents

[Document 192]

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany 1

secret

TRI/22 (Final)

Trizonal Export/Import Policy

It is agreed that the external trade of the French Zone shall, with-out prejudice to the observance of existing agreements and contracts to which the French Zone or the Combined Zone are party, be conducted through J.E.I.A., in accordance with the general rules of the J.E.I.A. Charter, with effect from the 1st August next. The Military Government of the French Zone will be associated with the management of the J.E.I.A., with its Board of Directors and, for this purpose only, the Bipartite Board, in such a way as may be agreed between the three Military Governors before that date.

Discussions shall be opened forthwith among the three Governments with a view to reaching agreement on the financial and economic issues of French participation in J.E.I.A.

United Kingdom reservation

The United Kingdom Delegation accepted the foregoing subject to the understanding that it would not be required to assume obligations to provide capital or to convert currencies additional to those which His Majesty’s Government had accepted in the revised Fusion Agreement.

French reservation

Nothing in this Agreement shall be interpreted as committing the French Government to assume an obligation to make any contribution in national or foreign currencies from its own resources to J.E.I.A.

United States reservation

Nothing in this Agreement is to be interpreted as adding to the share of the United States Government in the cost of maintaining the occupation of Germany.

London, 26 May, 1948.

1 Conference approval of this paper was reported upon in telegram 2297, Delsec 1762, May 27, from London, not printed (740.00119 Council/5–2748). It was Annex J to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 118: File—TRI Documents

[Document 193]

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany 1

TRI/23 (Final)

Agreed Minute Relative to Certain Articles of the Document Entitled “International Control of the Ruhr” (TRI/16 (Final)2 )

Article 1

It is understood that nothing in the provisions of this Article shall prevent the Bizonal and/or Trizonal area, through the appropriate authorities, from entering into a bilateral agreement with the United States Government in accordance with the provisions of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1948.3

It is understood further that the Contracting Governments will determine, in consultation with the Governments of the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxemburg, the time when the Authority begins to exercise its functions.

Article 4

It is understood that, in accepting the provisions of this Article, neither the Government of the United States nor the Government of the United Kingdom relinquishes any rights which it possesses under the Bizonal Fusion Agreement.

Article 6(b)

It is understood that the agreements referred to herein relative to financial assistance are the Bizonal Fusion Agreement between the United States and the United Kingdom and any Trizonal Fusion Agreement which may be concluded by the United States, the United Kingdom and France.

It is further understood that the international agreement relative to the allocation of coal and coke referred to in this Article and in the first sentence of Article 5 is the Agreement concluded in Moscow on 19th April, 1947,4 and subsequently modified in Berlin in connexion with (i) coke, (ii) the Saar, and any extension thereof.

It is understood that nothing in Article 6 shall affect the obligations of the signatories of the Convention for European Economic Co-operation under that Convention.

Article 12

It is understood that the Governments of the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg shall be fully associated with the preparation of this more detailed agreement.

London, 26 May, 1948.

1 Telegram 2295, May 27, from London, not printed, reported that this paper had been approved at an informal meeting of the London Conference on Germany on the afternoon of May 27 (740.00119 Council/5–2748). The agreed minutes comprising this paper were first discussed at an informal meeting of the Conference on May 25. Then and subsequently, Ambassador Douglas affirmed that the United States reserved its position on this paper subject to consideration of the entire work of the Conference. This paper was Annex D to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

2  Ante, p. 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190].

3 As originally agreed upon by the Conference on May 27, this paragraph concluded with the phrase “… bilateral agreement with the Administrator, E.C.A.” At a meeting of the Conference on the afternoon of May 28, it was agreed to restore the language presented here (see telegram 2346, Delsec 1764, May 28, p. 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 199]). The phrase had appeared in earlier versions of the document.

4 For the exchange of correspondence between Secretary of State Marshall and Foreign Minister Bidault on April 19, 1947, constituting the agreement under reference here, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 486–488.

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 118: File—TRI Documents

[Document 194]

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany 1

top secret

Report on Security

The United States, French, Benelux and United Kingdom Delegations agreed to submit the following report to their Governments:

general provisions

(1) Military Occupation

It was agreed that the occupation of Germany should continue for a long period of time. During this period it was further agreed that there should be no general withdrawal of the forces of occupation of the United States, France or the United Kingdom without prior consultation among these Governments.

The United States Delegation has been authorised to reiterate the assurance given by the United States Government that United States occupation forces in Germany will remain until the peace is secured in Europe.

(2) Consultation

It was agreed that the Governments concerned should consult if any of them should consider that there was danger of resurgence of German military power or of the adoption by Germany of a policy of aggression.

measures during the period in which the occupying powers retain supreme authority in germany

(1) Demilitarisation

It was agreed that the prohibitions on the German armed forces and the German General Staff as contained in Four Power agreements should be maintained.

(2) International Control of the Ruhr

Agreed recommendations on this are being submitted to the Governments concerned.

(3) Disarmament and Control of Industry (i) It was agreed that the Military Governors should exercise controls with respect to disarmament and demilitarisation, level of industry and certain aspects of scientific research.

(ii) As regards prohibited industries, it was agreed to ask the Military Governors to establish a Working Party with the following terms of reference: To consider the industries described as “prohibited industries” and “restricted industries” in the quadripartite Plan for Reparations and the Level of Post-War German Economy (March 1946) and the Revised Plan for Level of Industry in the U.K./U.S. Zones of Germany (August 1947), and to submit a report not later than 1st September.

(a) defining the industries which should remain prohibited,

(b) stating the amount of productive capacity in the three Western Zones which should be retained in those formerly “prohibited industries” which should henceforth be restricted only,

(c) making recommendations as to the manner in which any decisions reached tinder (a) and (b) above may be revised.

(iii) As regards any restrictions on the level of industry contained in the revised plan for the Level of Industry in the U.S./U.K. Zones of Germany and in a French plan which will be established, it was agreed that any changes which may be made without the unanimous consent of the three Military Governors shall be referred to the Governments prior to putting them into effect.

(4) Inspection and Enforcement 1. A Military Security Board for the Western Zones of Germany will be set up by the Military Governors in order to ensure the maintenance of disarmament and demilitarisation in the interests of security.

2. The Board will consist of members of the Armed Forces and of industrial experts of the three Western Occupying Powers. Its members will be nominated by, and be responsible to, the respective Military Governors.

3. The Board’s responsibilities will cover the whole field of disarmament and demilitarisation. In particular the Board will advise the Military Governors on the maintenance and enforcement of disarmament and demilitarisation restrictions. It will carry out the appropriate inspections and will recommend to the Military Governors measures necessary to: (a) prevent the revival of military or para-military organisations;

(b) ensure that there shall be no manufacture or import of any arms, war materials or any other materials or equipment which are or may be prohibited;

(c) prevent the infringement by the German authorities of restrictions in respect of certain industries;

(d) ensure that any military buildings or structures or any factories capable of producing armaments which may be retained are used for peaceful purposes only;

(e) ensure that scientific research is not directed to warlike ends;

(f) ensure that as to the construction and operation of merchant shipping and the operation of civil airlines, no war potential is created.

4. On receipt of such recommendations the Military Governors will determine by majority vote what action should be taken. In the event of disagreement between the Military Governors any of them may refer the matter to his Government.

measures after the period in which the occupying powers retain supreme authority in germany

(1) Demilitarisation, Disarmament and Control of Industry and Occupation of Key Areas

It was agreed that Germany must not again be permitted to become an aggressive power and that prior to the general withdrawal of the forces of occupation agreement will be reached among the governments concerned with respect to the necessary measures of demilitarisation, disarmament and control of industry and with respect to occupation of key areas.

(2) International Control of the Ruhr

It was agreed that control of the Ruhr should be maintained in accordance with the agreed recommendations which are being submitted to the Governments concerned.

(3) Inspection and Enforcement

It was agreed that there should be a system of inspection to ensure the maintenance of the agreed provisions of German disarmament and demilitarisation.

London, 26 May, 1948.

1 In telegram 2282, Delsec 1757, May 26, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas reported that this paper had been adopted by the Conference at a meeting on the morning of May 26. Douglas made clear to the Conference that the U.S. reserved its position on this paper subject to consideration of the entire work of the Conference. He also observed that American agreement to this paper had to be viewed in the light of the expressed interest of the United States in support of the security of Western Europe. (740.00119 Council/5–2648) This paper was Annex L to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–2748: Telegram

[Document 195]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, May 27, 1948—1 a. m.

2296. Delsec 1761. Informal meeting heads four delegations German talks this afternoon1 discussed remaining point at issue in basic political organization paper (TRI/132 ). See previous discussion same point Delsec 1742, May 20.3 Discussion was without result as French were unwilling to recede from their former position, being strongly opposed to election of delegates to Constituent Assembly. Couve de Murville and Massigli made clear that they feared procedures adopted for selection of delegates to Constituent Assembly would prejudge manner selecting members of Lower House under constitution and that French Govt was not in favor of elections carried out directly by populations of the Laender but favored elections by individual Landtage. Basis for French views was fear of taking step which would pave way for another Hitler. In reply to direct question whether French would vote against approval of constitution which provided for direct election of members of Lower House, Couve replied he did not know but that this was possible.

Douglas pointed out that conditions proposed for German constitution as well as fact Prussia was no longer in position to dominate German states removed dangers feared by French. For example, unlike Weimar Constitution, Upper House would have considerable powers; emergency powers article similar to Article 48 (Weimar) would not be permitted; citizenship in Laender as well as in Federal state would be provided for; elections would be carried out on Laender basis under arrangements to be made by individual Laender. Murphy and Clay stressed US experience in bizonal economic administration indicated German representatives considered themselves representatives of Laender and were sensitive to states rights; that Landtage members US Zone were extremely jealous of their rights and opposed to a high degree of centralization. Clay felt French favored weak govt and pointed out strong assembly, jealous of its rights, was probably best guarantee against outsider gaining power and setting up dictatorship.

Couve de Murville felt that fact Soviets preferred highly centralized state was strong argument in favor of setting up decentralized state. He insisted system proposed by US/UK would lead to centralized state. He was sure that delegates elected to Constituent Assembly would consider themselves as representing German people as whole and would come up with constitution providing for elections to Federal legislature by people as a whole.

USDel in course of discussions had suggested compromise proposal whereby Article 4 would read “the delegates to this Constituent Assembly will be selected in each of the existing states.” Agreed minute to Article 4 would read approximately as follows: “Military Governors after consultation with the Ministers-President will determine the method of selection, giving full weight to the dominating opinion of the Ministers-President.”

In reply to question Clay stated Military Governors would present question to Ministers-President, who would be permitted only about an hour to come to decision since it would be disastrous to permit question to become political issue in Germany by prolonged debate. If Ministers-President did not in time all take clear cut position Military Governors would decide question on basis majority vote.

This proposal was not discussed in detail but did not apparently meet with favorable reception. Therefore whole issue still remains unsolved.

Sent Dept as 2296; repeated USPolAd Berlin 147 and American Embassy Paris 235.

Douglas

1 Presumably the afternoon of May 26.

2 For the final version of the paper under reference, TRI/13 (Final), May 31, see p. 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205].

3  Ante, p. 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171].

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–2748: Telegram

[Document 196]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent Paris, May 27, 1948—10 p. m.

2838. Deptel 1812, May 26.1 The French Government is more unhappy than anyone over the prospect of an Assembly debate on the German program but considers in view of the tremendous importance French public and political parties attach to the German question that there is no possible way for the government to escape debate after the conclusion of any agreement reached in London. Bidault expects violent opposition from the Communists, at least from a number of Gaullist deputies and some independents and rightists but is even more concerned over possibility of Socialist opposition.

It is now envisaged that debate would occur about a week after agreement is reached in London. Its outcome would appear to depend to a very considerable extent on the possibilities for presentation of the German program in a favorable light which in turn would depend to a great extent on the nature of the communiqué issued at the termination of the London meeting. If debate terminates favorably for the government, implementation of the program would presumably proceed as scheduled, barring unpredictable international or internal developments. It is a foregone conclusion, however, that regardless of outcome of debate both Communists and Gaullists will thereafter greatly step up the rhythm of their attacks against the government’s German policy and in particular will accuse it of abandoning France’s minimum security requirements, et cetera.

If the debate should terminate in a vote against the German program adopted at London, the government would of course not only be unable to implement such a program but its very existence would be placed in serious jeopardy.

Sent Department 2838; repeated London 444; Berlin 257.

Caffery

1  Ante, p. 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 187, Doc. 188, and Doc. 189].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Council/5–2648: Telegram

[Document 197]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

top secret   us urgent Washington, May 28, 1948—2 p. m.

1849. Urtel 2789 and Delsec 1759 from London.1 Dept will wish to undertake similar approach to legislative branch US Govt by informing Congressional leaders re conference recommendations before approval. US and French situations not entirely analogous but possibly Bidault’s first step should envisage consultation of this kind and be directed to avoidance of general debate if possible or to limitation of debate to terms of conference communiqué as suggested.2

Sent Paris as 1849; repeated to London as 1959.

Lovett

1 Neither printed.

2 Telegram 2874, May 29, from Paris, not printed, reported that Bidault insisted that there was no way to avoid a general debate in the French National Assembly but he would endeavor to limit debate to the terms of the Conference communiqué (740.00119 Council/5–2948).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/5–2748: Telegram

[Document 198]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent Washington, May 28, 1948—7 p. m.

1980. For Douglas. Dept deplores fact that continued French objections delay acceptance of substantial conference achievements in which we have gone far to meet French wishes (Delsecs 1755,1 1757,2 1758,2 1759,2 1760,2 17613 and 17622 ).

Recognize that approach to security problem is best that can be reached, weighing respective French and German reactions. We do not insist on change in language re length of occupation. In light of new Berlin Soviet-licensed press campaign favoring total troop withdrawal, essential point is US view that occupation forces cannot be withdrawn until peace in Europe is insured.

Perceive no objection to extensive publicity on Ruhr as well as on security in form which will not lend itself too readily to Soviet-inspired deception that Germans be freed of virtually all restraints. Agree that full disclosure of political papers be reserved until Govt approval and notification to German Ministers-President.

Will communicate later re general reference to effect that ownership would not revert to industrialists supporting Nazi war effort.4

We have nothing to add to your forceful presentation of manner of selection of constituent assembly. We are inclined to accept any method of selection which is duly representative provided French for their part would agree that they would not reject direct election of lower house of constitutional Govt if such is recommended by constituent assembly.

Sent London as 1980; repeated Paris 1868.

Lovett

1 London telegram 2270, May 25, p. 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183].

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

3 London telegram 2296, May 27, p. 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195].

2 Not printed.

4  Telegram 2004, May 29, to London, not printed, requested that if mention of the ownership of Ruhr properties was considered necessary in the communiqué, the American Delegation was to endeavor to have the following language inserted: “The ownership question is one for future determination by the Germans themselves, except insofar as past ownership will of course have been affected by decartelization and denazification under due process of law.” (740.00119 Council/5–2948)

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–2848: Telegram

[Document 199]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, May 28, 1948—10 p. m.

2346. Delsec 1764. At meeting four delegations German talks this afternoon it was decided defer discussion on remaining disagreed point in political organization paper (TRI 131 ) on question of election or designation of Delegates to Constituent Assembly. British delegation not ready discuss this issue until Monday afternoon May 31 by which time cabinet will have considered question, together with that of timing of political program.2

Meeting agreed, at Douglas’ suggestion, to amend minute to Article 1, Ruhr paper,3 in accordance Department’s Secdel 1586 May 26. Last phrase now reads “from entering into a bilateral agreement with the US Government in accordance with the provisions of the foreign assistance act of 1948.”

Communiqué was then discussed and it was agreed that in light of French Government’s insistence on debate in French Assembly only very brief communiqué4 will be issued at close of German talks. This communiqué will probably be limited to statement that all matters of substance have been agreed and that the delegations are now preparing full report to their governments.5 This communiqué will be issued as soon as agreement has been reached on last remaining point in TRI 13, we hope Monday afternoon.

Full communiqué6 will also be prepared at once and submitted to governments for approval with intention of having it released for publication one day before debate in French assembly. If conference finishes its work Monday afternoon it is possible debate can begin in French assembly by Friday or Saturday June 4 or 5. It should not last more than one day. Since French Government approval depends on results of debate in assembly, all delegations recognized need to have debate held soonest, particularly if recommended time schedule is to be followed and proposals to be presented to German Minister President on or before June 15. Every effort will be made here to agree on text of full communiqué by tomorrow afternoon. It will be telegraphed to Department when completed and it is hoped Department’s approval can be given promptly. We understand Bidault can begin informal talks with French Government and assembly leaders in preparation for assembly debate as soon as conference talks ended and draft communiqué available but there is still urgency in obtaining US Government’s approval of communiqué in order to be sure it approves scope of material to be used by Bidault.

This time schedule in regard to releasing communiqué in relations to debate in the French chamber is designed to reduce the period in which the Soviet, we can confidently expect, will have an opportunity to use all its instruments of propaganda in France and elsewhere.

Working Party, which has begun its task of drafting communiqué, has been authorized tentatively to include text of Ruhr paper,7 rather full summary of security paper and as much on political papers as are required by French for presentation to French assembly, taking into account reaction in Germany and need to avoid giving impression of imposed government structure.

It was also tentatively agreed to give communiqué to Soviets 12 hours before publication. British delegation suggested it would also be advisable to give copies of communiqué in advance to other allied Governments.

Reaction of other delegations to this proposal was unenthusiastic and question will be reconsidered tomorrow afternoon when meeting will be held to consider Working Party’s draft communiqué.

Sent Department 2346, repeated USPolAd Berlin 150 and Paris 239.

Douglas

1 For the final version of the paper under reference as agreed upon by the Conference on May 31, see document TRI/13 (Final), May 31, p. 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205].

2  In his telegram 2351, May 29, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas strongly recommended that the United States and the United Kingdom give the French advance notice that they will proceed immediately in the Bizonal area to implement the German program should the French for some reason withhold agreement on any of the Conference papers (740.00119 Council/5–2948). Telegram 2003, May 29, to London, not printed, approved the recommendation (740.00119 Council/5–2948).

Telegram 2374, Delsec 1770, May 31, from London, not printed, reported that Ambassador Massigli had told Strang and Douglas that afternoon the French National Assembly debate on the German program would probably be held on June 10 and 11 and vote might not be possible until June 15. Douglas and Strang told Massigli that if the French Government for any reason found the German program unacceptable, the United States and the United Kingdom would, however regretfully, find it necessary to proceed with the program in the Bizonal area (740.00119 Council/5–3148).

3 The reference here is to document TRI/23 (Final), May 26, p. 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193].

4 Not printed.

5 For the final text of the communiqué under reference, dated June 1, and released to the press on June 2, see p. 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209].

6 For the final text of the Conference communiqué under reference here, released to the press on June 7, see p. 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210].

7 Document TRI/16 (Final), May 26, p. 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–3048: Telegram

[Document 200]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact London, May 30, 1948—4 p. m.

2361. I hope that the last remaining substantive question, namely, method by which members of the Constituent Assembly will be elected will be resolved tomorrow afternoon and that the talks on Germany will be concluded. If they are, Oppenheimer will proceed from London by plane to Washington tomorrow afternoon (May 31). Meanwhile all final papers will be taken to Washington today by Admiral Conolly, who is traveling by air, and should be delivered to Beam in Washington tomorrow, Monday, afternoon; and changes in communiqué and report will be cabled, we hope, tomorrow afternoon.

2. We recognize the difficulties in the way of obtaining prompt US Government approval, particularly since you properly contemplate discussing the agreements with congressional leaders. (Deptel 1959, May 281 )

3. We recommend, however, that the US Government and the British Government, in the absence of finding some objectionable feature of the papers, give them their official, though not necessarily published, stamp of approval before the French debate commences. We make this recommendation because (a) It will make it more difficult for the French Chamber to reject or amend;

(b) It will strengthen Bidault’s resolution and position;

(c) Since the French have agreed that favorable outcome of the debate in the Chamber means immediate approval by the French Government, it will make it possible to proceed immediately thereafter at least to hold a preliminary meeting with the Ministers President in Germany.

(d) It will therefore avoid delay in commencing appropriate communications with the Ministers President, which, in view of an apparent increasing effort by the Soviet in western Germany to build up opposition to the establishment of a government there, we view as very dangerous to our whole program.

4. As a result tentative discussions with Strang and short talk with Bevin believe that British Government will be able to give its approval during the course of the next three or not more than four days.

5. You, of course, know how best to present the agreed recommendations to the congressional leaders. I suggest, however, that they should be informed that there are risks in proceeding in accordance with the time schedule and the agreed papers, and that among them, at least, we may be subjected to greater pressure and have to cope with a more critical situation in Berlin.

Sent Department as 2361, repeated Berlin 157.

Douglas

1 Not printed.

Memorandum of Trans-Atlantic Telephone Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) 740.00119 Council/5–3148

[Document 201]

Memorandum of Trans-Atlantic Telephone Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman)1

top secret [Washington,] May 31, 1948.

Participants: Ambassador Douglas [in London] and Mr. Saltzman

Re our message 20032 having to do with the British and the U.S. telling the French at the end of the current conference that if because of the debate in the French Chamber or for some other reason the French withhold agreement on any papers, the U.S. and U.K. will together be compelled to proceed immediately with the bizonal area. Mr. Douglas said the British were willing to do this and it was his and their plan to tell this to the French as a matter of information rather than in a coercive manner. I agreed that this should be done.

Re London message 2360,3 and our message 20083 having to do with action by the Military Governors to submit the constitution for ratification, it was agreed with Mr. Douglas that we should have a clear but informal understanding with the British at this time that if the U.S. and U.K. Military Governors find that the constitution is acceptable, with the French dissenting, the U.S. and U.K. Military Governors will authorize the submission of the constitution for ratification, notwithstanding the French dissent.

Re London 23634 having to do with the question raised by the French as to steps which may be taken in the event of overt acts committed by the Soviets as a result of implementation of the general program. I told Mr. Douglas that we thought it undesirable to include in the report to the three governments the language suggested in 2363 because of its specific reference to overt acts committed by the Soviets and I agreed with him that it would be satisfactory to put in the report a statement to the effect that after acceptance of the program, the governments might jointly consult on all aspects of the situation that may result from announcement and implementation of the program. I suggested to him that he check this point with General Clay. It was his opinion that General Clay would agree with it as the latter recognizes there are certain aspects of this subject which are matters of governmental concern and information rather than his own.

Re London 23565 regarding reparations. I agreed with Mr. Douglas that it would not be objectionable to authorize the French to make a statement, in connection with the presentation of German recommendations to the Assembly, that allocations and deliveries of reparations to French will continue.

Re London 23616 relative to obtaining prompt approval of the program by this Government. Mr. Douglas pointed out in the telephone conversation the desirability of obtaining such approval before the French Assembly debate and said that if possible such approval ought to be obtained by this coming Friday, June 4th. I agreed to keep Ambassador Douglas informed of our progress in this respect.

Re our 20075 and the Communiqué in general. Mr. Douglas agreed with our suggestions in 2007 and stated that he would try to avoid all reference to ownership in the Communiqué if possible.

Re London 23627 relative to currency conversion. Mr. Douglas said that General Clay has told the French that we must proceed on schedule, without delay, but has not yet heard from the French. Mr. Douglas said that the British agree with us on this point, i.e., that we should proceed on schedule. He does not think this matter will affect the the satisfactory closing out of the conference, although he is not sure. He will cable us regarding any further developments in this respect.

Charles E. Saltzman

1 This conversation began at 10 a. m., Washington time, May 31, 1948.

2 Not printed, but see footnote 2 to telegram 2346, May 28, from London, p. 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 199].

3 Neither printed.

3 Neither printed.

4 Dated May 30, not printed. It reported that in a private meeting with Douglas and Strang on the afternoon of May 30, Massigli had reiterated the French fear that the Soviet Union, as a result of the implementation of Conference decisions regarding Germany, might commit overtly hostile acts. Massigli wanted the Conference Report to include some American and British assurance of the steps to be taken should the Soviet Union act overtly. (740.00119 Council/5–3048)

5 Not printed.

6  Supra.

5 Not printed.

7 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 2002, May 29, to London, p. 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545].

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/5–3148: Telegram

[Document 202]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret Berlin, May 31, 1948—6 p. m.

218. Personal for Douglas. Following message sent today by General Clay to Draper repeated herewith for your information:

London conference will be concluded today. Proposals must be debated in French Assembly prior to formal approval by French Govt. Douglas believes and I concur fully that US approval should be granted and French Govt so notified prior to French Assembly debate to strengthen French Govt’s position. I understand State Dept desires to consult congressional leaders prior to formal approval. Urge this consultation be expedited to permit approval prior to French debate now scheduled for Tuesday of next week.

I also recommend Dept of Army indorsement of report to the congressional leaders if State Dept believes such indorsement helpful.

While, as you know, I have misgivings about any Ruhr control being in interest of peace, the final paper is as satisfactory as could be expected in obtaining tripartite agreement. Taken as a whole, the papers largely reflect US policy and therefore represent a real achievement on part of Ambassador Douglas. I think they are workable solutions which will be accepted in western Germany. Time is urgent in moving forward and a delay in approval could be disastrous politically and economically.

Hence, I urge full support of the papers without change and expedited approval by our Govt.

Sent London 218, repeated Dept 1258; Paris for Caffery 218; Moscow for Smith 200.

Murphy

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–3148: Telegram

[Document 203]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, May 31, 1948—11 p. m.

2376. Delsec 1772. Referring our 2363 and portion thereof referred to in our conversation of this afternoon,1 following is text of language proposed for insertion at the end subparagraph (G) of section II conference report to governments:2 “It is recommended that upon acceptance of this program the three occupying powers jointly give consideration to all aspects of the situation in Germany which may result from the announcement or the implementation by the governments of the program recommended by this conference for Germany.”

I feel certain that correct interpretation this language will provide for automatic assessment of the situation in Germany following the acceptance of the program by the governments. It was emphasized and is clearly understood by all that this does not imply any right to hold high level governmental discussions on the subject. In my judgment it does mean that the appropriate representatives of the three occupying powers will jointly assess the situation without necessarily awaiting the development of any adverse reactions. Such joint assessment can be undertaken through ordinary diplomatic channels or between the military governors in Germany. I do not regard this provision as imposing upon US Government any significant new commitment since the effective implementation of the program will in any case require extensive consultation among the military governors and in event of strong Soviet reaction, also among the governments.

I hope you will be able to indicate the approval of the Department and Army for the use of this language in our telephone conversation of tomorrow morning, since Massigli has stressed need for it to strengthen Bidault’s position and since it has been approved here, rendering retraction or modification embarrassing and difficult.

New subject. It was agreed that no press conference would be granted with regard to the recommendations arrived at or the contents of the second communiqué until the issuance of this communiqué. It is hoped that all parties will observe their commitments to this effect since the release by any official source of any of the significant particulars would defeat the purpose of our strategy in delaying release of second communiqué until day proceeding debate in French Assembly.

Sent Department 2376; repeated USPolAd Berlin 162.

Douglas

1 For Saltzman’s memorandum of the trans-Atlantic conversation under reference here, see p. 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]; telegram 2363, May 30, from London, is not printed, but see footnote 4 to Saltzman’s memorandum.

2 For the final version of the Report of the Conference, see p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/5–3148: Telegram

[Document 204]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, May 31, 1948—midnight.

2016. Text and subparagraph (G) section II conference report generally acceptable particularly in light of your interpretation which you might usefully make clear to other delegates. (Delsec 1770 [1772]).1 However, we would like following insertion made if possible: “The three occupying powers jointly give consideration in such manner as developments might require to all aspects of the situation in Germany etc”. We suggest this with the following thought in mind which you should communicate in appropriate terms to the other delegates. It should be understood that consultations are not to be of military nature unless and until consultations at appropriate diplomatic level develop the desirability of such military conversations. This would not, of course, preclude consultations of military governors on short term and local military problems as already agreed. In short we do not wish to be committed to any particular form of consultation nor do we desire any form excluded.

Lovett

1  Supra.

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany EUR Files: Lot 55 D 374: Box 5342: File—500 London Tripartite Conf.

[Document 205]

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany 1

secret

TRI/13 (Final)

Political Organisation

final report of the drafting committee of the united states, french and united kingdom delegations, as amended, final

1. The three Military Governors will, not later than 15th June 1948, call a joint meeting of the Ministers-President of the States of their respective zones.

2. This meeting will be instructed to examine the boundaries of the several states in order to determine what modifications might be proposed to the Military Governors. Any such modification will take account of traditional patterns, and avoid, to the extent feasible, the creation of states which are either too large or too small in comparison with the other states. The recommendations of the Ministers-President, if not disapproved by the Military Governors, will be submitted for approval by the people of the affected areas not later than the choice of members of the Constituent Assembly.

3. The meeting of the Ministers-President will also be informed that they are authorised to convene a Constituent Assembly to be held not later than 1st September 1948 in order to prepare a Constitution to be ratified by the participating states, to communicate this fact to the various states and to make the necessary arrangements.

4. The delegates to this Constituent Assembly will be chosen in each of the existing states under such procedure and regulations as shall be adopted by the legislative body of each of these states.

5. The number of delegates from each state will be in the proportion that its population is to the total population of the participating states. The total number of delegates will be determined by dividing the total population at the last census by 750,000 or some similar figure as may be recommended by the Ministers-President and approved by the Military Governors.

6. The Constituent Assembly will draft a democratic constitution which will establish for the participating states a governmental structure of federal type which is best adapted to the eventual re-establishment of German unity at present disrupted, and which will protect the rights of the participating states, provide adequate central authority, and contain guarantees of individual rights and freedom.

7. If the Constitution as prepared by the Constituent Assembly does not conflict with these general principles the Military Governors will authorize its submission for ratification. The Constituent Assembly will thereupon be dissolved. The ratification will take place by each participating state by means of a referendum requiring a simple majority of the voters in each state under such rules and procedure as it may adopt. When the Constitution has been ratified by two-thirds of the states, it will come into force and be binding upon all states. Thereafter, any amendment to the Constitution must be ratified by a like majority of the states.

8. The Ministers-President of the existing states will, prior to the completion of the work of the Constituent Assembly take the necessary steps for the election of the Assemblies of those states, the boundaries of which have been modified, so that these Assemblies and those of the states, the boundaries of which have not been modified, will be in a position to determine the electoral procedures and regulations for the ratification of the Constitution as stated in paragraph 7 above.

9. Within thirty days following the coming into force of the Constitution, institutions will be established as determined by the Constitution.

10. Prior to the convening of the Constituent Assembly, there shall be a determination of the control and administrative powers which the occupying authorities intend to retain as regards both the proposed Government of the participating states and the governments of the states themselves.

London, 31 May 1948.

[Annex]

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany 2

secret

TRI/19 (Final)

Reorganisation of the Laender

In connection with the words “affected areas” in paragraph 2 of TRI/13 (Final) the following method has been agreed for dealing with specific proposals which may be put forward by the Ministers President regarding North Rhine/Westphalia.

(a) A recommendation to divide the present Land into two Laender, namely North Rhine and Westphalia, with boundaries as they were before the junction was affected.

method of voting

All voters in the present Land to be asked to vote for or against this proposal. If the voters in either one of the two parts, namely North Rhine and Westphalia, should show a majority in favour of the proposed division, that division will take place provided that the combined vote in the two parts in favour of division represents at least 33⅓% of total votes cast.

(b) Splitting off that part of North Rhine which lies west of the Rhine and joining it to South Rhine.

method of voting

The people in the area to be split off to vote.

(i) for or against separation from the Land to which they at present belong;

(ii) for or against junction with South Rhine.

(c) Addition of South Rhine to present Land North Rhine/Westphalia. To be vetoed by Military Governors unless other regroupings result in the creation of comparably large Laender.

Note Any material increase in the size of Bavaria would constitute a case of this sort.

London , 26 May, 1948.

1 The Conference reached final agreement on this paper at a meeting on the afternoon of May 31. It was Annex F to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

2 The terms of this paper were first discussed in an informal meeting of the Conference on May 11 (see telegram 2072, Delsec 1732, May 12, from London, p. 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]). Telegram 2297, May 27, from London, not printed, reported that the Conference had agreed to attach this paper as an annex to document TRI/13 (740.00119 Council/5–2748). It was also Annex G to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 118: File—TRI Documents

[Document 206]

Paper Agreed Upon by the London Conference on Germany 1

secret

TRI/18 (Final) (Amendment)

Protection of Foreign Interests

In connexion with the Report of Berlin Working Party No. 6:2 — (1) The Conference recommends that the principle of non-discrimination against Foreign interests in Germany be reaffirmed and that each Government should promptly study the problem of safeguarding foreign interests in order that there may be subsequently established as close to September 1st as possible an inter-governmental group to review the question and make recommendations to their Governments.

(2) The Conference agrees that the use of the term “foreign interests” in paragraph 1 above shall not be held to imply that reciprocity of treatment from the foreign countries concerned is not required.

(3) The Conference recommends that the three Military Governors should afford the representatives of the Benelux countries, to the extent consistent with the maintenance of secrecy regarding monetary reform, opportunity to express their views before any decisions are taken affecting their property interests in Germany.

London, 31st May, 1948.

1 The Conference reached final agreement on this paper at a meeting on the afternoon of May 30 after the insertion of the new paragraph 2. Tentative agreement on an earlier version of the paper had been reached by the Conference at an informal meeting on May 12 (see telegram 2108, Delsec 1733, May 13, from London, p. 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]). This paper was attached as Annex E to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

2 The final report of Working Party No. 6 of the Military Governors’ Conference at Berlin is not printed, but a summary is contained in telegram 845, April 13, from Berlin, p. 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/6–148: Telegram

[Document 207]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, June 1, 1948—4 p. m.

2385. Delsec 1773. For Saltzman from Douglas. In final meeting of delegates this morning,1 French failed to reiterate their previous reservation on timing and all remaining papers were agreed, except that French maintained general reservation on communiqué pending US–UK approval to be given this afternoon of a brief statement which Bidault can make re continuation of reparations to France. Notwithstanding this evidence of French willingness to drop their insistence on delay in timing, I still feel it very important for US and UK Government to approve conference recommendations prior to French debate and, in informing French of such approval, to emphasize strongly that our time schedule is of the essence. Bevin assured me this morning that, whereas he hesitated at this juncture to suggest that the Labor Party should as a party exert its influence on the French Socialists, he will instruct UK Ambassador, Paris, to make strongest representations regarding importance of maintaining time schedule to Bidault prior to French debate and to advance date of debate.

In same conversation, Bevin informed me that under the blanket authority he had received from British Cabinet he was to avoid delays implicit in veto and was to proceed without delay in authorizing submission constitution to Germans in event French at that time seek to block such submission by unilateral action. He would, of course, desire to give French reasonable opportunity to express their views, but after receiving such views he would proceed in harmony with us. Since we made the above suggestion for informal understanding believe we should give British same assurances.

In presenting new language suggested by Department for inclusion in new section III of report (ReDeptel 2016 May 312 ), I explained that our reasons for proposing this additional language are that we are anxious to avoid requiring the inclusion or exclusion of any specific form of joint consideration and to leave the form of such consideration dependent upon such developments as may occur. I said we felt that the new language accomplished this purpose in the most satisfactory manner. The French and other delegates accepted this explanation and agreed to the inclusion of the new language. Because of the importance which this language may have in the future, I recommend that this cable, together with the one of last night (Delsec 17723 ) reporting statement by me yesterday that language did not imply ministerial consideration, be attached to the paper concerned.

Sent Department as 2385, repeated Berlin as 163.

Douglas

1  In subsequent telegrams Ambassador Douglas reported upon other aspects of this final meeting of the London Conference on Germany. Telegram 2391, Delsec 1774, June 1, 6 p. m., reported that the final meeting had resolved the remaining differences on the communiqués and the Report (740.00119 Council/6–148). Telegram 2404, June 1, 7 p. m., stated that the Report had been signed at 5:30 p. m. It also reported that the Conference had agreed upon the following statement as appropriate to be made by Foreign Minister Bidault in the French Chamber of Deputies: “The question of reparations from Germany has been discussed through diplomatic channels among the occupying powers of the Western Zones and I have been given assurances by the other two and we all agree that inasmuch as the quadripartite reparations allocating machinery is now, at least temporarily, inoperative, means will be found promptly, during the period in which the condition exists, to resume the making of allocations from capital equipment in the Western Zones of Germany for reparations purposes.” (740.00119 Council/6–148)

2  Ante, p. 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204].

3 Telegram 2376, May 31, p. 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203].

Report of the London Conference on Germany 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–148

[Document 208]

Report of the London Conference on Germany 1

top secret

Talks on Germany

I. In accordance with the instructions of their Governments, Delegations of the United States, France, and the United Kingdom have met in London from 23rd February–6th March 1948 and again from 20th April–1st June in order to discuss matters affecting Germany. On 26th February they were joined by a Delegation representing the Governments of Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg which participated in the discussions of all items on the agenda, except those dealing with administrative matters which are the direct responsibility of the Occupying Powers controlling the three Western Zones. During the recess between 6th March and 20th April, certain matters were further discussed by working parties in Berlin.

II. The Conference submits the following report:—

a. association of benelux countries in policy regarding germany

At the conclusion of the first part of the Talks the United States, French and United Kingdom Delegations addressed a letter to the Benelux Delegation on this subject; this letter is contained in Annex A.2

In connexion with paragraph 4 of this letter, a working party in Berlin submitted a report concerning arrangements for a close association between the Military Governors and the Benelux representatives in Germany. The report, which is attached as Annex B,3 was accepted by the Conference.

These two papers therefore constitute the recommendations of the Conference on this subject.

b. international control of the ruhr

The recommendations of the Conference are contained in Annex C.4 An agreed minute is attached as Annex D.5

c. protection of foreign interests in germany

The recommendations of the Conference are attached as Annex E.6

The United States, French and United Kingdom Delegations also agreed to recommend that the Military Governors should offer an early opportunity to the Governments and nationals of the Benelux countries and of the three Occupying Powers to discuss measures that can be taken with a view to the resumption of normal management of their property interests in Germany. The Benelux Delegation expressed approval of this recommendation.

d. evolution of the political and economic organization of germany

The recommendations of the Conference relating to procedure for modification of Laender boundaries, and to the convening of a Constituent Assembly with a view to the drafting of a constitution and the establishment of a German Federal Government, are attached as Annex F.7

In connexion with paragraph 2 of Annex F there was some discussion on the meaning of the words “affected areas” and agreement was reached on the procedure to be followed in the specific case of North Rhine/Westphalia. This agreement is contained in an agreed minute appended to Annex F as Annex G.8

With reference to paragraph 4 of Annex F, it is recommended that the procedure and regulations for the choice of delegates to the Constituent Assembly should provide either for popular elections in individual states or for election by the respective legislative bodies of individual states, as will be determined by such legislative bodies. If any state chooses the latter procedure, delegate need not be elected from among members of the legislative body, and in any event must be elected in a manner which will truly reflect political opinion in the state.

The above recommendations were, after preliminary examination by the Delegations of the three Occupying Powers, discussed with the Benelux Delegation, who concurred therein.

The United States, French and United Kingdom Delegations also reached agreement on two letters of advice which it is recommended should be sent to the Military Governors in amplification of paragraphs 6 and 10 of Annex F. These letters of advice, which were subsequently discussed with and approved by the Benelux Delegation, concern the German Constitution and the powers to be reserved by the occupying authorities. These letters are attached as Annex H9 and Annex I.10

e. trizonal export/import policy

The recommendations of the United States, French and United Kingdom Delegations are attached as Annex J.11

f. provisional territorial arrangements

The recommendations of the United States, French and United Kingdom Delegations are attached as Annex K.12 The Benelux Delegation agreed to submit these recommendations to their Governments.

g. security

The recommendations of the Conference are attached as Annex L.

During the discussions leading to the agreement on the recommendations contained in Annex L,13 the United States Delegation called attention to certain significant recent developments in United States foreign policy in the field of security—including particularly the President’s statement on 17 March, 1948, and the resolution unanimously approved on 20 May, 1948, and subsequently submitted to the United States Senate by its Committee on Foreign Relations.

III. It is recommended that upon acceptance of this programme the three Occupying Powers jointly give consideration, in such manner as developments might require, to all aspects of the situation in Germany, which may result from the announcement or the implementation by the Governments of the programme recommended by this conference.

IV. In submitting this report the Conference invites the attention of the Governments concerned to the fact that the main recommendations contained in it are mutually dependent and that acceptance by Governments of all the main recommendations is necessary for acceptance of any one of them. The Conference strongly recommends that the Governments concerned take their decisions on these recommendations without delay.

Sgd._______
for the United Kingdom Delegation.

Sgd.____________
for the French Delegation.

Sgd.____________
for the United States Delegation.

Sgd.____________
for the Benelux Delegation.

London, 1 June, 1948.

1 Telegram 2391, Delsec 1774, June 1, from London, not printed, reported that at its meeting that morning, the Conference had agreed to the text of the Report as printed here (740.00119 Council/6–148). Telegram 2404, Delsec 1775, June 1, from London, not printed, reported that this Report was signed at 5:30 p. m. on June 1 “in atmosphere of complete amity” (740.00119 Council 6–448). The signed copy of the Report taken to Washington has not been found. The source text has not been signed. The signatories presumably were Douglas for the United States, Strang for the United Kingdom, Massigli for France, and Michiels van Verduynen for Benelux. Telegram 2357, May 29, from London, not printed, reported that the Conference had agreed that day that this Report would transmit texts of Conference recommendations for approval by the governments concerned and would not be made public (740.00119 Council/5–2948). The Annexes to the Report are not printed here. The Conference documents included as Annexes are identified in annotations at the appropriate places.

2 Document TRI/10, March 6, p. 114.

3 The text of the Final Report of Working Party No. 1 of the Military Governors’ Conference is included as Appendix B to document MGC/P(48) 16, April 14, p. 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120].

4 Document TRI/16 (Final), May 26, p. 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190].

5 Document TRI/23 (Final), May 26, p. 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193].

6 Document TRI/18 (Final), May 31, p. 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206].

7 Document TRI/13 (Final), May 31, p. 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205].

8 Document TRI/19 (Final), May 26, included as an annex to document TRI/13 (Final), p. 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205].

9 Document TRI/15 (Final), Letter of Advice to Military Governors Regarding German Constitution, May 12, p. 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155].

10 Document TRI/17 (Final), Letter of Advice to Military Governors Regarding Powers of Civil and Military Governments, May 19, p. 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170].

11 Document TRI/22 (Final), May 26, p. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192].

12 Document TRI/20 (Final), May 26, p. 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191].

13 Document entitled “Report on Security”, May 26, p. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194].

Communiqué Issued by the Four Delegations to the London Conference on Germany, June 1, 1948 CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 119: File—London Conference Press Releases

[Document 209]

Communiqué Issued by the Four Delegations to the London Conference on Germany, June 1, 1948 1

London, June 1, 1948

The informal discussions on Germany between representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, France and the three Benelux countries, which began in London on 23rd February and which, after a recess beginning on 6th March, were resumed on 20th April, have resulted in agreed recommendations over the whole field. These recommendations are being submitted for approval to the Governments concerned, as envisaged in the communiqué issued on 6th March. A report of these recommendations2 will shortly be made public.

1 This communiqué was released for use by the press on June 2.

2 The reference here is to the long Conference communiqué released to the press on June 7, printed infra.

Communiqué of the London Conference on Germany, Released to the Press on June 7, 1948 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–748

[Document 210]

Communiqué of the London Conference on Germany, Released to the Press on June 7, 1948 1

London, June 7, 1948

In accordance with an announcement issued on June 22 at the conclusion of informal discussions on Germany between representatives of United States, United Kingdom, France and three Benelux countries a report3 containing agreed recommendations on all items discussed was submitted to their respective governments. These recommendations have been submitted as a whole since their main provisions are mutually dependent and form an indivisible program. Principal features of this report are the following:

i. association of benelux countries in policy regarding germany

The recommendations include specific provisions for a close association between military governments and Benelux representatives in Germany on matters affecting Benelux interests. Moreover full opportunities will be given the Benelux representatives to be kept informed of developments in the western zones.

ii. role of the german economy in the european economy and control of the ruhr

(A) As stated in the communiqué of March 64 it had been agreed that for the political and economic well-being of the countries of Western Europe and of a democratic Germany, there must be a close association of their economic life. This close association, which will enable Germany to contribute to and participate in European recovery, has been ensured by the inclusion on April 16 of the combined zone and French zone in the organization for European economic cooperation as full members.

(B) It was agreed to recommend the establishment of an international authority for the control of the Ruhr in which United States, United Kingdom, France, Benelux countries and Germany would participate, and which does not involve the political separation of the Ruhr area from Germany. It does, however, contemplate control of distribution of coal, coke and steel of Ruhr in order that on the one hand industrial concentration in that area shall not become an instrument of aggression, and on the other will be able to make its contribution to all countries participating in a European cooperative economic program, including, of course, Germany itself. A draft agreement5 containing the provisions for its establishment is attached as Annex I. This agreement is to be concluded by the United States, United Kingdom and France as occupying powers. Moreover the Benelux countries are to be fully associated with the preparation of the more detailed agreement provided for in Article 12, and are to be consulted as to the time when the authority begins to exercise its functions.

(C) Arising out of the discussions on the Ruhr it has been recommended that the principle of non-discrimination against foreign interests in Germany be reaffirmed, and that each government should promptly study the problem of safeguarding foreign interests in order that there may be subsequently established as soon as possible an intergovernmental group to review the question and make recommendations to their governments.

iii. evolution of political and economic organization of germany

(A) Further consideration has been given by all delegates to the problem of the evolution of the political and economic organization of Germany. They recognize, taking into account the present situation, that it is necessary to give the German people the opportunity to achieve on the basis of a free and democratic form of government the eventual reestablishment of German unity at present disrupted. In these circumstances they have reached the conclusion that it would be desirable that the German people in the different states should now be free to establish for themselves the political organization and institutions which will enable them to assume those governmental responsibilities which are compatible with the minimum requirements of occupation and control and which ultimately will enable them to assume full governmental responsibility. The delegates consider that the people in the States will wish to establish a constitution with provisions which will allow all the German states to subscribe as soon as circumstances permit.

Therefore the delegates have agreed to recommend to their governments that the military governors should hold a joint meeting with the Ministers-President of the western zone in Germany. At that meeting the Ministers-President will be authorized to convene a Constituent Assembly in order to prepare a constitution for the approval of the participating states.

Delegates to this Constituent Assembly will be chosen in each of the states in accordance with procedure and regulations to be determined by the legislative bodies of the individual states.

The constitution should be such as to enable the Germans to play their part in bringing to an end the present division of Germany not by the reconstitution of a centralized Reich but by means of a federal form of government which adequately protects the rights of the respective states, and which at the same time provides for adequate central authority and which guarantees the rights and freedoms of the individual.

If the constitution as prepared by the Constituent Assembly does not conflict with these general principles the military governors will authorize its submissions for ratification by the people in the respective states.

At the meeting with the military governors the Ministers-President will also be authorized to examine the boundaries of the several states in order to determine what modifications might be proposed to the military governors for the purpose of creating a definitive system which is satisfactory to the peoples concerned.

(B) Further discussions have taken place between the United States, United Kingdom and French delegations on measures for coordinating economic policies and practices in the combined zone and the French zone. Agreed recommendations have been reached on the joint conduct and control of the external trade of the whole area. It has been recognized that a complete economic merger of the two areas cannot effectively take place until further progress has been made in establishing the necessary German institutions common to the entire area.

iv. provisional territorial arrangements

The delegations have agreed to submit for the consideration of their governments proposals for dealing with certain minor provisional territorial adjustments in connection with the western frontiers of Germany.

v. security

This problem was considered in three aspects: (A) General Provisions. (B) Measures during the period in which the occupying powers retain supreme authority in Germany. (C) Measures after the period in which the occupying powers retain supreme authority in Germany.

General Provision.

The United States, United Kingdom and French Delegates reiterated the firm views of their governments that there could not be any general withdrawal of their forces from Germany until the peace of Europe is secured and without prior consultation. During this period there should be no general withdrawal of the forces of occupation of the United States, France or the United Kingdom without prior consultation. It was further recommended that the governments concerned should consult if any of them should consider that there was a danger of resurgence of German military power or of the adoption by Germany of a policy of aggression.

Measures during the period in which the occupying powers retain supreme authority in Germany.

The prohibitions on the German Armed Forces and the German General Staff as contained in 4-power agreements were reaffirmed, as well as the exercise of controls by the military governors with respect to disarmament and demilitarization, level of industry and certain aspects of scientific research. To ensure the maintenance of disarmament and demilitarization in the interests of security, the three military governors should set up a military security board in the western zones of Germany to carry out the proper inspections and make the necessary recommendations to the military governors, who decide the action to be taken.

Measures after the period in which the occupying powers retain supreme authority in Germany.

It was affirmed that Germany must not again be permitted to become an aggressive power and that prior to the general withdrawal of the forces of occupation agreement will be reached among the governments concerned with respect to necessary measures of demilitarization, disarmament and control of industry and with respect to occupation of key areas. Also there should be a system of inspection to ensure the maintenance of the agreed provisions of German disarmament and demilitarization.

The present recommendations, which in no way preclude and on the contrary should facilitate eventual 4-power agreement on the German problem, are designed to solve the urgent political and economic problems arising out of the present situation in Germany. Because of the previous failure to reach comprehensive 4-power decisions on Germany, the measures recommended mark a step foward in the policy which the powers represented at these talks are determined to follow with respect to the economic reconstruction of Western Europe, including Germany, and with respect to the establishment of a basis for the participation of a democratic Germany in the community of free peoples.

1 The source text was released to the press by the Department of State as Press Release No. 454, June 7, 1948, for publication after 6 a. m. of that date. The Communiqué was simultaneously released to the press in London and Paris. The text of the Communiqué was approved at a meeting of the London Conference on the morning of June 1. Telegram 2391, Delsec 1774, June 1, from London, not printed, reporting on the Conference meeting, added that it had been further agreed that the Communiqué would be delivered to the Soviet Ambassador in London by Sir William Strang twelve hours in advance of its release to the press (regarding the Strang-Zarubin meeting on June 7, see telegram 2511, June 7, from London, p. 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]). At the same time, the American, British, and French Military Governors in Germany were to arrange for the delivery of the Communiqué to Soviet representatives in Berlin (740.00119 Council/6–148).

2  Supra.

3  Ante, p. 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205].

4  Ante, p. 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94].

5 Document TRI/16, May 26, p. 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190].

E. Approval by the governments of the recommendations of the London ConferenceE. Approval by the governments of the recommendations of the London Conference

[211] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, June 2, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/6–248: Telegram

[212] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, June 4, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Council/6–448: Telegram

[213] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, June 4, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Council/6–448: Telegram

[214] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, June 7, 1948—noon.

740.00119 Council/6–748: Telegram

[215] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, June 7, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Council/6–748: Telegram

[216] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, June 7, 1948—7 p. m.

851.00/6–748: Telegram

[217] The Ambassador in Belgium (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Brussels, June 9, 1948—11 a. m.

851.00/6–948: Telegram

[218] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, June 9, 1948—1 p. m.

740.00119 Council/6–948: Telegram

[219] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, June 9, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Council/6–948: Telegram

[220] Editorial Note

[221] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, June 10, 1948.

740.00119 Council/6–1048: Telegram

[222] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, June 10, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/6–1048: Telegram

[223] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, June 10, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Council/6–1048: Telegram

[224] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, June 11, 1948—noon.

740.00119 Council/6–1148: Telegram

[225] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, June 11, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Council/6–1048: Telegram

[226] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, June 16, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–1648: Telegram

[227] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, June 17, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Council/6–1748: Telegram

[228] Editorial Note

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/6–248: Telegram

[Document 211]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

secret Paris, June 2, 1948—7 p. m.

2927. We talked Bidault into going along with us at the London Conference on Germany but he is very unhappy now because at this juncture the chances of his surviving the Assembly debate do not look very good.1 The root of the opposition is a fear that as a result of our setting up a government in West Germany, the Russians may endeavor aggressively to force us out of Berlin. “If they do that,” the French say, “what will you do? Will you fight, and if you fight, with what will you fight? If we were sure you would drop atomic bombs fast enough and often enough, we would not be so worried but we doubt that you will. It would be easy for the Russian armies to overrun France and we shudder to think of what would happen to our beautiful country. We are defenseless, as you well know.”

In addition some of the Socialists believe that some sort of final gesture should have been made to the Russians before proceeding with the London Conference. When pinned down they are very evasive as to just what they mean.

For all these reasons, I and various members of my staff are working on all the political parties except the Communists in an endeavor to line them up behind Bidault for the debates on Germany next week. It is important that the British Socialists approach the French Socialists in the same sense. Harvey told me yesterday that he would telegraph London on this.

(Every time I have seen Bidault recently he has had a pile of news paper clippings, American and French, alleging Bidault has given in to US oil this or that point at the London Conference.) (Mytel 2896, June 1.2 )

Sent Department 292, repeated London 474, Berlin 274.

Caffery

1  In his telegram 2966, June 4, from Paris, Ambassador Caffery reported as follows: “Bidault said to me last night: ‘You can tell your Government that I shall have the fight of my life in the Assembly on this London Conference German business, but on my part I shall make the fight of my life and very definitely I am not licked yet.’” (740.00119 Council/6–448)

2 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/6–448: Telegram

[Document 212]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, June 4, 1948—8 p. m.

2471. 1. Baudet, in the absence of Massigli, called on me and said that Bidault had particularly asked whether in the forthcoming debate in the Chamber he might use the language contained in paragraph III of the report to governments entitled “Talks on Germany”.

If, Baudet said, it would be embarrassing to US for Bidault to use the exact language, might he use some modified language so as to give the impression that there would be joint consideration to the situation as it may develop in Germany.

2. I have no judgment on the matter, for I am not well enough aware of the implications of the reactions of Bidault’s use of the idea on our own internal Congressional situation. We might, however, agree that he say something along the following lines: “Obviously, the three occupying powers must give joint consideration in Berlin, or through diplomatic channels, to the entire German situation.”

3. To go much beyond this might, it seems to me, be construed by the Soviet as a consultative arrangement aimed against them. It might, therefore, influence them to take steps which they might not otherwise take.1

Douglas

1 Telegram 2107, June 5, to London, not printed, replied that the Department was averse to the French proposal set forth in numbered paragraph 1. The Department was not, however, opposed to further incidental reference by the French Government that joint consultation on Germany would continue as required. (740.00119 Council/6–448)

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/6–448: Telegram

[Document 213]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, June 4, 1948—8 p. m.

2479. For Lovett from Douglas.

1. Bevin talked with me this morning about the German situation and our policy and program there. He said that his government was thoroughly prepared to accept the recommendations, and that final and formal acceptance would probably be taken on them on Monday.

2. He also stated that in the event the French do not go along with US, his government is prepared to proceed with US in the bizonal area. He added, however, that what we planned to do might prove to be more provocative than we now thought, and that certain of his colleagues were a little uneasy lest, having decided to proceed without France should the French fail to agree to the recommendations, and having decided to proceed with US, Britain might find herself alone. He suggested that this uneasiness could be allayed if we could give him some assurance that the policies of our respective two governments be harmonized and identical in the event that the Soviet might attempt to aggravate the difficulties of our position in Berlin and throughout Germany either by the use of force, which Bevin thought unlikely, or by a variety of other devices including inspired strikes.

3. I explained to him the significance of our statement that the American troops would be held in Germany until the peace of Europe is secured. This, of course, Bevin completely understood.

4. Bevin made it very clear that there was no suggestion in what he said of modifying HMG’s determination to go through with the program in western Germany. He was merely indicating a certain uneasiness lest the firmness of the executive branch of our government might not be reflected by Congressional action should this become necessary.

5. I think I suspect that the uneasiness to which Bevin refers was inspired by the news of the action of the Appropriation Committee in reducing the appropriations for European recovery.

6. In view of the foregoing, while, of course, we cannot make a commitment which is binding upon the Congress, I suggest that I be authorized to tell Bevin that in the event the Soviet move more vigorously that we think, in any event US and UK policy will be formulated in concert with each other.

7. Although paragraph III of the report to governments entitled “Talks on Germany”1 implies the type of assurance which would be helpful, it can be invoked only in the case all three governments accept the recommendations which have been submitted to them.2

Douglas

1  Ante, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

2 Telegram 2106, June 5, to London, not printed, stated that the Department accepted paragraph in of the Report of the London Conference as applying to consultation between the U.S. and the U.K. in the event that the two governments find it necessary to implement the London program without French approval (740.00119 Council/6–448). In telegram 2530, June 8, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas reported that he communicated the Department’s view to Bevin. Bevin told Douglas that the assurance would allay uneasiness among a few of his colleagues (740.00119 Council/6–848).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Council/6–748: Telegram

[Document 214]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

secret
us urgent Washington, June 7, 1948—noon.

1973. Embtel 2998 June 5.1 Hope some member of your staff can impress upon one of De Gaulle’s close advisers importance in wider international field of approval of London agreements. British and US Govts are approving them. De Gaulle may or may not be aware of extent to which they protect French interests against resurgence of German aggression. Agreement on Ruhr international authority fulfills a long-sought desideratum of French policy. We doubt he is aware of implications for overall French security of continued resolute and united action by three Western Powers. Failure of French Govt to approve agreements would have serious repercussions on public opinion here, would offer dangerous encouragement to Soviet Govt, and would benefit no one but Communists.

Marshall

1 Not printed; it reported that the period of the coming ten days would be the most crucial the Schuman government had faced and that the German problem was the most critical issue. It was further reported that General de Gaulle was expected soon to make a statement strongly condemning the government’s German policy. Foreign Minister Bidault was apprehensive over the effect of de Gaulle’s pronouncement. (851.00/6–548)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Council/6–748: Telegram

[Document 215]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

secret Washington, June 7, 1948—4 p. m.

1975. Please convey to Bidault following personal message from me: “My Government has now decided to give definitive approval to London agreements on Germany. Although U.S. Delegation was called upon to make numerous concessions, I feel agreements finally reached constitute a noteworthy step in advancing interests of all three countries, particularly in insuring that Germany cannot again become a threat to any of us. Unity of purpose and action shown at London by the three Governments and Benelux also marks a further important step in our efforts to enhance our joint security against any aggressor.”

Bidault may use foregoing any way he sees fit short of publication.

Marshall

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 851.00/6–748: Telegram

[Document 216]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

secret Paris, June 7, 1948—7 p. m.

3015. I have been for two days with the President of the Republic and a large group of Cabinet Ministers, Deputies, and Councillors of the Republic, prefects, etc. along the Normandy beach-heads for the annual June 5 and 6 celebrations. I had occasion to speak to the President about the London recommendations on Germany and, as I found him opposed to the recommendations, I spoke to him frankly and forcibly. He made no commitments but said he would talk to me again on Tuesday or Wednesday.1

I encountered strong opposition too from some others and was surprised to find how much the recently developing personal opposition to Bidault (for the “high handed” way he is running foreign policy) has seized on this issue in an endeavor to eliminate him once and for all. I pointed out the frivolity and gravity of mixing personal dislikes with a serious issue of the sort.

We are facing a curious situation. Bidault is the only man in the French Government who would have approved the recommendations of the London conference and he necessarily must defend them. On the other hand we well know Bidault’s manifest weaknesses. But at this juncture his elimination could be effected only at the expense of sacrificing the London recommendations unless some formula were evolved of approving the recommendations and getting rid of Bidault. This does not appear at all likely because up until now there is no one else in sight who will openly and publicly defend the recommendations.

Repeated London 500, Berlin 294.

Caffery

1 No record has been found of a subsequent conversation between Ambassador Caffery and President Auriol.

The Ambassador in Belgium (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 851.00/6–948: Telegram

[Document 217]

The Ambassador in Belgium (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Brussels, June 9, 1948—11 a. m.

1184. For Hickerson. Agreeing quickly to my suggestion he might help in building up Bidault’s resistance to pressures inside France Spaak will use Guillaume as medium (he considers unwise telephone Bidault direct adding Bidault so hypersensitive that conversation by phone too liable to create misapprehension or to wound feelings). He will also send Socialist in whom he has confidence to talk with Blum.1

Spaak intends follow line developed in Embtel 1161 June 52 but principal emphasis will be attempt to get Bidault to realize strength his own position (as opposed to his defeatist attitude during negotiations) and to present London Agreement as long vigorous forward one. He expects to accentuate again remarkable difference between responsible American public opinion after this war as compared with its isolationist attitude following 1914–18 war. However, he gave me impression he feels Bidault so touchy that any approach must be most carefully phrased and staged.3

Spaak understands our concern which he shares although he thought this morning’s news from France showed some revival inherent good sense people. He cannot understand De Gaulle, saying any fantastic claims upon USA to guarantee French security would show very unrealistic view of current situation in both Europe and America.

Kirk

1 In telegram 1161, June 5, from Brussels, Ambassador Kirk reported on a conversation with Belgian Foreign Minister Spaak. Spaak felt that Bidault was entirely too sensitive to French internal political pressures and had overlooked the importance of American expressions of determination to maintain troops in Germany until a stable peace had been achieved. (840.00/6–548) Telegram 868, June 7, to Brussels, not printed, instructed Ambassador Kirk to ask Foreign Minister Spaak most urgently whether he did not consider it advisable for him to give Bidault some message designed to strengthen the latter in his efforts to obtain parliamentary approval of the London recommendations on Germany (840.00/6–548).

2 Not printed; see preceding footnote.

3 In his telegram 1221, June 12, from Brussels, not printed, Ambassador Kirk reported having been informed by Foreign Minister Spaak that Belgian Ambassador Guillaume had made a démarche with Foreign Minister Bidault. Bidault expressed his thanks for Spaak’s interest and promised to do his best (851.00/6–1248).

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/6–948: Telegram

[Document 218]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent Paris, June 9, 1948—1 p. m.

3052. My 3046, June 8.1 After four hours of discussion yesterday which did not go well for Bidault, the Council of Ministers agreed to submit the London-German Agreement to the Assembly on Friday for latter’s approval. (It is not, of course, a question of ratification since the agreement is neither a treaty nor a convention but the Assembly will debate the government’s foreign policy, particularly the German issue, and at debate’s conclusion will be called to vote on an “order of the day” supporting the government’s position.)

The strongest opposition which Bidault encountered yesterday in the Cabinet came apparently from René Mayer (who is said to be a candidate for the job of Foreign Minister) and from Jules Moch. René Mayer is said to have strongly criticized the London Agreement because it does not provide the necessary control of Ruhr production, does not provide adequately for French security; and because the introduction of an “occidental mark currency” in western Germany as much as the establishment of a government in Frankfurt would tend to make for a final division of Germany involving serious risks for France.

Jules Moch took the position that the unity of Germany remained the objective of Socialist policy, whereas, the agreement would accentuate the division of Germany, and furthermore that the Socialists did not wish to support any agreement which would accentuate the division of the world into two blocs. Moch, supported by other Socialist Ministers, indicated the desire to obtain an improvement in certain conditions of the agreement. Among other things Moch is reported to have suggested that since Koenig is presiding over the Quadripartite Control Commission in Berlin during the month of June, the French should take the initiative thereby convoking the commission and placing the question of monetary reform on the order of the day. Moch’s idea apparently is that such a move might help to break the present deadlock in Germany between East and West.

As things now stand Bidault is to meet early this morning with certain Cabinet Ministers to go over the declaration which he will make later in the morning to the Foreign Affairs Commission and the actual Assembly debate is scheduled to begin Friday afternoon unless the debate on the school issue is prolonged (my 3053, June 92 ). In connection with the final outcome of the debate the wording of the order of the day on which the Assembly will be called to vote will be of great importance. As things now stand it is unlikely that the government could obtain a majority vote on an order of the day which implies outright approval of the London Agreement. Accordingly, there is a possibility that the order of the day will be so worded as to avoid calling directly on the Assembly to approve the government’s German policy perhaps may even call on the government to seek “supplementary guarantees” in connection with the German agreement.

Sent Department 3052, repeated London 508, Berlin 302.

Caffery

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Council/6–948: Telegram

[Document 219]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 1

secret
us urgent
niact Washington, June 9, 1948—6 p. m.

2027. For the Ambassador. Although we fully recognize the very serious difficulties involved in the presentation of the German recommendations to the Assembly and the real danger, particularly in the light of De Gaulle’s speech,2 that the Government may not be able to secure acceptance of the program, nevertheless we hope Bidault will avoid the attitude of encouraging suggested changes or reservations. There have been implications in press reports from Paris today that he may be planning this. As you know and as the French Government is aware the Conference recommendations are to be treated as a whole. This does not naturally exclude ultimate modification of program by evolution and common agreement and you may so inform Schuman or Bidault if it will be helpful.3

Marshall

1 This telegram was repeated to London as 2152 and to Berlin as 1013.

2 On June 9 General de Gaulle made a statement opposing the London Conference recommendations on Germany.

3  In telegram 3089, June 10, from Paris, not printed, Ambassador Caffery reported that he had again emphasized to the leaders of all French political parties (except the Communists) that the London recommendations stood as a whole and could not be changed or whittled down. Caffery added that this telegram was definitely helpful. (740.00119 Council/6–1048)

In his telegram 2565, June 10, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas observed that the final sentence of this telegram required clarification, and he expressed the following view: “While, of course, it is of the utmost importance that France be carried and that we do not behave in an excessively inflexible manner, it seems to me that the precise meaning of this sentence should be made clear so that we may be able, in the future, to avoid protracted discussions and Fabian tactics which could operate to create confusion and to frustrate the application of our program in Germany.” (740.00119 Council/6–1048)

Editorial Note [Document 220]

Editorial Note

On June 9 Secretary of State Marshall issued a statement to the press announcing and explaining the approval and acceptance by the United States Government of the recommendations of the London Conference on Germany. For the text of the Secretary’s statement, see Department of State Bulletin, June 20, 1948, page 810. Previously, on June 7, the Department of State had issued to the press a lengthy statement explaining the background of the London Conference recommendations. For the text of this earlier statement, see ibid., page 811.

The Department of State had considered it desirable that the United States announcement of approval of the Conference recommendations follow the British announcement, in order to avoid the impression that the United States was forcing the pace on the London program on Germany. The British agreed, and Foreign Secretary Bevin read a statement to the House of Commons on the afternoon of June 9 announcing British acceptance of the London recommendations. For the text of Bevin’s statement, see Parliamentary Debates, House of Commons, 5th series, volume 451, columns 2166–2168.

In an official Benelux communiqué issued at The Hague on June 14, the Governments of the Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg announced approval of the London Conference recommendations. Formal notification was also transmitted to the United States, British, and French Governments.

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/6–1048: Telegram

[Document 221]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

us urgent Paris, June 10, 1948.

3076. The Foreign Affairs Committee of the National Assembly last night disapproved by 24 to 13 a motion submitted by M. de Chambrun (Communist) rejecting the London recommendations on Germany outright, and rejected also a second motion proposed by several Gaullist deputies denouncing the recommendations on Ruhr control and demilitarization and calling for the postponement of the creation of a western Germany until a peace conference, to be called immediately, should have attempted to agree on the text of treaties with Germany and Austria. The committee finally approved, by the narrow margin of one vote (21 to 20) a motion approving the submission of the London recommendations to the consideration of the National Assembly. 11 MRP, 7 Socialist, 2 Radical, and one Independent voted for this motion, while 13 Communists and 7 PRL and Gaullist-Independent voted against. There were two Radical-Socialist abstentions (Bonnefous, chairman of Foreign Affairs Commission and Paul Bastid).

The text of the motion follows: “The Foreign Affairs Committee, after having heard the statement of M. Georges Bidault on the recommendations resulting from the conversations at London on the subject of Germany: I. Notes that these conversations originated in proposals of the Allied powers which together with France occupy the three western zones of Germany and which the Govt of France has legitimately desired to discuss.

II. Notes that in connection with certain important points, the London recommendations arrived at after negotiations correspond only to a certain extent with the views and requests constantly supported by France in the interests of her own security which coincides with that of world peace.

III. Recognizes the efforts made by French diplomacy, not without result, to bring the Anglo-American projects closer to the French theses.

IV. Considers that these (London) recommendations may be taken into consideration in such a manner that in the ensuing negotiations and in the placing in effect of the subsequent decisions: (a) all risk of the reconstitution of a unitary and centralized Reich shall be avoided by a political organization of Germany in conformity with federalist principles.

(b) the effective participation of France in the control of the German industrial potential shall be assured with a view to bringing about in particular an international management of the industries of the Ruhr.

(c) that the French demands for security, indispensable to the maintenance of peace, shall likewise be satisfied.

V. Invites the Govt to express its reservations and to oppose its veto to anything which might run counter to these principles, and records the assurances given by the Minister for Foreign Affairs in this regard.

VI. Declares itself, under these conditions, in favor of the consideration by the National Assembly of the recommendations which will be submitted to it.”1

Repeated to London 514, Berlin 308.

Caffery

1 For the French text of the resolution quoted here, see Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, p. 566.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Council/6–1048: Telegram

[Document 222]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, June 10, 1948—7 p. m.

2057. Reurtel 3077, June 10.1 US Govt’s answer is no to suggestion that French Govt be authorized to inform Assembly that question of extension of Ruhr control to actual management of mines remains open for future discussion in connection with setting up International Authority.

French are aware of concession we made from our original position in agreeing that International Authority should make allocations rather than review German allocations between internal consumption and export. While we continue to believe agreed London recommendation is equitable and just, French must also be aware of unfavorable German reaction which will make it difficult to maintain coal production for general recovery needs. The mere fact of leaving question of extension of Ruhr control open for consideration, when it had been agreed in February to eliminate international management, would produce further unfortunate results in Germany and is moreover unnecessary from security standpoint. French Govt is fully cognizant that Ruhr recommendation is part of integral program. If crippling reservations are attached to program French should realize that insofar as the Ruhr and other commitments favorable to themselves and Benelux are concerned these will become inoperative. We appreciate implication of this action but would regard it straightforward and necessary step. As we understand it Massigli had been thoroughly informed of these consequences.

Re Deptel 20272 and Ambassador Douglas’ query in London’s 272 to Paris,3 we of course did not envisage amendment now or in near future of London program, particularly before it should have chance to justify itself. London agreements, like other agreements relating to developing situation, nevertheless cannot be regarded as immutable. It may be found that certain adjustments will have to be made and process of continuing consultation regarding all aspects of German situation may well lead to suggestions for change which we would be willing to accept by common agreement including that of the Germans. However on the Ruhr we cannot go beyond the basic position accepted at London.

Sent Paris as 2057; repeated Berlin 1022; and London 2182.

Marshall

1 Not printed; the suggestion about which it reported had been made by André Philip, the leader of the Socialists in the Foreign Affairs Committee, who warned Ambassador Caffery that the London recommendations would fail of approval in the National Assembly unless the suggested concession be made to the French Government (740.00119 Council/6–1048).

2 June 9, p. 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220].

3 Same as telegram 2505, June 10, from London, not printed, but see footnote 3 to telegram 2027, June 9 to Paris, p. 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220].

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/6–1048: Telegram

[Document 223]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

secret   most immediate
niact Paris, June 10, 1948—9 p. m.

3091–A. In the Assembly vote on the London-German agreement it is obvious that as things now stand the Communists and Gaullist inter-group will vote against; that a majority of the MRP and Socialists will probably vote favorably; and that the outcome will probably depend largely on the position of the PRL and the independent Republican’s.

In view of the vital importance of getting the PRL and independent Republicans to go along, I saw Paul Reynaud and Laniel together this afternoon and explained again the tragic consequences for France if it rejected the London agreement.

At the conclusion of my exposé, Reynaud said that there was great hostility to the agreement in both his and Laniel’s group and that many of their followers in the Assembly still believe that if the London agreement is rejected negotiations for a new agreement could at once recommence with a new Foreign Minister in the place of Bidault who, he said, no longer has the Assembly’s confidence. (He added that Palewski and the Gaullists are spreading this “line”.) He agreed personally that it would be disastrous for France to isolate herself from the other occidental powers on the German issue. With this in mind he said he and Laniel would endeavor to convince their followers but he would need some ammunition.

In particular he said that it would be helpful to have a statement from a qualified US Government official (perhaps in answer to a question posed at a press conference) that if the French Government did not approve the agreement the United States, with reluctance, would feel obliged to carry through the London agreements with the other signatories but without France. He also said that any American press or editorial criticism of De Gaulle’s declaration on Germany would also be very helpful. Reynaud said that he would have to have this information by tomorrow evening (Paris time) if it were to be really effective in the final vote, which he expects will occur Saturday.

I believe that if we can supply Reynaud with something along these lines (which will permit him to endeavor to convince his followers and colleagues and at the same time not require him to pose as an actual champion of the specific terms of the agreement itself) it will be very useful. I have in mind a question at a Departmental press conference tomorrow or some form of question posed to a State Department “spokesman” with an answer along above lines.1

Sent Department as 3091; repeated London as 520, Berlin as 315.

Caffery

1 The Department did not reply to this telegram, and there was no Departmental statement of the sort discussed here.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/6–1148: Telegram

[Document 224]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Berlin, June 11, 1948—noon.

1341. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. It is still too early to gauge German reactions to the communiqué of the London conference.1 Our agencies are sampling public opinion and a number of German leaders have made preliminary comments about which I have telegraphed you. The reception is decidedly mixed and the Germans are obviously badgered by the conflicting desire to have their own government and fear that the London recommendation contemplates a puppet German western state with the substantial loss of the control of the Ruhr and entailing a permanent split of Germany. There is also fear of eventual Soviet reaction.

I have had a number of discussions with General Clay on the subject. He has sent the following cable to General Draper, Under Secretary of the Army, which is repeated for your information: “For your information, publication of long communiqué which was necessarily written to please French public opinion prior to our explanation of proposals to German leaders has resulted as we feared in unfavorable reaction and has made some German leaders upon whom we had counted to take public positions not too favorable to proposed evolution of government. As you know, our desires had been to give as little as possible to the public about political evolution until we had met with Minister Presidents so that initial publicity could come from Minister Presidents. This procedure, I am sure, would have resulted in an enthusiastic German reception. However, even now, we are unable to explain the really favorable details of the proposals since the resultant publicity might have unfortunate repercussions in France. Soviet propaganda meantime rolls forth unchecked on the popular tune of German unity. Until French Government has acted, our own propaganda machine can only emit rather feeble grunts.

I bring this to your attention for information since it is apparent that there is no other course of action open to us. Nevertheless, in our efforts to gain France, we have let loose political forces in Germany which might lead to a rejection of the constitution which, of course, would be a serious political blow to our objectives. I have every hope that our influence combined with Britain will be able to overcome the initial obstacles when we are able to really explain the details to the German leaders. Nevertheless, in making moves in political evolution, we must recognize that German public opinion does become of increasing importance in the political struggle for Germany, and that we cannot neglect the reaction of some seventy million Germans, if, in fact, we hope to secure a Germany in which extreme parties either of the left or of the right cannot flourish.

Frankly, I am worried as it is going to be difficult for political leaders forced to take positions based on the communiqué to change their position when we have given them more complete explanation. I wanted you to know this now, so that you would better understand some of the problems which are certain to arise in forming the Constituent Assembly and in attaining the constitution. I am not being critical in any sense of what we have done as I recognize fully the nature of the French problem. However, I do want to bring to the attention of the responsible authorities in Washington once again that we still have a German problem.

I think it might be helpful if you would informally discuss the general context of this radio with Mr. Lovett and others concerned in the State Department”.

Sent Department 1341, repeated London personal for Douglas 234; Paris personal for Caffery as 233; and Moscow personal for Smith as 213.

Murphy

1 The reference here is to the London Conference communiqué of June 7, p. 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Council/6–1048: Telegram

[Document 225]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

secret
us urgent
niact Washington, June 11, 1948—2 p. m.

2063. While Dept would regard as unfortunate any reservations in French approval of London recommendations on Germany, we are most concerned about para 5 of Foreign Affairs Committee motion (urtel 3076, June 101 ), according to which French Govt is to veto anything which might run counter to French reservations. Although procedure for implementation of London program was not definitively clarified at London, Douglas nevertheless made it clear that the exercise of a veto should be avoided. It is our firm belief that repeated use or threat of French veto would stultify program. Although we fully understand French preoccupation concerning a centralized German state and security, nevertheless specific inclusion of veto provision in French Govt’s acceptance of program would presumably tie hands of French negotiators in subsequent discussions and result in French intransigence on particular issues which might destroy possibility fulfillment of program as agreed. As you know whole conception of veto in international agreements has become repugnant to US public opinion as a result of Soviet abuse of veto in United Nations, CFM, and other international bodies.

Elimination veto instructions in any Assembly resolution on London program would remove most serious aspect. Please take whatever steps you consider feasible at this late date with respect to this matter.

Sent Paris as 2063; repeated to London as 2188; to Berlin as 1023.

Marshall

1  Ante, p. 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–1648: Telegram

[Document 226]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact London, June 16, 1948—4 p. m.

2639. I. Chauvel flew to London evening fourteenth and met for hour and half with Strang, Massigli and myself to obtain for Bidault such observations regarding tripartite German agreement as Strang and I might make and which, as Chauvel explained, could be used by Bidault in the Chamber as a clear interpretative comment on agreement. It finally became evident that Chauvel wished at least to obtain three things: (1) Our consent that a démarche be made to Moscow; (2) An interpretation regarding the Ruhr control which would permit French participation in management control; and (3) A US–UK agreed statement which Bidault might use in the debate—the first two as replies to questions which the debate had brought out; the third as an interpretation of the last sentence of Deptel 2027 to Paris.1

II. To the second we both stated that we could not agree to extension of Ruhr authority’s powers so as to provide international control of management. We pointed out the relationship of the authority’s power to the controls to be exercised by the Military Governors during the period of occupation and to the controls which the agreements provided for thereafter. (These were matters of which apparently Chauvel was in complete ignorance.)

Our answers to the first and third matters follow later in this cable. Strang suggested that it might be helpful if Chauvel would put in writing the particular points which he and Bidault had in mind.

III. Yesterday morning Chauvel and Massigli, after calling on Bevin, met with us for two hours and again for two hours in afternoon. They presented a paper which in translation read as follows:

[Here follows the text of a French paper offering an analysis, from the French point of view, of some of the salient features of the London Conference recommendations. The principal points of the analysis are reflected in later portions of the telegram printed here and the annotations thereto.]

IV. After reading and before commenting on the French paper, Chauvel asked three questions: 1. Could there be any change in timing of the plan?

I replied that we felt that the present schedule must be followed. Strang concurred.

2. Could there be a meeting of the three Foreign Ministers to consider the recommendation which had been made?

Strang stated that Bevin could not agree to this. I replied that I was sure my government felt the same way. We both stated reasons, which we have previously discussed, why this would be an imprudent act to take.

3. Would we agree to a formal note to the Soviet calling their attention to the plan after agreement had been reached by all parties, including the French, and the program had been initiated? He suggested the note might say that we would welcome Soviet participation.

Strang stated that in Bevin’s opinion this should not now be done, nor should it be done in the immediate future, for a tactical move of this kind would prove embarrassing and would probably be turned against us. The possibility, however, of making an approach to the Russians later could not be dismissed.

I asked Chauvel what purpose he thought such a note might serve. He replied in effect that the commitment to send one would be a gesture to the Socialists in France and would put the Soviet in the position where they would probably refuse. I then said that in view of the three years of frustration which the Soviet had caused, and in the light of their tactics, as evidenced about a variety of different matters, including currency reform, it was doubtful that the Soviet would refuse but instead would employ the maneuver to effect further confusion, further delay, and to spread the seeds of discord by propaganda. A maneuver on our part, which provided no promise of reward and held no expectations of progress, for the purpose of satisfying Socialist views in France, would, I thought, be damaging to a united front in the west.

Chauvel continued to ask several questions indicating an earnest desire to obtain US–UK approval of some plan to advise the Soviets about the program which would give a possible opening for the Soviets to participate later. Both Strang and I suggested that Bidault, during the debate, if he chose to do so, might refer to our past sincere endeavors to reach agreement with the Soviet, to the communiqué which made it clear that what we were proposing in regard to political organization was of such a character to permit participation by all German states, and that he might say something in the Chamber, of course at his option, not unlike the line taken by Secretary Marshall in his press conference and Mr. Bevin in his statement to the House of Commons.2

V. Chauvel then asked for comments on the paper which he had presented, and suggested that we give our approval to its language, particularly to Paragraph Three.3 By way of background so that you may understand our replies, the original language which Chauvel handed us used the word “negotiations” instead of “discussions”. Moreover, it contained the phrase “supplementary agreements” instead of “complementary arrangements” and was worded in other respects so as to imply, if not expressly to infer, that Paragraph Three would be construed as a supplementary agreement between the US, the UK and France.

I, therefore, told Chauvel that the London recommendations had been agreed to by five of the six powers, and that we could not, without the consent of the others, place our stamp of approval on any language of this character which Bidault might choose to make. To do so would indicate that we were parties to an extra-lateral arrangement with France. Moreover, it might be used at a later stage to commit us to reopen the question of control of the Ruhr, or even as an undertaking on our part otherwise to amend the agreements. This I said we could not do. I therefore told Bidault [ Chauvel?] that in his own language, in his own way, he could draw the conclusion from his knowledge of the agreements and of the nature of the action which they woud require for implementation, that subsequent discussions would naturally have to be had. We wanted, however, to avoid the infirmities of a veto. Within these limitations the sense of the language as modified, but not the language itself, Bidault could use with the reasonable expectancy that it would not be contradicted by the US. In all of this Strang agreed heartily.

As to Paragraph Two,4 I pointed out to Chauvel that the entire accord had been reached through candid exchange of views, and adjustment of the propositions of the respective governments, to the end that a reasonably satisfactory agreement would, it was hoped, emerge. No one government had been able to obtain everything that it wished. All had compromised their opinions in order that we might promptly get on with the task of reconstructing western Europe.

As regards Paragraph Four,5 Strang took the ball and indicated that the first sentence appeared to be an attempt on the part of Bidault to throw the entire responsibility on the US and UK. The last sentence of Paragraph Four conformed to our views.

As to Paragraph Five,6 I said that, as in all aspects of the paper, we could not agree to the language. This matter had been discussed at length around the conference table with all the delegates. If Bidault chose to do so, I said that he might refer to our policy of de-Nazification, decartelization and deconcentration and draw the conclusion that the three together would have an effect upon proprietary interests in the properties of the Ruhr. In this Strang agreed, though he pointed out that differences on this point existed between the French and US on the one hand and British on the other, and between the US on the one hand and the UK on the other.

As to Paragraph Six,7 both Strang and I said that the controls over management in the Ruhr must be construed in the light of the paper itself, particularly Paragraphs Nine and Ten, and provisions in the security paper, but that again we could not be placed in a position of approving any specific language which Bidault might use, with the qualification that the general sense of Paragraph Six was consistent with our understanding. Both Strang and I reiterated our view that we could not be party to anything which might be construed as an extra-lateral or supplemental agreement.

VI. Chauvel then inquired what we would do if France rejected the recommendations. Strang stated that, as Mr. Bevin had said yesterday morning, HMG had no alternative but to proceed in the bizonal area, and that it was his, Strang’s personal view that HMG would want to follow the program which had been laid down as closely as possible.

I said that if the French Government should reject the agreement, we would find it necessary to carry out plans in the bizonal area, but that I could not say whether they would parallel the lines of the London agreement or whether they would take a different line. If, however, we adhered to the general meaning of the London agreements, there would, necessarily, since France would not be a party to them, have to be modification regarding French representation on the Ruhr authority and possibly consultation with French on certain phases of security.

VII. Chauvel inquired whether the report might be published. Both Strang and I stated that we felt that no part or parts of the report, particularly those relating to political organization and security, should be published now without in advance obtaining the comments of the Military Governors, the advice of our governments, and the consent of the other powers which had agreed to the recommendations. We said, however, that if Bidault chose to do so, he might elaborate somewhat on the communiqué by using discreetly the substance of some of the annexes to the report provided they were not of a secret nature and provided they did not further undermine our position in Germany, anticipate the conversations between the Military Governors and the Ministers President, and further weaken our influence among Germans already, according to Robertson’s reports (confirmed by Clay) not unseriously impaired.

VIII. I told Chauvel that if, after three years of spectacular disunity among four powers, the three last great sanctuaries of freedom were now to present to the world a spectacle of their own disunity, the consequences throughout western Europe and in the western hemisphere might well be incalculable, thus damaging the interests of France and of all those, including my own country, who are attempting to preserve the traditional features of western civilization. Strang followed this up by saying that there was a powerful argument to be made by France for the agreements on their merits, that this argument could be reinforced by a statement of the consequences of rejection and that France, were she to disapprove now might find it difficult, if not impossible, to recover that which the present agreements offered to her.

IX. Chauvel appeared to have a very limited understanding of the agreements, and both Strang and I could not resist telling him that the facts as they existed, the agreements as they had been drawn, the communiqué as it had been drafted, could be used by Bidault to demolish every honest criticism that had so far appeared among the opponents and the doubters of the London recommendations.

X. Chauvel said that the answers which he had received from us would enable Bidault and the French Government to put at rest the rumors that had been circulating in the Cabinet and among members of the Chamber that the US and UK were willing to reopen the negotiations, were prepared to accept now amendments to them involving control of management of the Ruhr, increased French control over the Ruhr authority, and postponement of the application of the plan.

Sent Department as 2639; repeated USPolAd Berlin for Murphy and Clay as 206; Paris for Caffery as 287; Brussels for Kirk as 100; Moscow for Smith as 100.

Douglas

1 June 9, p. 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220].

2 Regarding the statements made by Secretary of State Marshall and Foreign Secretary Bevin on June 9, see the editorial note, p. 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220].

3 Paragraph 3 of the French paper cited the need for inter-governmental discussions to work out complementary arrangements required to apply the Conference recommendations.

4 Paragraph 2 of the French paper emphasized the compromise nature of the Conference recommendations.

5 Paragraph 4 of the French paper observed that the Americans and British had not considered referring the Conference recommendations to a meeting of Foreign Ministers and insisted that the German program be carried out within prescribed time limits.

6 Paragraph 5 of the French paper summarized those aspects of the Ruhr agreements aimed at preventing pro-Nazis from resuming control of mines and industries.

7 Paragraph 6 of the French paper summarized the international control aspects of the Ruhr agreements.

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/6–1748: Telegram

[Document 227]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

secret   niact Paris, June 17, 1948—6 p. m.

3203. Until I can see Schuman, Bidault and other leading members of the government and have a very frank talk with them about the Assembly’s vote last night on the London German agreement,1 I do not feel in a position to make authoritative comment on the implications of the order of the day which was voted last night. As a very preliminary comment, however, I should like to point out that in view of the very great public and parliamentary opposition to the London German recommendations the government came through the ordeal about as well as could be hoped for from our point of view. The resolution finally passed is, in my opinion, less restrictive than the original motion of the French Foreign Affairs Committee. It will be noted also that the reference to a veto (Deptel 2063, June 11) was dropped and that the resolution, while it contains a number of admonitions, contains no reservation sufficiently specific to prevent implementation of the London recommendations.

The vitally important thing, as I see it, given the present political situation within France itself and western Europe, is that the door was not slammed on the German question last night. If the Assembly had rejected the agreement outright, it is difficult to see how this government, or any government which might succeed it, would be able to go as-far as the present government has gone. Moreover a rejection of the London agreement such as to place US under the necessity of proceeding alone would have separated France from the other Brussels pact signatories and from ourselves on the vital German issue and would have almost inevitably caused widespread and most unfortunate consequences insofar as the whole idea of western unity is concerned.

By the foregoing I do not wish to give the impression that I believe that last night’s vote is, by any means, entirely satisfactory from our point of view, for this is not the case. Everything, of course, depends on the spirit on which the negotiations implementing the London agreement are carried out. In the hands of De Gaulle or the Communists the Assembly’s reservations would unquestionably be used to hamstring on every conceivable occasion. The present government in the face of a very serious internal political situation has shown real courage in trying to reach a compromise agreement with US on Germany which will permit the vitally important German problem to be dealt with in a realistic fashion. If it continues to show the same spirit in facing up to the German problem there is no reason to believe a priori that the six powers which signed the London agreement cannot proceed to its implementation. I must add, however, that the French Government’s task will, of course, be more difficult as a result of the motion voted last night and there is little doubt that the Communists, Gaullists and ardent nationalists of the Right will endeavor to use the terms of the order of the day to shackle the government’s liberty of action in implementing the agreement. In view of the general unpopularity of the London agreement such pressure would unquestionably tend to make the government more cautious. I hope to see Schuman and Bidault (who are still “resting”) about this within the coming 24 hours after which I will be in a position to add to the foregoing very preliminary commentaries.

Caffery

1 In his telegram 3190, June 17, from Paris, not printed, Ambassador Caffery reported that the French National Assembly that morning had approved an “order of the day” agreeing to the London Conference recommendations on Germany (740.00119 Council/6–1748). Caffery subsequently reported that the final Assembly vote was 300 for and 286 against the “order of the day”. The MRP and the Socialists voted solidly for the London agreements while the Communists and Gaullists voted against.

Editorial Note [Document 228]

Editorial Note

In a note of June 19, not printed, Ambassador Bonnet informed Secretary of State Marshall that the French Government, with the approval of the French National Assembly, formally accepted the London Conference recommendations on Germany. The note called attention to the National Assembly’s reservations to the recommendations, set forth the text of those reservations, and announced the French Government’s intention to seek solutions which coincided with the views of the National Assembly (740.00119 Council/6–1948). Telegram 2308, June 19, to London, repeated to Paris and Berlin, not printed, observed that in transmitting the note, the French Embassy had pointed out that no conditions had been attached to the French acceptance and that the necessary instructions had apparently been sent to the French Commander in Chief in Germany to enable him to proceed with the application of the recommendations (740.00119 Council/6–1948). In a note of June 21, not printed, the Secretary of State acknowledged Ambassador Bonnet’s note and observed that instructions had been sent to General Clay to concert the necessary measures with the British and French Military Governors in Germany in order to accomplish the implementation of the London Conference recommendations (740.00119 Council/6–1948). For the text of the French National Assembly’s order of the day (resolution) setting forth its reservations to the London Conference recommendations, see Journal Officiel, Débats, Assemblée Nationale, June 1948, page 3578, or Keesing’s Contemporary Archives, 1948–1950, page 9376, or James K. Pollock, James H. Meisel, and Henry L. Bretton, eds., Germany Under Occupation: Illustrative Materials and Documents (Ann Arbor: George Wahr Publishing Co., 1949), pages 267–268.

F. Exchanges with the governments of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe regarding GermanyF. Exchanges with the governments of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe regarding Germany

[229] The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) to the Acting Secretary of State (Lovett)

[Washington,] February 13, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–1348

[230] The Chargé in Czechoslovakia (Bruins) to the Secretary of State

Praha, February 18, 1948—7 p.m.

862.00/2–1848: Telegram

[231] The Department of State to the Embassy of the Soviet Union

Washington, February 21, 1948.

740.00119 Council/2–1348

[232] The Ambassador in Poland (Griffis) to the Secretary of State

Warsaw, February 23, 1948—1 p. m.

711. 60C/2–2348: Telegram

[233] The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) to the Secretary of State

[Washington, February 26, 1948.]

862.00/2–2648

[234] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Poland

Washington, February 28, 1948—2 p. m.

711.60C/2–2348: Telegram

[235] The Secretary of State to the Yugoslav Ambassador (Kosanović)

Washington, March 2, 1948.

862.00/2–2348

[236] The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) to the Secretary of State

Washington, March 6, 1948.

740.00119 Council/3–648

[237] The Ambassador in Poland (Griffis) to the Secretary of State

Warsaw, March 7, 1948—6 p. m.

711.60C/3–748: Telegram

[238] Editorial Note

[239] The Secretary of State to the Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin)

Washington, March 25, 1948.

740.00119 Council/3–648

[240] The Ambassador in Polamd (Griffis) to the Secretary of State

Warsaw, March 26, 1948—4 p. m.

711.60C/3–2648: Telegram

[241] The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushhin) to the Secretary of State

Washington, April 13, 1948.

740.00119 Council/4–1348

[242] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, June 1, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/6–148: Telegram

[243] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, June 4, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–448: Telegram

[244] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, June 6, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–648: Telegram

[245] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, June 7, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Council/6–748: Telegram

[246] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Berlin, June 8, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Council/6–848: Telegram

[247] Editorial Note

[248] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Armour)

[Washington,] June 18, 1948.

740.00119 Council/6–1848

[249] Editorial Note

[250] The Secretary of State to the Polish Ambassador (Winiewicz)

Washington, July 6, 1948.

740.00119 Council/6–1848

[251] Editorial Note

The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) to the Acting Secretary of State (Lovett) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–1348

[Document 229]

The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) to the Acting Secretary of State (Lovett)1

[Translation]

[Washington,] February 13, 1948.

On instructions from the Soviet Government I hereby have the honor to communicate to you the following:

The Soviet Government has learned from the press that the Governments of Great Britain, the United States of America and France intend to convene in London on February 19 a conference to discuss questions concerning Germany. According to published communiqués, it is proposed to consider at this conference questions: Concerning the general policy of Great Britain, the United States and France with respect to Germany;

Concerning the future structure of western Germany;

Concerning control of the Ruhr;

Questions of security, reparations, etc.

The Soviet Government considers it necessary to draw the attention of the Government of the USA to the fact that the convocation of such a conference for the consideration of questions which lie within the competence of all the Powers occupying Germany and which affect other European countries would be a violation of the Potsdam Agreement and of other decisions, adopted by the Four Powers, in accordance with which responsibility for the administration of Germany and for the determination of policy with respect to Germany is borne jointly by the occupying Powers, which is incompatible with separate activities.2

The Soviet Government at the same time brings to your attention that in accordance with the Declaration on the defeat of Germany of June 5, 19453 the Governments of the Four Powers occupying Germany took upon themselves supreme authority, including all authority of which the German Government disposed, and consequently obligated themselves to determine “the status of Germany or of any region which at the present time is a part of German territory”.

The questions which are subject to consideration at the London conference of the representatives of Great Britain, the United States and France are questions which can be decided only with the common consent of all the powers occupying Germany.

The convocation of this conference in London is a violation of the Agreement on the control mechanism in Germany and a violation of the Potsdam decision for treating Germany as a unit.

In connection with the foregoing the Soviet Government considers it necessary to inform the Government of the USA that it will not consider as legal decisions which may be adopted at this conference.

1 A marginal handwritten notation on the original Russian text of this communication, filed separately under 740.00119 Council/2–1348, indicates that it was handed to Acting Secretary of State Lovett by Soviet Ambassador Panyushkin at 11:30 a. m. on February 13, 1948. Identic notes were delivered to the United Kingdom Government on February 13 and to the French Government on February 16: see the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the USSR, The Soviet Union and the Berlin Question (Documents) (Moscow: 1948), pp. 5–6.

2 In a communication to the Department of State dated February 15, not printed, translated in the Department of State, the Soviet Embassy requested that the concluding clause “which is incompatible with separate activities” be changed to read “with which the separate actions are incompatible”. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–1548)

3 For text, see Department of State Bulletin, June 10, 1945, p. 1052.

The Chargé in Czechoslovakia (Bruins) to the Secretary of State 862.00/2–1848: Telegram

[Document 230]

The Chargé in Czechoslovakia (Bruins) to the Secretary of State

secret Praha, February 18, 1948—7 p.m.

158. Joint declaration of Praha Foreign Ministers Conference February 17–18 reported in Embtel 157, February 181 reliably reported to be “document” brought along by Polish Delegation (Embtel 149, February 172 ) which was approved by conference with minor modifications.

Experienced observers in Praha regard it obvious that entire conference was Soviet utilization of three satellite countries to attempt to marshal world public opinion particularly among undecided elements in European countries, against expected action of London tripartite meeting scheduled for February 23.

Desired propaganda effect in Czechoslovakia of pulling country further into eastern sphere has apparently been unsuccessful because of mild nature of declaration and because present Cabinet crisis in Czechoslovakia has relegated Foreign Ministers Conference to inside pages even in Czechoslovak leftist press.

Embassy has been on alert to learn whether in view of routine manner in which public declaration was approved other less advertised decisions were taken. So far as ascertained the only other matters discussed on the side were the Yugoslav complaints against their bad press in Czechoslovakia. As result of private conversations it also appears that the Czechoslovaks are long way from being fully trusted either by Soviet Union or by Poles or Yugoslavs as evidenced by Czechoslovak press criticism of eastern countries and by fact that very many non-Communists continue to represent Czechoslovak interests abroad in both economic and diplomatic spheres.

Because of shortness of time available which included some social festivities Embassy regards it doubtful whether other matters of major importance were decided or even discussed in detail at Foreign Ministers meeting. Polish and Yugoslav Foreign Ministers arrived Praha by train morning, February 17 and left evening 18.

Sent Department as 158, repeated Warsaw as 8, Belgrade as 6, London as 11, Berlin as 17.

Bruins

1 Not printed; it transmitted the text of a joint declaration issued by the Polish, Czechoslovak, and Yugoslav Foreign Ministers at the conclusion of their conference in Praha on February 17 and 18 on the German problem. For the text of the Praha Declaration, see Poland, Germany and European Peace, p. 74. A German translation of the Declaration appears in Europa Archiv, March 1948, p. 1229.

2 Not printed; it reported reliable information to the effect that the initiative for the Praha Foreign Ministers Conference had come from the Polish Government whose delegation was bringing to the conference a document which the Czechoslovak and Yugoslav Foreign Ministers would be asked to approve. The Embassy in Praha continued to feel, however, that the Praha Conference had been inspired by the Soviet Government (862.00/2–1748).

The Department of State to the Embassy of the Soviet Union 740.00119 Council/2–1348

[Document 231]

The Department of State to the Embassy of the Soviet Union 1

Memorandum

The Department of State refers to the communication of February 13 of His Excellency the Soviet Ambassador relating to the discussions which the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom and France propose to hold in London respecting Germany.

These discussions have been arranged for the examination of problems in Germany of mutual interest to the three Governments. There is no provision in the Potsdam or other agreements relating to Germany concluded by the four occupying powers which prevents any of the powers from discussing between themselves questions of common concern.

The United States Government is surprised that the Soviet Government should undertake to remind the other powers of their contractual obligations in Germany. The result evoked by the failure of the Soviet Government to observe the principle of economic unity provided for in Section III B 14 of the Potsdam agreement2 impels the other three powers at this time to consult among themselves to put an end to a state of uncertainty and economic deterioration in Germany which threatens recovery in all of Europe. As has been repeatedly stated by United States representatives both in the Council of Foreign Ministers and in the Allied Control Council for Germany it remains open to the Soviet Government to join the other occupying powers in sound measures for the achievement of the economic and political unity of Germany. The fact that it now protests against the endeavors which will be made to develop constructive measures to deal with the present situation in Germany can only be construed as an effort to shift the responsibility incurred by the Soviet Government itself for the present division of Germany, with all the unfortunate consequences which this division entails, not only with respect to Germany, but for the recovery of Europe as a whole.

Washington, February 21, 1948.

1 The text of this memorandum was transmitted to the United Kingdom and French Governments on February 17, but no effort was made to seek an identic reply to the Soviet communication of February 13 (p. 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 229]). The French and United Kingdom Governments responded separately on February 21 and 23, respectively. For the text of the French communication, see Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, p. 556.

2  Foreign Relations, The Conference of Berlin (Potsdam), 1945, vol. ii, p. 1504.

The Ambassador in Poland (Griffis) to the Secretary of State 711. 60C/2–2348: Telegram

[Document 232]

The Ambassador in Poland (Griffis) to the Secretary of State

secret Warsaw, February 23, 1948—1 p. m.

272. Following Foreign Minister Modzelewski’s return from Prague,1 had long conference with him Saturday which opened with usual rehash of all American-Polish disagreements and mutual recriminations. Upon this protest of the use of Mikolajczyk’s charges on the VOUSA I replied that I had warned him for many months that the US did not propose to accept with equanimity the constant vicious attacks of the Polish press and once more suggested that the always hoped-for good will between the two countries could be better fostered if attacks on both sides were completely discontinued. Modzelewski responded with astonishing suggestion that the Polish Government would see to it that their attacks would be immediately discontinued if the US would make an official pronouncement favoring the Polish position on the western border question. He reiterated all the old Polish position that this border had been settled at Potsdam and that the British had concurred in it through the Cadogan statement.2

I stated to the Foreign Minister that such an arrangement was of course impossible, as the Polish border question was inextricably woven into the general solution of the entire problem on which the Council of Foreign Ministers, (CFM) was engaged in London in December.3 I reiterated what I had told him many times before that my personal and official belief was that the question of the western borders could always be promptly and favorably settled when, as and if the problems of the German treaty and the relations between USSR and the three other great powers were resolved.

Modzelewski stated again that Poland was desperately anxious to trade with all countries both east and west as evidenced by its many trade negotiations but could not divest itself of its two great fears, the first regarding its western borders and the second the bogie of the remilitarization of Germany. He stated that Poland had had no voice in international discussions since Potsdam. To this I replied that the entire Polish policy together with its political and economic activities seemed to indicate to the world that Russia spoke with authority for Poland. I told him of my personal belief that Poland was fast becoming the economic keystone between eastern and western Europe and that Poland was negligent in not more forcefully attempting to influence the Russian policy which had prevented American and CFM attempts to settle the European problems. I stated strongly my belief on the question of reparations and that a peaceful Europe would result in more profits and more favorable economic developments for all European countries east and west in a very short period than any possible reparations which would accrue over a long period. With this he emphatically agreed.

Modzelewski stated “Poland’s position is so precarious that if one fingernail of the US is hurt as a result of the present impasse, Poland will be completely destroyed”. He stated that he would go to any lengths to break the impasse and felt that unquestionably a loan [plan?], which involved the successful revival of the American suggestions of a 40-year 4-power German demilitarization agreement with a consequent settlement of the border question would be the consummation most to be wished.

Out of all this discussion developed the possibility of Modzelewski presenting a plan to the USSR with the backing of his Govt looking toward the solution of the present stalemate. What influence such a presentation by Modzelewski in Moscow would have I do not know, but it appears to me that if he made such proposals as originating in Poland there is always a chance that progress might be made and if failure resulted the approach might at least prove to have smoked out the USSR in the mind of the Poles and disclosed to them the USSR had not been acting in good faith.

I believe that Modzelewski was speaking extempore and the theme developed jointly as the discussion proceeded. From his emotion it appeared to me as if he were speaking as a true Pole and that for the moment he had shaken the hand of the Kremlin from his shoulder and had shed his Communist uniform.

However, there are some indications (Embtel 166, February 3,4 paragraph 2) that he is on his way out and it may be that his tendency occasionally to place Poland above the party in his thinking is one of the reasons.

Poles are not popular in Poland today.

Conversely, it is possible that I willingly stepped into a carefully preconceived Moscow dictated plan.

There may be many valid reasons in your mind why such a plan should not be attempted; on the other hand, if you see any possibilities in it, you might advise me of a proposed broad general approach to be suggested to Modzelewski even at the risk of over-simplification. My discussions in the matter can at all times be regarded as personal and unofficial and probably should be.

Griffis

1  Modzelewski had, of course, attended the Praha Conference of Czechoslovak, Yugoslav, and Polish Foreign Ministers, February 17–18.

2 The reference here is presumably to the note of November 2, 1944, from British Permanent Under Secretary of State Alexander Cadogan to the Foreign Minister of the Polish Government in Exile; the text of the note is printed in Poland, Germany and European Peace, p. 105.

3 For documentation on the Fifth Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers, held in London, November 25–December 12, 1947, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 676 ff.

4 Not printed.

The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) to the Secretary of State 862.00/2–2648

[Document 233]

The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) to the Secretary of State 1

[Translation]

[Washington, February 26, 1948.]

No. 39

Sir: Upon instructions from the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics I have the honor to communicate to you the following:

On February 23 of this year the Governments of Czechoslovakia, Poland and Yugoslavia informed the Soviet Government of the conference of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Czechoslovakia, Poland and Yugoslavia, which took place in Praha on February 17 and 18, and of the declaration which was adopted at that conference.2

As is well known, the Governments of Czechoslovakia, Poland and Yugoslavia expressed in this declaration their concern over the fact that the development of events in Germany is taking a course contrary to the principles of the Yalta and Potsdam decisions, which provide for the eradication of German militarism and Nazism and for the taking of all necessary measures in order that Germany may never again threaten her neighbors or the preservation of peace.

In connection with the request of the Governments of Czechoslovakia, Poland and Yugoslavia, addressed to the Governments of the four Powers occupying Germany, that consideration be given to their declaration adopted at the conference of Ministers of Foreign Affairs in Praha, the Soviet Government has informed the Governments of Czechoslovakia, Poland and Yugoslavia that it shares their position as stated in the said declaration, and feels that satisfaction should be given to the wishes of the Governments of the said states concerning consultation between the Powers occupying Germany and the Governments of other United Nations on the German question, which consultation was provided for by the declaration of the Governments of the U.S.S.R., Great Britain, the U.S.A. and France on June 5, 1945. Moreover, it is impossible not to recognize the fact that Poland, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia are states which are particularly interested in some solution of the German problem that would be in the interest of the peace and security of nations.

Accept [etc.]

A. Panyushkin

1 Similar notes were addressed to the United Kingdom and French Governments. In a note dated March 2, not printed, Under Secretary of State Lovett acknowledged this note and transmitted to Ambassador Panyushkin a copy of his note of March 2 to Ambassador Kosanović (p. 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]) (862.00/2–2648).

2 Regarding the Praha Declaration, see footnote 1 to telegram 158, February 18, from Praha, p. 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Poland 711.60C/2–2348: Telegram

[Document 234]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Poland

secret Washington, February 28, 1948—2 p. m.

128. We have read with great interest report of your conversation with ForMin urtel 272, Feb 23 1 p. m.1 and will appreciate any further indications which you may receive whether ForMin was speaking spontaneously or acting under Soviet directive. In any event, we feel that any suggestions to ForMin no matter how informal the basis, would be reported to Russians and considered by them as being made on our initiative. We believe that this would have unfortunate effects upon Austrian treaty discussions in London2 and would be interpreted as a sign of weakness on our part, particularly in view recent developments in Czecho. We therefore suggest no further approach to ForMin at this time. Should he raise subject you might say that ForMin must be fully aware of issues involved, that he should need no guidance in determining what steps should be taken on Soviet side to overcome present impasse. Department appreciates skill with which you handled this matter.

Marshall

1  Ante, p. 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232].

2 Reference to the meetings in London, February–May 1948, of the Deputies for Austria of the Council of Foreign Ministers; for documentation regarding these meetings, see pp. 1466 [Pg. 1466 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815] ff.

The Secretary of State to the Yugoslav Ambassador (Kosanović) 862.00/2–2348

[Document 235]

The Secretary of State to the Yugoslav Ambassador (Kosanović)1

Washington, March 2, 1948.

Sir: With reference to your note of February 28, 1948,2 transmitting the text of the declaration concerning German problems drawn up by the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Czechoslovakia, Poland and Yugoslavia at their recent conference in Praha, I have the honor to inform you that this resolution contains so many statements which are not in accordance with the facts that a discussion of its contents would serve no useful purpose.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert A. Lovett
Under Secretary

1 Identical notes were also transmitted to the Polish and Czechoslovak Ambassadors, and a copy was communicated to the Soviet Ambassador in reply to his note of February 26, p. 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]. In telegram 378, March 3, to Berlin, not printed, the Department transmitted the text of this note and instructed Ambassador Murphy that the United States Government was not prepared to consider in the Allied Control Council the Praha Declaration “which is based on misstatements and distortions of fact and is patently designed to serve propaganda ends”. (862.00/3–348)

2  Not printed. It transmitted the original French text and an English translation of the Praha Declaration of the Foreign Ministers of Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia (see footnote 1 to telegram 158, February 18, from Praha, p. 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]). The note expressed the hope that the United State Government would give the Declaration serious consideration. Parallel notes were also presented to the Secretary of State by the Polish Ambassador and the Czechoslovak Chargé on February 23.

Copies of the Praha Declaration were also transmitted to the Soviet, United Kingdom, French, Belgian, Netherlands, and Luxembourg Governments by the Polish, Czechoslovak, and Yugoslav diplomatic representatives, and the Declaration was submitted to the Allied Control Authority for Germany by the Polish and Czechoslovak Military Missions in Berlin.

The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–648

[Document 236]

The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) to the Secretary of State 1

[Translation]

Washington, March 6, 1948.

No. 50

Sir: In reply to the Department of State’s memorandum of February 212 of this year concerning the conference in London between the Governments of the U.S.A., Great Britain and France on the German question, upon instructions from the Soviet Government I have the honor to state the following:

In the statement of the Soviet Government transmitted to you on February 13,3 the fact was pointed out that the London Conference of the representatives of the U.S.A., Great Britain and France on the German question is a violation of the agreement made by Great Britain, the U.S.S.R., the U.S.A. and France on a Control Council in Germany, as well as a violation of the Potsdam Agreement on the establishment of a Council of Foreign Ministers, one of whose basic tasks was the preparation of a peaceful settlement for Germany. In reply, the Governments of the U.S.A., Great Britain and France stated that the agreement on control machinery in Germany and the Potsdam Agreement do not contain any prohibition of the arrangement of consultations of the Powers among themselves. However, such statements cannot be recognized as convincing.

It is known that, as a result of such a type of unilateral consultations held by the Governments of the U.S.A. and Great Britain, as well as France, there have already been committed more than one violation of earlier Agreements concluded between the four Powers. It is clear to everyone that the so-called consultations at the London Conference constitute the preparation of a new arrangement on the German question between the U.S.A., Great Britain and France, although it is absolutely obvious that arrangements of this kind between the governments of the three Powers are incompatible with a loyal attitude toward the above-mentioned Agreements signed by the four Powers.

From the very reply of the French Government4 it is clear that the Conference in London between the representatives of the U.S.A., Great Britain and France was convened for the consideration of a number of important problems pertaining to Germany. From the published agenda of the London Conference it is seen that in the said agenda were included such matters as the role of the German economy in Europe and the question of the Ruhr District, measures of security with respect to Germany, territorial changes, reparations and other matters directly related to the competence either of the Control Council or of the Council of Foreign Ministers and which consequently are subject to settlement in no other manner than by agreement between all four Powers occupying Germany.

Thus it follows that the reply of the French Government not only does not refute the assertion contained in the Soviet statement of February 13 to the effect that the Conference in London between the representatives of the three governments is a violation of the Agreement on control machinery in Germany as well as of the Potsdam Agreement on the establishment of a Council of Foreign Ministers, but also confirms the fact of such violation with full clarity.

The Soviet Government considers it necessary to invite special attention, first of all, to the position (terms of reference) of the Control Council in Germany.

In the Agreement between Great Britain, the U.S.S.R., the U.S.A. and France on the establishment of control machinery in Germany, published on June 6, 1945,5 it was stated that the Control Council in Germany was created to ensure coordination of the actions of the four Powers in the corresponding occupation zones “on the chief military, political, economic and other questions affecting Germany as a whole”.

In the Declaration on the defeat of Germany, likewise published on June 6, 1945,6 the Governments of Great Britain, the U.S.S.R., the U.S.A. and France jointly obligated themselves to determine “the status of Germany or of any area at present being part of German territory”.

Thus in these agreements the four powers—Great Britain, the U.S.S.R., the U.S.A. and France—assumed the obligation to carry out an agreed policy both with respect to Germany as a whole and with respect to determining the status of any area in Germany during the period of occupation. Therefore, separate conferences and decisions on the German question, pertaining either to Germany as a whole or to any of its parts, are in contradiction with the obligations assumed by the four Powers.

The implementation of an agreed policy by the four Powers with respect to occupied Germany was considered by the governments of the said Powers as the most important condition for ensuring a lasting peace and security for the peoples of Europe, and it was one of the bases of the decisions of the Yalta and Potsdam Conferences on the demilitarization and democratization of Germany. Furthermore, this policy was expected to prevent the possibility of the restoration of Germany as an aggressive power and to ensure Germany’s transformation into a peaceful, democratic state.

Throughout the entire period that has elapsed, the Soviet Union has consistently acted in accordance with this policy established by the four Powers. Moreover, the Soviet representatives have steadfastly insisted that, with respect to all the zones of Germany, the Control Council should adopt the appropriate agreed measures, which, however, even on very important questions, have not found support on the part of the British, American and French representatives.

In the meantime, the other occupying powers had already in 1946 started along the road of direct rejection of this policy established by the four Powers.

This first found expression in the separate Agreement between Great Britain and the United States of America on the unification of the British and American zones of occupation in Germany, and then in a series of other separate actions on the part of the British and American authorities, as well as of the French authorities, in their occupation zones. It is well known that the question of creating a unified Anglo-American zone was not even submitted for the consideration of the Control Council. The matter reached the point where, at the Anglo-American Conference in Frankfurt am Main in January 1948, decisions were taken which gave the two zonal agencies a governmental character, although scarcely a month before that the representatives of Great Britain and the United States of America had denied that they were preparing the formation of a separate West German state. Nor is it a secret that at the present time consideration is being given to the matter of France’s joining in this Anglo-American separate policy of forming a West German state vis-à-vis the rest of Germany.

The consequences to the Treaty of Peace of such a policy and of such an attitude are well known. The said actions of the British, American and French representatives have paralyzed the Control Council in Germany and have undermined its importance.

All this means that the Governments of the U.S.A., Great Britain and France have taken upon themselves the responsibility for the collapse of the Agreement on the Control Council in Germany.

The London Conference of the representatives of the U.S.A., Great Britain and France on the German question bears witness to the fact that now it is a matter not only of the collapse of the agreement on the Control Council in Germany but also of the collapse of the Potsdam Agreement on the Council of Foreign Ministers. Disregarding the fact that in the Agreement of the four Powers provision was made for questions connected with a peace settlement for Germany to fall within the competence of the Council of Foreign Ministers, the Governments of the U.S.A., Great Britain and France organized the said separate conference on the German question without the participation of the representatives of the U.S.S.R. and in violation of the Agreement on the Council of Foreign Ministers.

The Soviet Government considers that the fact of the organization of the three-Power London Conference constitutes a fuller development of the policy of the U.S.A., Great Britain and France which is directed toward the liquidation of the Council of Foreign Ministers representing all four occupying powers.

During 1947, sessions of the Council of Foreign Ministers on the German question were held in Moscow and London. In both cases the Soviet Government made efforts to bring about agreement between the four Powers with respect to Germany, meeting halfway the proposals of the other powers on a number of questions, so far as this was compatible with the basic principles of previous agreements on the demilitarization and democratization of Germany.

The Soviet Government was guided, first of all, by the desire to expedite the preparation of a peace treaty with Germany and to ensure the restoration of complete peace in Europe, in which all peace-loving peoples are interested. This government also tried to carry out the decisions of the Yalta and Potsdam Conferences concerning satisfaction of the lawful demands of Allied States which suffered from German aggression. In addition to this, the Soviet Government championed the necessity of promoting the restoration of Germany as a democratic and peaceful state, which is also in full accord with the Yalta and Potsdam decisions.

However, the Council of Foreign Ministers was unable to arrive at general agreements on the German question in view of the position taken by the United States of America, Great Britain and France.

The Governments of the U.S.A., Great Britain and France turned down the Soviet Union’s proposal presented to the Council of Foreign Ministers in London for the preparation of a peace-treaty with Germany. The Governments of the said three Powers also turned down the proposal of the Soviet Union concerning the establishment of central German economic departments, which was directly provided for by the Potsdam Agreement. The Governments of the three Powers likewise turned down the proposals of the Soviet Union on the organization of an all-German government, which is necessary for the restoration of the political and economic unity of Germany.

If the Governments of the U.S.A., Great Britain and France had agreed to begin the preparation of a treaty of peace with Germany and had agreed to measures aimed at the restoration of Germany’s unity, important progress would have been made in solving the entire German problem and in strengthening the peace of Europe. An agreement on all these questions was not achieved because of the negative attitude of the said three Powers.

If the Governments of the U.S.A., Great Britain and France had maintained the positions which found expression in the decisions of the Yalta and Potsdam Conferences, there can be no doubt that the Council of Foreign Ministers would have successfully coped with its problems upon considering the German question.

The failure of the Moscow and London Conferences of the four Foreign Ministers is explained by the fact that Great Britain, the United States of America and France deviated from the Yalta and Potsdam decisions on the German question and tried to impose upon the Council of Foreign Ministers a policy which contradicts these decisions and is incompatible with them.

Every kind of attempt is now being made to justify the present separate actions by the failure of the work and by the collapse of the Moscow and London Conferences of the four Ministers. The purpose of these attempts is to remove the blame for this collapse from the three Powers and ascribe it to the Soviet Union, although it is quite obvious that the responsibility for the failure of the Council of Foreign Ministers rests entirely on the Governments of the United States of America, Great Britain and France, which disrupted these Conferences.

The real significance of these separate actions is now fully apparent to all those who follow the policy of the said powers with respect to Germany. The significance of these actions, which are directed toward the liquidation of the Council of Foreign Ministers, is to throw off all restrictions which might interfere with the promotion of that policy respecting Germany on which the Council of Foreign Ministers was unable to agree, since such a policy is radically at variance with the policy previously agreed upon by the four Powers.

The facts indicate that the so-called “American Plan” with respect to Europe, including Germany, has become the basis of that policy pursued by aggressive circles in the United States of America, England and France, which policy is at the present time being carried out by those powers in disregard of the problem of demilitarization and democratization of Germany, instead of the one which was agreed upon by the powers of the anti-Hitlerite coalition when they established the conditions for the capitulation of Germany and adopted decisions at the Yalta and Potsdam Conferences. Furthermore, everything is being done for the purpose of converting the western part of Germany, as if it were a colony, into a simple object and tool for plans of this kind.

When in 1946 there was created in Germany a united Anglo-American zone, Bizonia, which was set up vis-à-vis all the rest of Germany, economic considerations were given as the explanation. It was said that such unification of the two zones would facilitate the restoration of the German economy and would at the same time reduce the expenditures of the occupying powers. These explanations and promises have not been justified.

In reality, the creation of Bizonia can in no way be explained by economic considerations. This step, which led to the splitting up of Germany, was dictated by the desire to obtain a free hand in the western part of Germany for carrying out the same one-sided policy of the Anglo-American authorities which they failed to impose upon the Control Council with respect to Germany as a whole. Since the departure from the Yalta and Potsdam policy met with resistance in the Control Council, the Governments of Great Britain and the U.S.A. created Anglo-American Bizonia, together with their bilateral agencies, in which, by-passing the Control Council, they began to carry out their separate political and economic plans.

While in the Control Council the Anglo-American representatives were constantly confronted with the demand of the Soviet Union that they faithfully carry out demilitarization in all occupation zones, in Bizonia they got a free hand, and the liquidation of the military potential in that part of Germany was reduced to zero. Thus, steps for the liquidation of the war enterprises of Germany, even those which were intended for delivery on account of reparations, also remained untaken.

If in the Control Council they demanded a report on the application of measures for democratization in all zones, in Bizonia the Anglo-American authorities were able to act without control and without observing previously agreed decisions of the four Powers on the policy of democratization of Germany. Moreover, they began all the more to rely upon aggressive German circles and German monopolies, which in the past had served as a prop of Hitlerism and German aggression and were always ready to come forth as militant German avengers. Plans for land reform and the transfer to small peasants of the land of big landowners and junkers, who have always served as a prop to German militarism, remained only on paper.

To this it must be added that in the French occupation zone there has been pursued and still is being pursued a policy which does not differ from that being followed in the Anglo-American zone.

Now everyone sees that the creation of a unified Anglo-American zone has served as preparation for carrying out the so-called “American Plan” with respect to Europe.

They likewise explained the appearance of the “Marshall Plan” chiefly on the basis of economic reasons. They attempted to prove that the purpose of this “plan” is to furnish aid to the states of Europe that suffered from the war. It is now evident that these explanations have absolutely no force.

In reality the European countries that suffered most from the war found themselves outside the American “plan”, in as much as these countries could not agree to the terms set forth by the said “plan”, for such terms were incompatible with their national sovereignty and state independence. It is entirely understandable that the democratic states, which defended with their blood their national sovereignty in the struggle against Fascism, did not accept such terms of so-called American “aid” as would mean the interference of a foreign state in their internal affairs, economic life and national development. On the other hand, not only was Italy included in the “Marshall Plan”, but also the western part of Germany, although to date the obligations of Germany in respect to making reparation for the enormous damage inflicted upon the Allied states have not even been determined.

Since the Anglo-American policy deprives Germany of the possibility of having its own central democratic government which can defend the interests of the nation, and since the Anglo-American occupation zone lies outside the control of the four powers, Bizonia is a convenient field for the uncontrolled economic manipulations of American and British monopolies. Here in Bizonia Anglo-American monopolists, banks and cartels are penetrating into all branches of economic life, subordinating them to themselves and to their expansionist aims.

The facts show that up to the present time nothing has been done toward the real restoration of a highly-developed industry in the western part of Germany and that, on the contrary, the development of such industry has been and is being constantly retarded because of fears of competition. Together with this, in the American “aid” plan there are included Bizonia and the Ruhr district, with its heavy industry, which has always been a powerful center of armament production, and this indicates the aspiration of certain American circles to restore the military and economic potential of Germany and to use it for the purposes mentioned above.

In view of the foregoing, there is no need to wonder at the fact that attempts to ensure joint control by all four occupying Powers over the Ruhr industrial region have met with active resistance on the part of the United States of America and Great Britain.

Such a policy of the Anglo-American authorities in the field of economic measures in Germany is designed to obtain the support of the magnates of German heavy industry, but it clearly contradicts the aims of a peaceful and democratic transformation of Germany. This policy does not lead to the restoration of a peaceful economy in Germany but involves the danger of converting the western part of Germany into a strategic base for future aggression in Europe.

At present the Government of Great Britain is advancing a plan for the creation of the so-called “Western Union”. Into this political bloc are drawn France, Belgium, Holland, Luxembourg, and also Italy and the western part of Germany; at the same time, the participation of the United States of America is also provided for. The inclusion of some other western European states is also in view.

It is not difficult to discern that this British plan is closely connected with “the Marshall Plan”, complementing it and disclosing the political aims of the American plan in respect to Europe. Both the American plan of economic “aid” and the British political plan of “Western Union” set up a Western Europe as against an Eastern Europe and, consequently, lead to a political cleavage of Europe. It follows from this that the American economic plan and its complement—the British political plan, have nothing in common with measures for strengthening the peace and security of the peoples of Europe.

Remembering the hard lessons of the First and Second World Wars, the peace-loving states of Europe have yearned for the conclusion of agreements to prevent the possibility of new German aggression. This has been the basis of all known treaties—like the Anglo-Soviet and the Franco-Soviet 20-year Treaties of Reciprocal Assistance, the treaties of the Soviet Union with other European states and also the Anglo-French Treaty of 1947. This aspiration to prevent new German aggression corresponds to the interests of all peace-loving peoples and can not lead to the setting up of some European states as against other European states. The conclusion of such agreements has promoted and still promotes the security of the peoples of Europe and the strengthening of universal peace.

The plan of creating a “Western Union” is of an entirely different character and has no such aim as the prevention of German aggression or the rendering of mutual assistance in case of such aggression. The British political plan could not even have such an object in view, in as much as it not only is not directed against the repetition of German aggression but includes in the Western bloc that part of Germany where is still preserved the dominant position of aggressive German monopolies which only yesterday were the very foundation for Hitler’s aggression. On the other hand, the character of the British political plan is sufficiently revealed by the fact that it sets up the European states united by the bloc as against the other states of Europe which have consistently maintained their position of strengthening universal peace and of not permitting new German aggression.

It follows from this that the creation of Anglo-American Bizonia and the cleavage of Germany resulting therefrom was not an accident. By placing the western part of Germany outside the joint control of the four Powers, an attempt is being made to use it for the purpose of setting up a special group of western European states as against the rest of the states of Europe, which leads to the political cleavage of Europe and the formation of two camps of European countries.

Thus neither the American economic plan nor the British political plan serves the purpose of strengthening peace, economic restoration and progress, but rather entirely opposite aims. All this explains the attitude of the Soviet Union toward these plans.

It follows from all this that the policy of the United States of America and Great Britain, as well as that of France, led to the collapse of the agreement of the Four Powers on the Control Council in Germany and to the collapse of the Potsdam Agreement on the Council of Foreign Ministers, which was charged with all preparatory work toward the peaceful settlement of Europe. This policy of the three Powers not only fails to promote the establishment of an enduring democratic peace in Europe but is pregnant with such consequences as can suit only all kinds of instigators of a new war.

The secret meetings in London on the German question, between the representatives of the United States of America, Great Britain and France, designed to by-pass the Council of Foreign Ministers, in which the Soviet Union would also have participated, bear testimony to the fact that the Governments of the three Powers do not balk at complete disregard of obligations undertaken by them.

The fact that the representatives of only a small group of states were included in these conferences while a majority of the states which suffered most from German aggression were left outside this conference testifies to the fact that the London Conference was pursuing the goal of a narrow group of creators of the Western bloc, which is placed vis-à-vis all the rest of the states of Europe.

In view of the foregoing, the Soviet Government deems it necessary to reaffirm the declaration made by it to the effect that the decisions prepared by this Conference can have neither legal force nor international authority.

Accept [etc.]

A. Panyushkin

1 For the text of an identic note handed to Foreign Secretary Bevin by the Soviet Ambassador in London, see The Soviet Union and the Berlin Question, p. 7.

2  Ante, p. 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231].

3  Ante, p. 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 229].

4 See Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, p. 556.

5 The reference here is presumably to the Four-Power Statement on Control Machinery in Germany, issued on June 5, 1945; for text, see Department of State Bulletin, June 10, 1945, p. 1052 or A Decade of American Foreign Policy, 1941–49 (Washington, Government-Printing Office, 1950), p. 512.

6 For text, see Department of State, Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS) No. 1520, or 60 Stat. (pt. 2) 1649.

The Ambassador in Poland (Griffis) to the Secretary of State 711.60C/3–748: Telegram

[Document 237]

The Ambassador in Poland (Griffis) to the Secretary of State

secret Warsaw, March 7, 1948—6 p. m.

343. In a meeting with the Foreign Minister1 yesterday, he referred with great bitterness to the reply of the Department to the statement of the Governments of Czechoslovakia, Poland and Yugoslavia emanating from the Prague Conference and released on the evening of February 18. He stated that contrary to American reports, no suggestion of such a meeting had been made by the USSR and both the calling of the conference and the form of the proclamation was his own personal brain child. The second part of this statement I am inclined to believe. He stated that the only reply that the State Department had seen fit to make was in insulting Bruvhoff [apparent garble]. I stated that I felt unofficially that both the timing, form, and geographic emanation of the declaration was unfortunate. It was timed almost in conjunction with the Communist coup in Czechoslovakia, it was formulated as a long series of statements constantly disproved by the US Government and was forming no new basis of negotiation, and that with some changes if it had emanated in conjunction with the ministers of [at?] Moscow containing some recognition of the deep desire of the US to solve the European problems it might have had some validity as it was increasingly obvious that in the last analysis negotiations must be with Moscow. I stated that, in any event, the entire pronouncement was answered to the Polish Government in our answer to its note of Sept 30, 1947 which stated inter alia the following: “In this connection, the Polish Government is undoubtedly aware that the US Government has made repeated proposals for negotiation of a treaty with the UK, France and the USSR, which would guarantee the security of Europe against the revival of militarism in Germany for a period of 40 years. The US proposal, which was accepted as a basis for agreements by the UK and by France but not by the USSR. This proposal is indisputable evidence of the determination of the people and the Government of the US that Germany shall never again be dominant military power in Europe.”2

The Minister then asked if I had any further suggestions re our last discussion, described at length in my wire to the Secretary No. 272, February 23.3 I stated that this, too, was entirely answered by the quotation described above in our note of September 30, 1947, and that, quoting Deptel No. 128, February 28,4 he “must be fully aware of the issues involved and he should need no guidance in determining what steps should be taken on the Soviet side to overcome the present impasse.” He again expressed the desire that I should put the general plan on paper as a suggestion for his use in Moscow. I then presented him a Polish translation of the above paragraph with the statement, “I have it right here.” The Foreign Minister stated that this was the last question to be discussed and many others came first. I told him we could not accept that view and reiterated my belief that most of the problems of Europe would iron out if the basic question of German militarization could once be settled. I suggest informally and unofficially that perhaps he might want to put his ideas on paper.

I stated to the Foreign Minister that I had called a press conference for tomorrow afternoon to make a full exposition to the Polish press of the intent and purposes of the European Recovery Program, that I was furnishing him with a full translation of my proposed statement in Polish, and was also furnishing a copy to General Groz, Director of the Press and Information Office of the Foreign Office.5 I told him that during the eight months of my stay here no statements of mine in explanation of US policy in Europe had been permitted to reach the Polish press and that I especially requested that in connection with the momentous decisions of the European Recovery Program, the American viewpoint might at least be permitted to reach the Polish press for consideration by the Polish nation. The Foreign Minister stated that the Polish Government regarded the Marshall Plan as greatly more political than economic and in view of the fact it had been repeatedly stated in the American press and the Congress that aid under the Plan should be withdrawn from any country with a Communist government, it was apparent that should Poland have joined or now join in the Plan, the entire present Polish Government would be invited by the US to resign.

Later at luncheon with Winiewicz, it was apparent that he had talked with Modzelewski re the substance of my telegram to the Secretary No. 272, February 23, and astonishingly in his discussion quoted the exact words used in your cable answer, No. 128, February 28, that any suggestions by [to?] Russia looking toward renewal of negotiations “would be interpreted as a sign of weakness.” It is difficult for me to accept fully this phrase either from the Department or from the Poles.

Griffis

1  Zygmunt Modzelewski.

2 For the text of the note quoted here, see Department of State Bulletin, October 12, 1947, p. 741.

3  Ante, p. 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232].

4  Ante, p. 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234].

5 Ambassador Griffis’ statement is not printed. For documentation regarding the European Recovery Program, see volume iii .

Editorial Note [Document 238]

Editorial Note

In his telegram 519, March 7, from Berlin, not printed, Acting Political Adviser for Germany Chase reported that the Praha Declaration of the Polish, Czechoslovak and Yugoslav Foreign Ministers (see footnote 1 to telegram 158, February 18, from Praha, page 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]) had been considered at the 152nd Meeting of the Coordinating Committee of the Allied Control Authority for Germany on March 6. The United States, British, and French representatives declined to discuss the Declaration. The Soviet representative, after recapitulating the charges contained in the Declaration, demanded that it be considered by the Allied Control Council (740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–748). The Declaration was subsequently discussed by the Allied Control Council at its 82nd Meeting on March 20. For a report on that meeting, see telegram 651, March 20, from Berlin, page 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526].

The Secretary of State to the Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) 740.00119 Council/3–648

[Document 239]

The Secretary of State to the Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin)

Washington, March 25, 1948.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note, No. 50, of March 6, 1948,1 concerning the discussions which the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom and France held in London respecting Germany.

In its note of March 6, the Soviet Government reiterated the views expressed in the Soviet Embassy’s communication of February 13, 1948,2 to the effect that the London discussions were in contradiction to the Potsdam Agreement and to the Agreement on Control Machinery for Germany. In its memorandum of February 21, 1948,3 the Department of State pointed out that these talks were arranged for a discussion of problems in Germany of mutual interest to the three governments, and that there is no provision in the Potsdam Agreement, or other agreements relating to Germany concluded by the four occupying powers, which prevents any of the powers from discussing between themselves questions of common concern.

The United States Government notes that the Soviet Government continues to fail to recognize that the three powers have been obliged to consult among themselves at this time as a result of the unwillingness of the Soviet Government to implement the principles of economic unity as well as other principles of the Potsdam Agreement. The Soviet Government claims that the other occupying powers have undertaken a series of unilateral actions, contrary to the four-power agreement with respect to Germany.

The Soviet Government cites, as the first expression of such policy, the agreement between Great Britain and the United States with respect to the economic fusion of their respective zones of occupation in Germany. The note of the Soviet Government states: “It is well known that the question of creating a unified Anglo-American Zone was not even submitted for the consideration of the Control Council”. This statement does not correspond to the facts. At the meeting of the Allied Control Council in Berlin on July 20, 1946, General McNarney made the following statement on behalf of his Government: “The United States Government is of the view that no zone in Germany is self-sustaining. The treatment of two or more zones as an economic unit would improve conditions in the zones concerned.

“Therefore, the United States Government has authorized its representative on the Allied Control Council to join with the representatives of any other occupying power or powers in measures for the treatment of our respective zones as an economic unit, pending quadripartite agreement which would permit the application of the Potsdam decision to treat all of Germany as an economic unit so as to attain a balanced economy throughout Germany.

“While the United States would prefer quadripartite agreement to implement the Potsdam decision for the establishment of central German administrative agencies for Germany as a whole, its representative is prepared to cooperate with the representatives of any or all of the other occupying powers in Germany in establishing administrative arrangements to secure economic unity.

“The United States does not intend by its present proposal to divide Germany but rather to expedite its treatment as an economic unit.

“Any arrangements which representatives of the United States may make with the representatives of any other occupying power will be open on equal terms to the representatives of all other occupying powers at any time they are prepared to participate.

“The United States Government proposes this arrangement because of its belief that Germany can no longer be administered in four airtight compartments without free economic interchange unless economic paralysis is to result. The United States Government is unwilling to permit creeping economic paralysis to grow if it is possible to attain economic unity between its zone and any other zone in Germany as a prelude to economic unity for all Germany.”

According to the official minutes of the Allied Control Council (CONL/M (46) 19), the meeting agreed in view of the unpreparedness of the other delegations to defer consideration of the United States proposal.4 At the next meeting on July 30, 1946, according to the official minutes (CONL/M(46)20), the Control Council considered the United States Government’s proposal. At this meeting Marshal Douglas announced that after full consideration the British Government had authorized him to accept, in principle, General McNarney’s offer. Comments on the United States proposal were made by the Soviet representative at this meeting and by the French representative at subsequent meetings.5

It should be recalled that the same offer of the United States Government to join its zone economically with that of any other occupying power had previously been made before the Council of Foreign Ministers by the Secretary of State, Mr. Byrnes, on July 11, 1946,6 at Paris, and was subsequently reiterated by him in an address at Stuttgart on September 6, 1946.7 The responsibility for rejection of this offer and for failure to include its zone in this economic arrangement lies upon the Soviet Union itself.

The threat to the authority of the Allied Control Council does not arise from the actions of the United States, but rather from the consistent pursuit by the Soviet Government in the eastern zone of Germany of a systematic unilateral policy of its own. The Soviet Government has failed to observe the principle of economic unity provided for in Section III, B, 14, of the Potsdam Agreement. It has likewise failed to insure, as provided in Section III, B, 15(c), of the same agreement, “the equitable distribution of essential commodities between the several zones so as to produce a balanced economy throughout Germany and reduce the need for imports”. It has carried out reparation removals of industrial capital equipment from the eastern zone without regard to agreed limitations on such removals and without consideration of the legitimate peace-time requirements of the German economy. It has also continuously taken reparation in the form of resources and current production, contrary to the understanding at Potsdam. The Soviet Government under the guise of reparation has taken into its possession in gigantic trusts (the so-called Soviet A.G.’s) major industrial establishments in the eastern zone accounting for 25 to 30 per cent of the total remaining industrial productive capacity.

The Soviet Government has furthermore carried out in its zone a unilateral policy with respect to political activity. The Potsdam Agreement envisaged that local self-government would be re-established throughout Germany on democratic principles; that all political parties with rights of assembly and of public discussion should be allowed and encouraged; and that representative and elective principles should be introduced in the various levels of government. In actual practice, however, the Socialist Party was suppressed by the imposed amalgamation with the Communist Party into the Socialist Unity Party, which has become the new bulwark for a totalitarian regime in eastern Germany, while the other authorized political parties have been subjected to pressure, discrimination and intimidation, and have not been enabled to function freely. Basic human rights are being denied the population, while concentration camps are being used anew for individuals unwilling to accept this new totalitarianism. It is the unilateral policy of the Soviet Union which has cut off eastern Germany from its natural intercourse, political and economic, with western Germany.

The Soviet Government not only charges the other three governments with the inadequate functioning of the Allied Control Council but also with the failure of the Council of Foreign Ministers to reach agreement on German questions during its 1947 sessions held in Moscow and London. The official records of these conferences do not confirm the Soviet Government’s assertion that it made efforts to bring about four-power agreement by meeting half-way the proposals of the other powers. The Soviet Government resorts to a curious logic when it seeks to demonstrate its assertion by enumerating proposals of the Soviet Union not found acceptable by the other three powers. By a sincere effort to arrive at reasonable compromises, the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom and France were able to arrive at many agreed positions, only to find that the Soviet Government was not likewise ready to seek solutions acceptable to all four powers.

It is impossible not to draw the inference from the known proceedings of the Allied Control Council and the Council of Foreign Ministers that the Soviet Government has been pursuing in Germany objectives different from those of the other occupying powers, who are seeking the pacification of Germany and the economic recovery of Europe as a whole, including Germany. This inference appears to be borne out by the extensive remarks in the Soviet Government’s note of March 6 directed against American aid in the economic recovery of Europe as well as against the economic and political cooperation of the United Kingdom, France, Belgium, Holland and Luxembourg confirmed in the treaty signed at Brussels, March 17. It is not these steps which have led to the political cleavage of Europe as claimed by the Soviet Government, but rather prior actions of the Soviet Government and a group of eastern European states under Soviet influence which have disrupted the normal framework of the European community and interfered with the progress of recovery from the effects of the war.

In the light of the foregoing, the United States Government is not able to agree with the Soviet Government’s interpretation of the London discussions on the German question. The London discussions sought the solution of the urgent political and economic problems which have arisen as a result of the continuous failure to reach and implement quadripartite agreement, due to the attitude of the Soviet Government. As was stated in the communiqué issued on March 6 by the representatives of the powers participating in the informal London discussions: “The participating powers had in view the necessity of ensuring the economic reconstruction of western Europe including Germany, and of establishing a basis for the participation of a democratic Germany in the community of free peoples. While delay in reaching these objectives can no longer be accepted, ultimate Four Power agreement is in no way precluded”.8

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Norman Armour

1  Ante, p. 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236].

2  Ante, p. 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 229].

3  Ante, p. 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231].

4 For a summary report of the 34th Meeting of the Allied Control Council, July 20, 1946, see telegram 1767, July 20, 1946, from Berlin, Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. v, p. 580.

5 For a lengthy report of the 35th Meeting of the Allied Control Council, July 30, 1946, see telegram 1825, July 30, 1946, from Berlin, ibid., p. 585.

6 The reference here is to a statement made by then Secretary of State James F. Byrnes at a meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers in Paris; see Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. ii, pp. 880, 897.

7 For text, see Department of State Bulletin, September 15, 1946. p. 496.

8 For the full text of the communiqué quoted here, see p. 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94].

The Ambassador in Polamd (Griffis) to the Secretary of State 711.60C/3–2648: Telegram

[Document 240]

The Ambassador in Polamd (Griffis) to the Secretary of State

confidential Warsaw, March 26, 1948—4 p. m.

454. In my many recent talks with Foreign Minister Modzelewski and this week during conference with Wierblowski, newly appointed Secretary General Foreign Office, I have been repeatedly asked to put on paper the ideas which I have been continually urging on the Poles regarding their vituperative attitude towards the US coupled with a complete attitude of “there is nothing we can do about it. It is all in the hands of the US and Russia”.

Will you advise me if the Department would have any objections to my sending the following letter to Wierblowski with a copy to Modzelewski? Have no special pride of authorship. Glad to receive suggestions or changes if letter may be sent at all.

Regarding my cables 272 February 231 and 343 March 7.2 I do not wish to be over-insistent on this matter but it seems reasonable that I should put on paper this policy already many times discussed. I firmly believe that Polish Government is not acting under Russian directive in this matter and that my proposed suggestions show no sign of US weakness. But the Poles have a responsibility in this matter which they are consistently refusing to accept, a policy I believe inspired by general fear of Kremlin. If the Department decides to give me an answer such as the answer to my cable 272 February 23 or should the Department hold the same viewpoint implied in its lack of answer to my cable 343 March 7, I shall, of course, be quite content having expressed my own personal opinion to the Department. Proposed letter follows: “In our talks the other morning regarding Polish-American relations, you asked me to put on paper the almost elementary and perhaps oversimplified ideas which I expressed to you and which I have been for many months expressing to your fellow ministers in the Polish Government. You will realize, of course, that these comments are presented as my own viewpoint and not as the Ambassador of the US.

“I have already transmitted to you a copy of the note of the American Government to the Polish Government dated September 30, 1947 and called your specific attention to the paragraph reading as follows: ‘In this connection, the Polish Government is undoubtedly aware that the US Government has made repeated proposals for negotiation of a treaty with the UK, France, and the USSR which would guarantee the security of Europe against the revival of militarism in Germany for a period of 40 years. The US proposal, which was put forward more than a year ago and is still open, has been accepted as a basis for agreement by the UK and by France but not by the USSR. This proposal is indisputable evidence of the determination of the people and the Government of the US that Germany shall never again be a dominant military power in Europe.’3

“During the almost a year during which I have been thinking exclusively of the relations between your good country and mine, it has become thoroughly defined that the three great fears of Poland are: “(1) The possible menace to Poland of future German military power;

“(2) The loss to Poland of what is popularly known as the recovered territory; and

“(3) The splitting of Europe into two divisions with the result that Poland’s hopes of trade development would be seriously retarded.

“It has seemed to me for many months that the following facts have been self-evident.

“(1) If accepted by USSR, the treaty agreement offered by the US, England and France would result in complete protection of Poland against possible future German aggression.

“(2) The settlement of the border questions being part and parcel of the German settlement should and in my personal belief would be concluded to the satisfaction of the Polish Government as a natural concomitant of any negotiations which had at their base the treaty offer.

“(3) Any sensible man, trade entity or nation should realize that the end of strife in Europe and even a short period of peaceful trade would bring far more profit and prosperity to eastern Europe, including Poland, than any possible reparations that might be wrung out of a moribund Germany.

“All of this has led to my repeated representation to the ministers of your government that Poland and its associated Slavic states have been continually negligent in their duties toward world peace by their constant attacks and vituperations against the US while they completely ignore the almost elemental fact of how a lasting peace can be secured should the efforts of Poland or the united efforts of the Slavic nations succeed in convincing their neighbor Russia as to the course which might so profitably be pursued.”4

Griffis

1  Ante, p. 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232].

2  Ante, p. 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237].

3 For the text of the note quoted here, see Department of State Bulletin, October 12, 1947, p. 741.

4  In telegram 210, April 6, to Warsaw, the Department replied as follows: “Top Level consideration given your proposed letter to Polish officials. In view of recent developments in Berlin and elsewhere Dept feels that proposed action might be misinterpreted and in any event not now opportune.” (711.60C/3–2648)

The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushhin) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/4–1348

[Document 241]

The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushhin) to the Secretary of State

[Translation]

Washington, April 13, 1948.

No. 78

Sir: In connection with the letter of March 25 of this year from the Department of State,1 I have been instructed by the Soviet Government to state the following:

The Soviet Government considers quite unsatisfactory the reply of the Government of the United States of America to the note of March 6 of this year from the Soviet Government2 in connection with the separate Anglo-French-American negotiations concerning Germany, which took place in London in February and March of this year, in as much as statements were made in the U.S.A. note of March 25 contradicting the real state of affairs.

In particular, the statement in the note of March 6 of this year from the Soviet Government to the effect that the question of creating a unified Anglo-American zone had never been presented for the consideration of the Control Council, cannot be refuted in any degree by a reference in the U.S.A. note of March 25 to General McNarney’s memorandum. As you know, the said memorandum did not touch on the question of creating a unified Anglo-American zone but merely contained an invitation to any other zone to join the American Zone, and even this question was not considered by the Control Council.

In this connection, we must recall the statement of Marshal Sokolov-sky at the meeting of the Control Council on February 25, 1947, to the effect that the Control Council “has no relation to the agreement for the unification of the British and American zones of occupation. It took no part in it and never approved it. This agreement was concluded without the knowledge of the Control Council, although such action no doubt violated the agreed principles of our joint task.”3

Thus, the attempt to present the matter as though the merger of the British and American zones was effected with the knowledge of the Control Council is obviously of no value.

As regards the other questions dealt with in your letter, it must be noted that you did not produce any facts to refute the data presented by the Soviet Government in its note of March 6. Therefore, the Soviet Government does not see the necessity for returning to a discussion of these questions, which were set forth with comprehensive fullness in the preceding note of the U.S.S.R.

The fact that the Government of the U.S.A. preferred to pass over in silence the numerous violations of agreed decisions on Germany, cited in the said note, merely confirms the fact that the responsibility for the collapse of the agreement concerning the Control Council in Germany, and also for actions directed toward the liquidation of the Council of Foreign Ministers, as well as for the consequences of such a policy, lies entirely with the governments of the United States of America, Great Britain and France.

Accept [etc.]

A. Panyushkin

1  Ante, p. 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239].

2  Ante, p. 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236].

3 For a report on the Allied Control Council meeting of February 25, 1947, see telegram 461, February 26, 1947, from Berlin, Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 853.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/6–148: Telegram

[Document 242]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, June 1, 1948—7 p. m.

2405. Massigli suggests, in accordance with a communication which he received today from Bidault, that immediately after the recommendations on Germany have been agreed by governments, a note be delivered to the USSR through the respective Embassies in Moscow stating in effect (a) that for the reasons we all know, we have found it necessary to proceed in western Germany; (b) that we are sincerely hopeful that this will not mean an ultimate division of Germany, and (c) that we consider the agreements as open ones and would welcome Soviet association in them.1

I pointed out that while this might be true in regard to the political organization, we would doubtless have serious objections to Soviet association in the international authority for the Ruhr and that we would hardly be prepared to agree that the Soviet should be associated with us in all of the recommendations covering security. Strang expressed the same view, Massigli agreed that our reservations were correct, that he would so notify Bidault and would give us a further suggestion tomorrow or later.

Douglas

1 In telegram 2477, June 4, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas reported that he had been informed by the French Chargé in London, Philippe Baudet, that the French Foreign Ministry was very firm in the suggestion outlined here. Baudet, who presented Douglas with a draft communication to be given to the Soviet Union, did state that France agreed the Soviet Union should not be invited to join the international control of the Ruhr or the security aspects of the London agreements on Germany. (740.00119 Council/6–448)

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–448: Telegram

[Document 243]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, June 4, 1948—8 p. m.

2476. Embtel 2405, June 1.1 Bevin this morning said that he had very serious doubts about the wisdom of any communication to the Soviet along the lines of and under the circumstances envisaged in the suggestion that Massigli, at the request of Bidault, had made.

It was his view that Moscow should merely be informed that the recommendations referred to in the communiqué on the talks on Germany had been agreed to by the three western occupying powers, and that the program which they contemplated would be carried out.

He thought it unwise to extend an invitation, even though limited, to become associated in the political organization.2

Douglas

1  Supra.

2 Telegram 2098, June 4, to London, not printed, replied that the Department agreed with Bevin’s views (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–448).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–648: Telegram

[Document 244]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, June 6, 1948—3 p. m.

2493. 1. At a meeting with Strang and Massigli this morning, Massigli again raised the question of a formal démarche through the Embassies of the three western occupying powers in Moscow. He made it clear that his government had contemplated a communication to the Soviet Government after the recommendations of the London conference have been accepted by the respective governments. He seemed to agree with all of our objections, but asked for further time to consider them. (Deptel 2098, June 41 )

2. Strang suggested, informally, that if anything were to be said on the subject, it should preferably be said by Mr. Bevin in explaining the German recommendations to the House of Commons, by M. Bidault, and possibly by Secretary Marshall; that the statements, if any were made at all, should take the following lines: That, of course, we were anxious that there should be a united Germany, but that political unity must be based upon economic unity; that this embraces the free movement of peoples throughout all of Germany, the free movement of trade, a common currency, a common export-import program, the cessation of the exaction of reparations from current production; that since none of these had been agreed to by the Soviet, we had found it necessary to proceed with our program in western Germany; that the communiqué2 itself made it clear that all states in Germany were free to subscribe to the constitution to which reference is made in the communiqué.

3. Massigli then asked what the answer would be if the Soviet were to ask what was meant by the last paragraph of the communiqué in which it is stated that the program recommended would, we believe, facilitate the four-power agreement on Germany. The answer we suggested to such a question, if it were put, was to be found in the communiqué itself.

Sent Department as 2493; repeated Berlin for Murphy and Clay as 175.

Douglas

1 Not printed, but see footnote 2 to telegram 2476, from London, supra.

2  Ante, p. 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/6–748: Telegram

[Document 245]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact London, June 7, 1948—9 p. m.

2511. Sir William Strang called upon the Soviet Ambassador Zaroubin at 10 o’clock this morning to deliver, as an act of courtesy, a communiqué covering the recent London talks on Germany. The following was given me by Strang as an account of his conversation with Zaroubin.

[Here follow Strang’s notes of his conversation with Zarubin. Strang explained that in his capacity as chairman of the London Conference on Germany he had been asked to hand to the Ambassador a copy of the Conference Communiqué (see page 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]) in advance of its release to the press. Zarubin reiterated the attitude of the Soviet Government, expressed in notes in February, March and April, that decisions regarding Germany reached without the participation of the Soviet Union, violated the existing four-power agreements on Germany.]

In discussing the above with Strang and Massigli this afternoon, the latter strongly urged that an answer to Zaroubin was necessary. Moreover, for internal French political reasons, principally for the purpose of carrying the Socialists in the forthcoming debate in the Chamber of Deputies, Massigli said that Bidault felt that an answer was necessary. He suggested that it take the form either of an oral statement to be made by the representative Ambassadors of the three western powers in Moscow or alternatively that it should be made in the capitals of the three western powers to the Soviet Ambassadors. He indicated that it should be associated with Zaroubin’s remarks to Strang and should be substantially in the following terms: “The démarche to be made to Moscow should not admit of any communication of texts accepted by the three governments.

“It should consist of a declaration saying in substance, that a political organization is going to be set up in the three western zones in such and such conditions, that these measures have been rendered necessary by the repulse (échec) of the Council of Foreign Ministers and the impossibility of arriving at an agreement of the four, that the three governments wish (souhaitent) that such an accord should be able finally to occur and that, in that spirit the door remains open in order that at any time (à tout moment) the Soviet zone may join the organization established in the western zones.

“It is the attitude taken by London and Washington with regard to Paris and Moscow when the bizone was established.”

On interrogation, Massigli conceded that the only reason of substance for any such statement was to carry the Socialists.

Strang indicated that while he would present Massigli’s views to Mr. Bevin, he doubted, from previous conversations with Bevin, that HMG would agree to Massigli’s firmly put suggestion. This coincides with what Bevin told me this morning to the effect that any communication to the Soviet, in his opinion, would be a mistake and that we should not indicate any vacillation or wavering but should instead proceed to carry out our program. I expressed to Massigli doubts as to whether my government would agree to his proposal but indicated that I would put the matter to you.

Inasmuch as Massigli would like to have an answer tomorrow when we meet again at 11:30 London time, would very much appreciate your comments.

My own view is that probably Soviet propaganda, of which Zaroubin’s remarks are but the beginning, will require some answer from us. I doubt very seriously, however, that it should take the form of either an oral or a written statement submitted either in the three capitals to the Soviet Ambassador or through the Ambassadors of the three countries to the Kremlin.1

It was interesting that Zaroubin spoke from notes, for this revealed preparation and advice from Moscow and everything that this implies.

Sent Department 2511; repeated Berlin (for Murphy and Clay) as 180.

Douglas

1 Telegram 2139, June 8, to London, not printed, observed that Ambassador Douglas’ views set forth here confirmed the doubts of the Department concerning the advisability of a further formal approach to the Soviet Union. The Department considered that it might be useful for the United States, United Kingdom and France to issue statements along the lines of paragraph 2 of telegram 2493, June 6, from London (p. 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]). The telegram transmitted the draft text of a statement to be made by Secretary Marshall to a forthcoming press conference (740.00119 Council/6–848). For the text of statement given by the Secretary to the press on June 9, sec Department of State Bulletin, June 20, 1948, p. 810.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/6–848: Telegram

[Document 246]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret
urgent
niact Berlin, June 8, 1948—4 p. m.

224. Your 180 June 7.1 Confirming Clay’s telephone conversation2 with Douglas this morning we view with grave misgiving French suggestion that démarche be made at Moscow along the lines of the text offered by Massigli. This would be tactical error giving USSR an impression of doubt and weakness on our part. It would also provide USSR an opportunity of suggesting delaying conversations which might interfere with the successful prosecution of program for western Germany. Démarche also would cause additional confusion in German public opinion already buffeted by waves of propaganda from east and west. Uncertainty as to western German policy might well deprive us of German support necessary for success of program which US has now approved.

Sent London 224, repeated Department 1310, Paris 226.

Murphy

1 Same as telegram 2511, June 7, from London, supra.

2 No record has been found of the conversation under reference here.

Editorial Note [Document 247]

Editorial Note

On the evening of June 14 in London, Ambassador Douglas discussed with Strang, Massigli, and Chauvel a new French proposal for a démarche to the Soviet Government regarding the London Conference recommendations. The proposal was not accepted. For the report on the discussion, see telegram 2639, June 16, from London, page 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 226].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Armour) 740.00119 Council/6–1848

[Document 248]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Armour)

[Washington,] June 18, 1948.

Participants: The Polish Ambassador1

G—Mr. Armour

EE—Mr. Elbrick

The Ambassador said that he had been instructed by his Government to deliver a note,2 which he handed to me, setting forth the Polish Government’s views with respect to the recent six-power conference in London and protesting the decisions taken at that conference with respect to Germany.

The Ambassador said it was his Government’s view that decisions with respect to the treatment to be accorded Germany should only be taken in accordance with the procedure set up by the Potsdam Agreement. He did not mention the Soviet Union in this connection, but the implication was clear. He went on to say that the Polish protest was motivated, not only in the interest of achieving harmony under the terms of the Potsdam Agreement, but also because Poland is vitally interested in all matters affecting the future of Germany. He said that this interest springs from the long history of German aggression against Poland and is heightened by the fact that 6,000,000 Poles lost their lives as a result of the most recent aggression.

I told the Ambassador that it had been our hope to reach a solution of the German problem which would be mutually satisfactory to all the powers concerned, and I reminded him that this Government had made many efforts to achieve a harmony of views and a common ground for proceeding to the implementation of the Potsdam Agreement. I said that I thought this Government had been most patient in its effort to reach some understanding on this subject and I thought he should understand that it was only after the failure of repeated attempts to arrive at an understanding that we considered it necessary finally to take the action he was protesting.

The Ambassador said that the Polish Government feels that the security of Poland would not be properly safeguarded by the six-power decisions. He said that prior to World War II, Poland had been economically dependent upon Germany and that Poland had no desire to resume any such relationship in the future. He said that the Polish Government feels that unless efforts are made to minimize Germany’s economic potential, Germany will once again attempt a war of revenge. Also, he felt that despite our statement to the contrary, a certain priority was being given to Germany in the matter of economic reconstruction, and that this could only result in placing Poland once more in the position of an economic vassal to a resurgent Germany. He laid great stress on the fact that this represented the views of the Polish Government and the Polish people as a whole and should not be considered, as some were apt to do, as merely a reflection of the Soviet attitude.

I said that I thought that the Ambassador was inclined to overemphasize the effect of German industrial rehabilitation as envisaged by the six-power conference, and to underemphasize the industrial potential and progress of Poland. The plans of the Polish Government for expansion of Polish industry, augmented by the addition of a large German industrial area now being administered by Poland, have made it evident that Poland does not intend or expect to be dependent upon any power in the future. The Ambassador admitted this but said that if German industry is restored to 60 per cent of its prewar capacity, it will still make it impossible for Poland to compete and would once again reduce Poland to the status of an agricultural nation.

The Ambassador was reminded that it was not the policy of this Government, as stated in our note3 to the Polish Embassy regarding the level of industry in Germany, to give priority to the reconstruction of Germany over any European country. It is important, however, that German industry be permitted to play its proper role in the overall reconstruction of Europe. The Ambassador said that this was very well as far as Western Europe was concerned, but that he felt that Eastern European countries, particularly Poland, would suffer as a result. I said that I regretted that Poland had not seen fit to join the other European nations in their present recovery program, and that it had always been the hope of this Government that such rehabilitation of industry as may take place in Germany would serve the common interests of all European countries. The Ambassador said that it was obvious that Poland could not participate in a recovery program such as that proposed in as much as it was expressly directed against the Soviet Union. He said it was as unthinkable for Poland to do this as it would be for Cuba, for example, to take some similar action with respect to the United States.

Earlier in the conversation, when I asked him if Soviet actions in the Soviet Zone were not a cause for concern in Poland, the Ambassador replied quietly but emphatically in the negative. He said that the Soviet had continued to reduce German industrial potential but that, unfortunately for Poland, the greater part of German industry was located in the West.

I said that we would study the Polish note in the Department and that it would be brought to the attention of Secretary Marshall with a view to making a reply.

Norman Armour

1  Jozef Winiewicz.

2  For toe text of the note, dated June 18, see Poland, Germany and European Peace, p. 38. The Polish Government also sent similar notes to the French Government on June 17 (ibid., p. 43), to the United Kingdom Government on June 18 (ibid., p. 32), and to the Belgian, Netherlands, and Luxembourg Governments on June 18 (ibid., p. 47).

On June 16, Major General Jakub Prawin, Chief of the Polish Military Mission in Germany, presented a similar communication (ibid., p. 48) to General Koenig, in the latter’s capacity as Chairman of the Allied Control Council for Germany for the month of June. General Koenig circulated the communication to Generals Clay and Robertson who refused to agree to have the matter made an item of the Council’s agenda unless instructed to do so by their governments. Telegram 1068, June 18, to Berlin, not printed, stated that the Department did not consider the Polish communication an appropriate subject for the Council’s agenda. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–1748)

3 In a note to Ambassador Winiewiez dated September 30, 1947, the Secretary of State rejected the interpretation placed by the Polish Government on the Revised Level of Industry Plan for the United States–United Kingdom zones of occupation in Germany and restated the position of the United States with respect to the plan. For the text of the note, see Germany, 1947–1949, p. 364, Department of State Bulletin, October 12, 1947, p. 742, or Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, p. 636.

Editorial Note [Document 249]

Editorial Note

Following a conference in Warsaw on June 23 and 24, 1948, apparently convened at the initiative of the Soviet and Polish Governments, the Foreign Ministers of the Soviet Union, Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Poland, Romania, and Hungary issued a Declaration regarding the decisions of the London Conference on Germany. For the text of the Declaration, see Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, page 566, The Soviet Union and the Berlin Question, page 32, or Poland, Germany and European Peace, page 17. For the text of Foreign Minister Modzelewski’s speech to the Polish Sejm on June 26 regarding the Warsaw Declaration, see ibid., page 25, or Zygmunt Modzelewski, Polityka Zagraniczna Polski (Warsaw, 1960), page 120. In his airgram A–972, July 9, 1948, from Warsaw, not printed, Chargé Edward Crocker reported in part as follows on the comments made by Ludwik Leszczynski, Head of the American Section of the Polish Foreign Ministry, regarding the Warsaw Conference of Foreign Ministers: “The sole purpose of the meeting was to discuss the German problem and the decisions of the London conference on the subject. The communiqué issued at the conclusion of the deliberations represented the only real achievement of the conference. There were no secret or supplementary agreements reached, although there did take place some informal exchanges of views between the Foreign Ministers present on a few subjects which Doctor Leszczynski did not mention.…

“The communiqué issued by the Foreign Ministers was drafted exclusively by three Polish Foreign Office officials who are experts on Germany. When the draft was completed the three authors, accompanied by Doctor Leszczynski, took the document to the conference for examination by the Foreign Ministers. Molotov made two or three minor changes in phraseology. The Bulgarian Foreign Minister [Vasil Kolarov] objected to several points in the draft, but he was overruled by Molotov. The others had no comments or suggestions to make.” (740.00119 Council/7–948)

The Secretary of State to the Polish Ambassador (Winiewicz) 740.00119 Council/6–1848

[Document 250]

The Secretary of State to the Polish Ambassador (Winiewicz)1

Washington, July 6, 1948.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 51/41/48 of June 18, 1948,2 protesting on behalf of your Government the recommendations resulting from the Six-Power talks on Germany, recently held in London, on the grounds that the participants were “not competent and not empowered to deal with these problems”. You stressed your Government’s opposition to many of the recommendations as being contrary to existing international agreements and your Government’s belief that all matters involving the future of Germany should be the exclusive concern of the Council of Foreign Ministers. I noted with particular interest your observation that “any possible difficulties in reconciling the positions within the Council cannot be insuperable, if all the Powers will abide by the Potsdam agreements”.

I need hardly remind you of my Government’s persistent efforts to achieve four-power agreement on Germany on the basis of the Potsdam Agreement. I discussed this point in my note to you of September 30, 1947, in connection with the decision to revise the level of industry in the Anglo-American zone. The record clearly shows that the continuing efforts of my Government to achieve an equitable solution of the German problem in the Council of Foreign Ministers and in the Allied Control Council in Berlin have been fruitless largely as a result of the intransigent attitude of one of the occupying powers. The records of the Control Council as of March 1948 show that the Soviet representative has vetoed the agreed decisions of the other three powers in 69 instances—nearly three times the combined number of vetoes exercised by the other powers. As explained in my note under reference, it is because of the repeated failure over a period of three years to achieve four-power agreement that my Government “feels justified in pursuing objectives which have been commonly agreed and making arrangements for that purpose with any other occupying power willing to work toward the common end”.

My Government agrees with your Government that German resources ought to be used for the benefit of the general reconstruction of Europe rather than for the reconstruction of only a part of Europe. The United States has consistently endeavored to implement the clear understanding in the Potsdam Agreement that Germany, including the Soviet Zone, should be treated as an economic whole and it has consistently striven to create those conditions which would lead to the establishment of a democratic German state capable of assisting the reconstruction of all the devastated countries of Europe and yet not constituting a threat to the security of those nations. The assertion that the United States has sought to divide Germany or to divide Europe is without any foundation. The fact that its offer to assist the general European recovery has not been accepted by certain countries, including Poland, has of necessity limited the application of that recovery program to those countries which have accepted it. The apparent division of Germany today after three years of unsuccessful attempts to hold it together is greatly deplored by my Government. Here again the necessity to confine our joint program in Germany to Western Germany is not of our making and certainly not in accordance with our wishes. The fact that the efforts of the United States toward the rehabilitation of Europe now have to be concentrated on the program for Western Europe, including Western Germany, is a direct result of the failure of the other countries of Europe at the instigation of the Soviet Union to join in a common program looking toward the rehabilitation of all Europe.

With regard to the substance of the London recommendations I must point out that there was no attempt in these talks to cover all aspects of the German problem. Therefore, there is no basis for your protesting the fact that the problem of reparations was omitted in the recommendations of the conference, a conference which you have insisted had no right to discuss any matters relating to Germany.

I must take exception to your comments on the recommendations concerning security and your statement that the fundamental aim of removing Germany’s economic basis of aggression has been ignored. It should not be necessary for me to remind you that the United States has twice been engaged in major wars with Germany and that it is vitally interested in preventing a recurrence of German aggression. Security considerations, far from having been relegated to a secondary position, were constantly in mind throughout the London discussions as should be evident from the communiqué reporting the final recommendations. This problem has of course become more complicated as a result of the unwillingness of the Soviet Union to join the other occupying powers in a long term treaty guaranteeing the disarmament and demilitarization of Germany. The London recommendations on the Ruhr and on general security make specific provisions against the rebuilding of German economic power as a means to future aggression.

Your comments on the plan for the control of the Ruhr have, I believe, been answered in the general discussion above with respect to the division of Germany and of Europe. It should be observed that the program for the rehabilitation of Western Germany does not exclude that area from trade relations with Eastern Europe but, on the contrary, seeks to foster such trade in the common interest. If certain countries “who suffered most in consequence of German aggression” claim that their interests are not sufficiently taken into account by the program planned for Western Germany, their complaint should not be addressed to the United States Government but to the Government primarily responsible for preventing these countries from cooperating in the general recovery program for Europe. In the same way it seems to me that your protest against the failure to utilize quadripartite consultative machinery, should more appropriately be addressed to the occupying power responsible for the present deplorable division of Europe and Germany.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert A. Lovett

1 Following consultations between the British Foreign Office and the Department of State, a parallel British note was delivered to the Polish Embassy in London on July 6. Both the American and British notes were subsequently released to the press. The French Government addressed a separate note to the Polish Embassy in Paris on July 16.

2 See footnote 2, p. 368 [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248].

Editorial Note [Document 251]

Editorial Note

On July 29 Polish. Ambassador Winiewicz called on Under Secretary of State Lovett to deliver a note replying to the Secretary of State’s note of July 6 (supra). The Polish note contended that the facts evolving from American policy were not in conformity with the statements in the Secretary’s note. The note further argued that the “unilateral moves in Western Germany” had hampered efforts to solve the German problem on a just basis and in conformity with the Potsdam decisions. The Polish note complained that the vital interests of the Polish nation were being neglected particularly in the questions of security, control of heavy industry, and prevention of the revival of the economic supremacy of Germany in Europe. Ambassador Winiewicz, in his brief conversation with Under Secretary Lovett, took occasion to emphasize Poland’s anxieties regarding a satisfactory settlement of the German problem, and he observed that the Warsaw Declaration of Foreign Ministers of June 24 (see the editorial note, page 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]) exactly corresponded to his Government’s views for a solution of the problem. Under Secretary of State Lovett’s memorandum of conversation and Ambassador Winiewicz’s note are included in file 740.00119 Council/7–2948. For the text of the Polish note of July 29, see Poland, Germany and European Peace, page 41. Similar notes were addressed to the United Kingdom on July 30 (ibid., page 34) and to the French Government on August 7 (ibid., page 43).

II. Implementation of the recommendations of the London Conference on GermanyII. Implementation of the recommendations of the London Conference on Germany

Contents

1. Preparations for the Conference (Documents 299-310)

2. Proceedings of the Conference; Conference documents and supplementary papers (Documents 311-372)

A. Preparation of a constitution for West Germany; the Bonn Parliamentary CouncilA. Preparation of a constitution for West Germany; the Bonn Parliamentary Council

[252] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, June 10, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Council/6–1048: Telegram

[253] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 14, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Council/6–1448: Telegram

[254] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Frankfurt, June 30, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048: Telegram

[255] Editorial Note

[256] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Frankfurt, July 8, 1948—6 p. m.

862.00/7–848: Telegram

[257] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Frankfurt, July 9, 1948—2 p. m.

862.00/7–948: Telegram

[258] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Frankfurt, July 9, 1948—3 p. m.

862.00/7–948: Telegram

[259] The Ministers President of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay)

[Koblenz, July 10, 1948.]

USPolAd Germany Files: MGMP/P Documents: Box 119

[260] Comments of the Ministers-President Conference Regarding Document I

[Koblenz, July 10, 1948.]

Appendix “A”

[261] Comments of the Ministers-President Conference Regarding Document II

[Koblenz, July 10, 1948.]

Appendix “B”

[262] Comments of the Ministers-President Conference Regarding Document III

[Koblenz, July 10, 1948.]

Appendix “C”

[263] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, July 11, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1148: Telegram

[264] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Frankfurt, July 14, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1448: Telegram

[265] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

Washington, July 15, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1448: Telegram

[266] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Frankfurt, July 15, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1548: Telegram

[267] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Frankfurt

Washington, July 15, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Council/7–1548: Telegram

[268] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, July 16, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1648: Telegram

[269] Minutes of a Meeting Between the Military Governors and the Ministers President of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, Frankfurt, July 20, 1948, 3 p. m.

[Frankfurt, July 20, 1948.]

USPolAd Germany Files: Box 119: File—MGMP/M Documents

[270] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Frankfurt, July 26, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2648: Telegram

[271] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

[Berlin,] July 27, 1948.

USPolAd Germany Files: 801.1 Ministers President: Telegram

[272] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Berlin, August 2, 1948—8 p. m.

862.014/8–248: Telegram

[273] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, August 13, 1948—7 p. m.

862.011/8–1348: Telegram

[274] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, August 14, 1948—8 p. m.

862.014/8–1448: Telegram

[275] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

Washington, August 27, 1948—7 p. m.

862.011/8–2748: Telegram

[276] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

Washington, August 28, 1948—3 p. m.

862.011/8–2748: Telegram

[277] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

Washington, August 28, 1948—3 p. m.

862.011/8–2848: Telegram

[278] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, August 28, 1948—4 p. m.

862.011/8–2848: Telegram

[279] Editorial Note

[280] Editorial Note

[281] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, September 1, 1948—midnight.

862.011/9–148: Telegram

[282] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Beam)

Frankfurt, September 16, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1648

[283] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Beam)

[Frankfurt,] September 16, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1648

[284] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, September 23, 1948—7 p. m.

862.032/9–2348: Telegram

[285] Draft Letter From the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany to the President of the Parliamentary Council (Adenauer)

[Berlin ?,] 29th September 1948.

EUR Files: Lot 52 D 324: File—G–801 Govt

[286] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Forrestal)

Washington, October 1, 1948.

033.1100/10–148

[287] Resolution by the Conference of the Ministers President of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany

Jagdschloss Niederwald, [undated.]

USPolAd Germany Files: File—801.1 Ministers President Meetings

[288] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

Washington, October 6, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Council/10–548: Telegram

[289] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Under Secretary of the Army (Draper)

[Berlin,] October 8, 1948.

862.011/10–2348: Telegram

[290] Record Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting of the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, Frankfurt, October 16, 1948

[Undated.]

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–1748

[291] Notes Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting of the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, at Frankfurt, November 4, 1948

[Undated.]

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–448

[292] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, November 5, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–548: Telegram

[293] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Frankfurt, November 17, 1948—1 p.m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1748: Telegram

[294] The Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany to the Parliamentary Council

November 22, 1948

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2348

[295] Memorandum of Conversation, by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

Berlin, November 24, 1948.

862.01/11–2448

[296] Record Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting Between the American and British Military Governors and the Ministers President of the Bizonal (U.S–U.K.) Area

Frankfurt, November 30, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–648

[297] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, December 2, 1948—8 p. m.

862.00/12–248: Telegram

[298] Editorial Note

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/6–1048: Telegram

[Document 252]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, June 10, 1948—6 p. m.

1331. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. In implementation of London decisions, a US, UK, French Political Working Party has been meeting this week to prepare drafts for presentation to Ministers-President on June 15 when military governors meet with them to discuss political decisions of German talks. The committee has concluded its preliminary work and has prepared four papers as follows:1 (1) A statement summarizing the constitutional decisions (TRI 132 ).

(2) A statement outlining the general principles of reserved powers of military governments after constitution becomes effective (TRI 173 ).

(3) A statement on Laender reorganization (TRI 134 ).

These statements follow closely London texts and are only slightly modified for editorial reasons or in order to make them more palatable to German leaders.

There has also been prepared fourth statement with the following text:

“Representatives of the Military Governors will be available to advise and assist the Ministers-President and the Constituent Assembly on any matters which they may bring to their attention.” During the Working Party’s discussions it developed that the French preferred not to have a committee representing the military governors established to carry out this liaison function, but preferred to maintain such liaison by means of individual representatives. General Clay however insisted that there should not only be a committee but that it should make its decisions by a majority vote. The British agreed with this position but French have reserved their attitude until it can be discussed with General Koenig. This question may therefore be discussed by three military governors prior to meeting with Ministers-President. OMGUS director of CAD 5 will probably be US member of this committee.

On the assumption that the meeting of military governors with Ministers-President will take place on June 15 and assuming of course French government’s approval before that date, it is now anticipated that there will be preliminary meeting of military governors in Frankfurt on June 14, to be followed by meeting with Ministers-President next day. French member of Political Working Party has tacitly acquiesced in this procedure subject of course to French government’s approval and further consultation with Koenig who is in French zone.6 It is contemplated that meeting on June 15 will take form of oral explanations of London decisions and background by military governors followed by presentation of statements mentioned above. Text of these statements will be transmitted when finally approved by three military governors.

Sent to Department as 1331; repeated London as 228; Paris as 229.

Murphy

1 For citations to texts of the papers under reference, as handed to German Ministers President as Directives from the Military Governors on July 1, see editorial note, p. 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]. The fourth paper referred to here was subsequently included as an annex to the 3rd paper or directive.

2 See document TRI/13 (Final), May 31, p. 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205].

3 See document TRI/17 (Final), May 19, p. 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170].

4 See document TRI/19 (Final), May 26, appearing as an annex to document TRI/13 (Final), p. 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205].

5 Presumably, Edward H. Litchfield.

6 The American, British, and French Military Governors subsequently agreed to meet in Frankfurt on June 30 and to confer with the Ministers President the following day.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/6–1448: Telegram

[Document 253]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent Washington, June 14, 1948—9 p. m.

2229. For Douglas Eyes Only. Would appreciate your comments on following State–Army message sent to Clay in reply to message from him along lines Berlin’s 13481 to Dept, repeated to you:2

“Your CC 4650.3 Have held discussions with State Dept and following are our joint comments on procedures proposed by you and Robertson in case French failure to ratify London Agreement: 1. Subject to following considerations we agree with your proposal. It is, however, difficult to foretell what form French action may take and particularly whether approval will be given with reservations which might or might not be acceptable. In general we feel it very important to have French go along with us and therefore will want to evaluate the significance of their reservations if any. We will therefore wish in any case to take another look at situation promptly after French action, and will communicate with you immediately.

2. We assume your proposal ‘to instruct the Ministers President to arrange for the drawing up of a Constitution’ is intended to follow the London Agreement under which the Ministers President would be authorized, rather than specifically directed, to arrange for a Constitutional Assembly, etc.

3. No objection here to transforming the present Economic Council into an Interim Semi-Provisional Govt again on the assumption that the Germans themselves initiate or support this transformation.

4. Our suggestion essentially is that in working out both the Constitution and the Interim Govt, Germans should to greatest extent possible take initiative in plans for assuming governmental responsibilities, in particular whether new elections are necessary, their form and timing. We all feel sure you have this fully in mind and that your proposals are intended to move rapidly ahead on a Bizonal basis, if necessary, to give the Germans increased governmental responsibilities but along lines and in accordance with procedures which they are ready to assume and carry out. We make this point particularly with respect to the transformation of the Economic Council in view unfavorable reaction in Germany to the Economic Council in the past, and also in view of the somewhat unfavorable reaction in Germany to the London Conference proposals.

5. So far as possible in working out Constitutional arrangements it would seem desirable to follow the London Conference procedure so that it will be easier for French to adhere to our Bizonal program if and when they are ready to join. Irrespective of outcome of French debate, all here still feel strongly that common policy in western Germany should be our persistent aim.

6. As you know, we are not committed on the Ruhr recommendations and the Ruhr authority unless the French accept the program as a whole. Therefore, this problem should be left in suspense if the French reject the London recommendation.

7. Would appreciate your further comment after discussion of above with Robertson. State is sending this cable to Douglas for info and comment, and requests that copy be made available to Murphy.”

Sent London as 2229; repeated Berlin for Murphy (Eyes Only) as 1036.

Marshall

1 Not printed; it reported that Generals Clay and Robertson and their political advisers met on June 9 to discuss possible measures for the development of German political organizations in the United States and British zones of occupation in the event that France failed to approve the recommendations of the London Conference on Germany. General Clay proposed that the U.S. and British Military Governors would direct the German Ministers President in their zones to have drawn up constitutions under the terms of the London Conference recommendations. In order to speed up the establishment of a provisional German government in the Bizone area, the Economic Council would be replaced by a Council of members elected by each Land. Upon election the new Council would assume provisional governmental responsibilities until the new Constitution came into effect. German officials would be informed of the powers to be retained by the Military Government in a subsequent formal occupation statute. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–1048)

2 In his telegram 2658, June 16, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas concurred in the program reported upon in telegram 1348 from Berlin (see previous footnote) and in the Department’s reply set forth here. Douglas added that the German program so far dealt only with the political organization of the Bizone area but did not deal with the establishment of an International Authority for the Ruhr or with security measures regarding Germany. Douglas considered it particularly important to reach an understanding with the British regarding security along the lines set forth in the London Conference recommendations even without France as a party. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–1648)

3 Not printed.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048: Telegram

[Document 254]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Frankfurt, June 30, 1948—8 p. m.

23. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. I attended meeting of three military governors at Frankfurt today which was marked by great cordiality. After discussion of numerous points raised principally by French military governor, views of three military governors considered sufficiently reconciled regarding all features of London recommendations permitting agreement to convoke German Minister-Presidents July 1 at 11:30 a. m., Koenig’s attitude cooperative and in connection with the two issues about which it was believed there would be considerable debate, namely paragraph 4 TRI/131 regarding method of choosing delegates to the Constituent Assembly and the matter of land boundaries, no particular difficulty experienced.

It was agreed that at tomorrow’s meeting, which will be preceded by courtesy meetings with the individual German Minister-Presidents, that General Clay would preside and would present to the Minister-Presidents the paper on the Constituent Assembly; General Robertson the paper on land boundaries, and General Koenig the paper on the occupational statute.2

It was agreed that the Minister-Presidents would be authorized to decide the Constituent Assembly question by simple majority; also that, if Minister-Presidents insist on some form of participation of Minister-Presidents from eastern zone, there would be no objection. Agreed that it is important that Germans be permitted to invite eastern Minister-Presidents and representatives from Berlin. This could include symbolic representation from the western zone [of Berlin?]. In that connection, some form of communication would then be made to the Soviet Military Administration. With regard to land boundaries, there was a discussion of the North Rhine-Westphalia and the Rhine Palatinate question, General Koenig emphasizing that his instructions would in no event permit North Rhineland to be separated from the Palatinate and joined to North Rhine-Westphalia.

The discussion regarding the method of choosing the delegates to the Constituent Assembly was brief. Koenig repeated the well-known French argument on this point, adding that particularly at this time, with the state of popular nervousness existing, general elections would not be wise. The US and UK stood by the text of the London recommendations.

There was a discussion regarding the use of the veto by any one military governor, Robertson pointing out that it would be quite untenable that a military governor be permitted to veto a system adopted by a State, Clay emphasizing that he did not agree that a single military governor had the power of veto. Clay also pointed out that military governors could leave choice to the respective Landtags or each military governor could exercise pressure on a Landtag. US prefers not to bring pressure and will not do so unless other military governors do.

There was discussion of the language in TRI/17 (final)3 paragraph 1 D regarding occupational costs within defined limits agreed upon between the military governors.

The procedure to be followed under this paragraph will be decided on at the next meeting of the military governors.

There was also a discussion of the suggestion made at London regarding a vetting party for appointed officials, but it was agreed to re-examine this question as the case may arise. A vetting party was not established.

It was also agreed that the committee of government advisers to remain in liaison with the German Constituent Assembly will not constitute a formal committee, but there will be separate representatives of the three military governors. In the event they do not succeed in coordinating their work and indulge in individual lobbying with the Germans, it was decided that in such case the military governors would intervene. The military governors agreed to the establishment of working party whose duty it will be to submit the required report on prohibited and restricted industries before September 1 or as early thereafter as possible. This relates to the negotiation regarding the adhesion of the French Zone to JEIA.

General Koenig also informed the meeting that the French Government intends to invite the US and UK Government to a meeting on or about July 18 for the purpose of drafting the detailed agreement on the Ruhr contemplated by paragraph 12 of TRI/16.4

General Koenig also wished it noted that the study to be made by governments regarding the protection of foreign assets should be ended by September 1 to enable the appointment of GA working party by that date.

The committee setup regarding the French Zone’s participation in JEIA was requested to submit its report as soon as possible, the deadline being August 1.

Reference was also made to the question of possible reservations in respect of the resumption of Four-Power negotiations. Military governors agreed that this question was too delicate to raise now and that there would be no public statement regarding it.

It was also agreed that at the end of tomorrow’s meeting, the Minister-Presidents will be consulted as to how and when following meetings will be arranged.

In summing up, it should be said that today’s meeting ended on tone of general satisfaction and constructive approach which augurs well for progress as contemplated by the London recommendations.

Repeated Paris personal for Caffery as 5 and London personal for Douglas as 8.

Murphy

1 See document TRI/13 (Final), May 31, p. 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205].

2 Regarding the Directives to the Ministers President referred to here, see editorial note, infra.

3  Ante, p. 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170].

4 The reference is to document TRI/16 (Final), May 26, International Control of the Ruhr, p. 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190].

Editorial Note [Document 255]

Editorial Note

The Military Governors and the Ministers President of the U.S., British, and French Zones of Occupation of Germany met at Frankfurt on July 1 to discuss future German political organization. The more than forty officials representing the occupying powers included the following: for the United States—Gen. Clay, Under Secretary of the Army Draper, Ambassador Murphy, Mr. Panuch and Dr. Litchfield; for the United Kingdom—Gen. Robertson, Sir Cecil Weir, Mr. Steel, and Lt. Gen. Macready; for France—Gen. Koenig, Ambassador Tarbé de St. Hardouin, Gen. Noiret, M. Seydoux, and M. Sabatier. The Ministers President present were: from the U.S. Zone—Ehard, Stock, Maier, and Kaisen; from the U.K. Zone—Arnold, Kopf, Luedemann, and Brauer; from the French Zone—Altmeier, Wohleb, and Bock.

The Military Governors read and then handed to the Ministers President formal documents embodying the substance of the London Conference recommendations on the convoking of a Constituent Assembly (document MGMP/P(48)1), the submitting of proposed modifications of existing Land boundaries (MGMP/P(48)2), the drafting of an Occupation Statute (MGMP/P(48)3), and the appointment of Military Government Liaison Officers to advise and assist the Ministers President in these tasks (MGMP/P(48)4). These documents are sometimes referred to collectively as the “German Documents” or the “London Documents”. For the texts of documents 1, 2, and 3, see Germany 1947–1949, pages 275–277, Ruhm von Oppen, Documents on Germany Under Occupation, pages 315–318, or Litchfield, Governing Postwar Germany, pages 542–545, or Documents on the Creation of the German Federal Constitution, pages 43–45.

The formal minutes of this meeting of July 1, document MGMP/M(48)1, are included in CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 119, File—MGMP/M(48) Documents. Ambassador Murphy reported upon the meeting in telegram 24, July 1, from Frankfurt, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–148).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.00/7–848: Telegram

[Document 256]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

confidential Frankfurt, July 8, 1948—6 p. m.

37. Party functionaries, governmental leaders, economic council factions, leaders of SPD and CDU met July 7, 1948 to brief and instruct their Ministers-President for the Koblenz sessions July 8 and 9.1 Franz Neuman, Fritz Heine, Willy Eichler returning from London conversations for SPD meeting at Ruedesheim, CDU in Koblenz.

Announced purpose party meetings to instruct Ministers-President on constitutional questions, according to Frankfurt proposals which “authorized” Ministers-President to call constitutional assembly before September 1, 1948. Actual purpose reported to decide degree each party will cooperate with MG re participation in constitutional convention.

SPD and CDU sources state that compromise on constitutional questions easily reachable. Following basic principles already agreed: (1) decentralized state; (2) civil rights guarantees; (3) supreme court with powers of legislative review. Differences to be reconciled both intraparty and between parties: (1) competence central and Land governments in economic and financial matters; SPD tends toward strong central powers, CDU strong Land powers but both Ehard and Adenauer groups willing to compromise on questions of competence; (2) electoral procedure, single constituency as against proportional representation.

Both parties oppose September 1 assembly for formulating constitution; argue time not ripe or practical and to put constitutional proposals to German people would be meaningless unless combined with more basic economic questions such as socialization, economic reconstruction, etc. Neither party believes German people in position to choose, for example, between single constituencies as against proportional representation, to decide on complicated questions of distribution financial or taxation power.

SPD has suggested variations on following themes: (1) basic administrative statute defining relations between central, Land and local governments and establishing de facto west Germany government; or (2) actual constitutional assembly representing all Laender including Soviet Zone and Berlin to establish sovereign German state with allied recognition. CDU source (confirming my telegram 32 of July 7, 19482 ) predicted nothing more than basic administrative statute could be devised now; complained that by leaving foreign policy and control foreign trade in allied hands, Frankfurt proposals mean German sovereignty nonexistent. Under these circumstances they agree constitution a farce or front for allied purposes. CDU sources also contend it extremely dangerous for Allies to insist on constitution this date, as automatically severing Soviet Zone from Germany. Think road should be left open for unified Germany, identifying unified Germany with return of Pomerania and Silesia, trumps now held by Soviets.

Both CDU and SPD leaders appear insecure on their legalistic ground. They understand contemporary party scrimmages not getting at basic issues of German life and agree only way to end situation is German assumption of sovereignty, but incapable of accepting German sovereignty merely as western state, even while they may be realistic enough to see Soviet Zone is lost.

Report July 7 meetings follows.

Murphy

1 Wuerttemberg–Baden Minister President Maier announced on July 1 that the Ministers President of the American, British, and French zones of occupation would meet in Koblenz on July 8 and 9. Telegram 1582, July 2, from Berlin, not printed, reported that the meeting would seek to arrive at a common viewpoint concerning the method of selecting a constituent assembly, suggestions for revising Laender boundaries, and reaction to the outline of an occupation statute (862.00/7–248).

2  Supra.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.00/7–948: Telegram

[Document 257]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

confidential Frankfurt, July 9, 1948—2 p. m.

38. Refmytel 37, July 8.1 SPD held eight-hour session Ruedesheim July 7 to formulate party policy regarding Frankfurt proposals and instruct Ministers President for Koblenz meeting July 8 and 9. Carlo Schmid, Deputy Minister President Wuerttemberg-Hohenzollern, drafter original SPD occupation statute delivered main address analyzing three Frankfurt documents. He reiterated main aim SPD is creation of unified Germany. Party would accept western German state only as temporary solution, but a western state not under “constitution” and not under occupation statute set forth in document three of Frankfurt proposals. Main objection to document three centered on article concerning allied control of foreign trade and related internal policy. Schmid position supported in discussion by Hessian Minister Zinn, Schleswig Holstein Minister President Luedemann and Rheinland-Pfalz Minister of Interior Jakob Stefan.

More conciliatory approach advocated by Bremen Senate President Kaisen, Hamburg Buergermeister Brauer, Hesse Minister President Stock, etc. Germans should seize every opportunity within Frankfurt proposals to extend sovereignty, should forego outright opposition but make counterproposals (for example on question of foreign trade at least to wipe out JEIA) accept hopelessness of four power agreement on German unity but press for occupation statute against constitution. Following decisions represent compromise: 1. Committee established to draft and present occupation statute and counter proposals to MG. Draft to be called occupation statute basic law, administrative statute or anything but “constitution” as latter implies sovereignty which occupied Germany does not possess. Statute to include bill of rights.

2. Ministers President to press for occupation statute before cooperation on any work for constitutional convention. Statute must be drafted not by Ministers President themselves but by enlarged group selected indirectly by Laender. This group to prepare groundwork for convocation of Parliament.

3. Before end of 1948 Parliament elected by popular and direct vote to convene and form government.

4. Alteration of land boundaries to be postponed, carried out later by referendum.

Conference indicated that SPD reluctance to support constitution stems more from conflict over sovereignty than from fear of sanctioning split Germany. Ministers President instructed to work for compromise with Frankfurt proposals, but only on basis of occupation statute.

CDU–CSU Ministers President, Deputies, party functionaries and government officials from all three zones met for only three hours Koblenz July 7. Declared themselves in favor of all positive aspects of Frankfurt proposals and of federative basis for new state. Opposed linking together constitution and occupation statute. Adenauer and some associates took positive attitude, assuming proposals offer Germans opportunity to shape their own government.

French zone representatives regarded Frankfurt proposals as improving their own position. Dr. Josef Mueller of Bavaria stated proposals should not be construed as French concessions but on contrary as evidence French views prevailed over American and British. General demand for “clarification” of proposals before further Germans action and for clear definition German rights and realms of autonomy.

Decisions: 1. Constitutional convention should be elected indirectly from Laender not by popular direct vote.

2. Preparations should be made by Ministers-President not by enlarged committee as SPD suggested.

3. Committee should draw up short occupation statute not constitution as counterproposal to contain (a) delegation of powers and competence, (b) definition of structure, (c) bill of human rights not to include social, economic rights.

Sent Department 38, repeated Paris 10.

Murphy

1  Supra.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.00/7–948: Telegram

[Document 258]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

confidential Frankfurt, July 9, 1948—3 p. m.

39. Eyes Only. Remytel 38, July 91 concerning SPD and CDU meetings July 7.

Military Government circles have privately advised Germans to accept Frankfurt proposals because.

1. If not they will only get less.

2. They should frankly recognize split of Germany as fact.

3. They should not become involved in legal fantasy of “sovereignty”. Regardless what Germans call new government document, administrative statute, etc., it will be translated into English as “constitution”.

Murphy

1  Supra.

The Ministers President of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) USPolAd Germany Files: MGMP/P Documents: Box 119

[Document 259]

The Ministers President of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay)1

[Translation]

restricted [Koblenz, July 10, 1948.]

[Herr General:] The Ministers-President of the Laender of the three Western Zones of Occupation met in Coblenz from 8th to 10th July of this year in order to consider the answers which they were requested to make to the documents handed to them on the 1st of July of this year.2 They subjected the mandate of the Military Governors contained therein to a thorough discussion and unanimously arrived at the opinions, expressed in the appendices to this letter, which they ask to be examined.

The proposals are an expression of the intent to collaborate creatively in the solution of the problems posed and to reach the goal set in the documents with all possible speed and effectiveness.

The Ministers-President are convinced that the critical difficulties under which Germany suffers today can be overcome only if the German people are enabled to administer their affairs on the broadest territorial basis possible at any given time. They welcome, therefore, the Occupying Powers’ determination to combine the areas of Germany which are subject to their jurisdiction into a unified territory to which the population itself shall give a vigorous organization which makes it possible to preserve the interest of the whole without prejudicing the rights of the Laender.

The Ministers-President believe, however, that notwithstanding the granting of the fullest possible autonomy to the population of this territory, everything should be avoided that would give the character of a state to the organization which is to be established. They are, therefore, of the opinion that the procedure to be followed for this purpose should make it clear that a provisional establishment only is involved, an institution, furthermore, which owes its formation solely to the temporary state of affairs in relation to the present occupation of Germany.

Because of the inability of the four Occupying Powers to reach unanimity regarding Germany thus far, the Ministers-President must take special care to avoid in the pending reorganization, anything which could widen further the rift between west and east. In the light of the present circumstances, they are convinced that the procedure they suggest is suitable to provide the administration of the area of Germany under the jurisdiction of the three western occupying powers with the instrument best fitted to overcome the present difficulties.

The same considerations were decisive in the proposal of the Ministers-President to refrain from a referendum. A referendum would give to the basic law the kind of weight which should be reserved to a final constitution. The Ministers-President wish once more on this occasion to stress the fact that in their opinion a German constitution cannot be created until the whole German people find it possible to constitute itself through free self-determination; until such time measures for a provisional organization only can be taken.

With regard to the modification of Land boundaries, the Ministers-President unanimously reached the conclusion that a basic and final solution is required and needs thorough examination.

The boundaries of the individual Laender should be reviewed with the purpose of creating for a united Germany the kind of internal structure which takes into account the needs of a well-functioning federal system. Attention should be paid to the needs of the present, and in particular to the development of efficient and well-balanced Laender, as well as to traditional patterns. Such review and reorganization of the Laender in the combined area of administration is a German task. It presupposes the existence of common organs of a democratic parliamentary character. It cannot, therefore, be solved within a short period of time.

This should not prevent the elimination, by the Laender concerned, of the particularly unfavorable territorial conditions which exist in the southwest of Germany.

The Ministers-President gave especially serious consideration to the problems related to the regulation of the exercise of powers by the occupation authority. They noted with satisfaction the intention that their relations to the Occupying Powers be put on a clear legal basis. However, the Ministers-President think that it is an urgent necessity that the Military Governors proclaim an occupation statute before the body which is entrusted to draft the basic law for the area of the three Western Zones starts its activities; only then will this body have a firm foundation for its work. Furthermore, they think that the Occupation Statute should express clearly that the organizational changes which are now intended are ultimately based on the will of the Occupying Powers. This must lead to consequences different from those which would follow if the changes were an act of free self-determination of the German people.

In making these detailed proposals the Ministers-President want to express their conviction that the German organs should have competences in all matters which are not excluded from their competence by the Occupation Statute itself; save for definite exceptions the actions of the Occupying Powers should be in principle limited to the supervision of the activities of the German organs with a view to ensuring the fulfillment of the occupation purposes.

In this connection it seems particularly important that German foreign trade, while continuing under effective supervision by the Occupation Authorities, should be freed from the restrictions under which its productivity is at present suffering. The Ministers-President believe that, over and above the provisions of the Occupation Statute, at an early date the possibility should be granted to German agencies to enter into and conduct trade negotiations, the results of which, however, should be subject to ratification by the Occupying Powers.

Furthermore, they think that it might be appropriate to leave the question of the international Ruhr authority out of the Occupation Statute because of its special functions. Concerning the resumption of full occupation powers by the Military Governors in case of emergencies, the Ministers-President believe that the Military Governors share their opinion that in the case of mere police emergencies it should be left to the German governments to do what is necessary to overcome them.

Finally, the Ministers-President address to the Military Governors the request to consider at regular intervals whether developments permit a further extension of German powers and a further decrease of control.

In conclusion, the Ministers-President express their wish and their expectation that by decision of the Governments of France, Great Britain and the United States the state of war be ended.

In view of the wealth of problems which are posed by the intended reorganization, the Ministers-President could comment only on the most important points in the attached appendices. Therefore, they express their wish for an opportunity to explain orally to the Military Governors the opinions and requests laid down in the appendices and in this letter.

The Ministers-President do not want to end this letter without thanking the Military Governors for, through their initiative, widening the possibilities for a progressive democratic development which can unfold only when a people deciding freely can accept responsibility and determine its own affairs. They affirm that they, as much as the Military Governors, will do everything which can serve the peace of the world and the unity of a free and democratic Germany.

Peter Altmeier
Minister-President
Rhineland–Pfalz
Chairman of the Ministers-President Conference

Leo Wohleb
State President
Baden Wilhelm Kaisen
President of the Senate
Bremen

Dr. Hans Ehard
Minister-President
Bavaria Max Brauer
Buergermeister
Hamburg

Christian Stock
Minister-President
Hesse Heinrich Wilhelm Kopf
Minister-President
Lower Saxony

Karl Arnold
Minister-President
North–Rhein–Westphalia Hermann Luedemann
Minister-President
Schleswig–Holstein

Dr. Reinhold Maier
Minister-President
Wuerttemberg–Baden Lorenz Bock
State President
Wuerttemberg–Hohenzollern

1 The source text was circulated to the Military Governors as document MGMP/P(48)5, July 12, 1948. The text was transmitted to the Department of State by Ambassador Murphy in telegram 1663, July 12, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1248).

2 Regarding the meeting at Frankfurt on July 1, and the documents under reference here, see the editorial note, p. 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255].

Comments of the Ministers-President Conference Regarding Document I Appendix “A”

[Translation]

[Document 260]

Comments of the Ministers-President Conference Regarding Document I

restricted [Koblenz, July 10, 1948.]

Subject: Constituent Assembly

1. The Ministers-President will assume the powers delegated to them on 1 July 1948 by the Military Governors of the American, British and French Zones.

2. The convening of a German National Assembly and the preparation of a German constitution shall be postponed until a solution for all of Germany is possible and until German sovereignty has been sufficiently restored.

3. The Ministers-President will recommend to the Landtage of the three Zones that they elect a representative body (Parliamentary Council) which will have the task of: a) Drafting a basic law for the uniform administration of the Occupation Zones of the Western Powers;

b) Enacting an electoral law for a popular representation based upon general and direct elections.

The participation of the Land governments in the deliberations of the Parliamentary Council must be assured.

The representation shall be formed in accordance with the figures proposed in Document No. I and shall convene not later than 1 September 1948. Each Land shall put up at least one delegate; for a remaining fraction of at least 200,000 votes a further delegate shall be appointed.

4. The elections for the popular representation shall be carried out during the year 1948.

5. The basic law must provide, in addition to a popular representation elected directly by the people, for Laender representation to take part in Legislation.

6. As soon as the delegates elected by the Landtage have accomplished their task (para 2), the Ministers-President, after consultation with the Landtage, will submit the basic law, with their comments, to the Military Governors and ask them to authorize the Ministers-President to promulgate the law.

7. The representative body shall fulfil all functions to which a democratically elected parliament is entitled.

8. The common executive organ envisaged for the occupation area of the Western Powers shall be appointed under the provisions of the basic law.

Comments of the Ministers-President Conference Regarding Document II Appendix “B”

[Translation]

[Document 261]

Comments of the Ministers-President Conference Regarding Document II

restricted [Koblenz, July 10, 1948.]

Subject: Land Boundaries

The Ministers-President agree with the Military Governors that a re-examination of the German Laender boundaries is appropriate.

They are, however, of the opinion that this question requires careful examination which cannot be accomplished within a short time.

Under these circumstances the Ministers-President cannot at present propose a general solution. They are, however, of the opinion that a revision of the boundaries of the southwestern Laender is urgently required. The Parliamentary Council should debate these revisions and submit proposals to the Ministers-President.

The right of the Laender concerned to arrive themselves at a solution remains unaffected.

Comments of the Ministers-President Conference Regarding Document III Appendix “C”

[Translation]

[Document 262]

Comments of the Ministers-President Conference Regarding Document III

restricted [Koblenz, July 10, 1948.]

Subject: Occupation Statute

basic principles for an occupation statute

i

1. In order to realize the economic and administrative unity of all German territory falling under the Occupation Authority of Great Britain, France and the United States, this territory should be combined into a united area, with the organization of which the Occupying Powers should charge the population.

2. German legislative, administrative and judicial powers should be limited only by those powers of the Occupation Authorities which are directly defined in the text of the occupation statute.

In case of doubt, the competence should rest with the German organs.

3. The Occupying Authorities reserve the right to take action only in so far as is necessary to realize the purposes of the occupation.

4. These measures may consist of: (a) Direct administration by organs of the occupation;

(b) Control;

(c) Supervision;

(d) Observation, advice and assistance.

5. The purposes of the occupation are to: (a) Ensure the security of occupying troops;

(b) Ensure continuing democratic order in Germany;

(c) Ensure the demilitarization of Germany;

(d) Ensure the fulfillment of Germany’s treaty (vertraglichen) obligations.

6. Direct administration will be exercised by the Occupying Authorities for the temporary conduct of foreign affairs; nevertheless, German representation abroad for the protection of economic and trade interests will be permitted. The heads of such German offices abroad have a legal status corresponding to that of a Consul.

7. Measures to be taken by the Occupying Authorities are in principle limited to general supervision of the activity of German organs. In regard to German foreign trade the right of control may be exercised, but only in so far as there is reason to fear that the obligations which the Occupying Powers have undertaken in relation to Germany are not being observed, or that the means placed at Germany’s disposal are not being used in an appropriate manner. Such control shall not extend to deciding whether German measures are technically correct and appropriate.

Furthermore, such control may be concerned with the safeguarding of German reparations obligations still in force, for observing the regulations defining the level of German industry, for carrying out decartelization, for disarmament and demilitarization and for scrutinizing such activities of scientific research as served the German war economy.

This statute is not concerned with the powers of an international Ruhr authority.

8. Instructions within the framework of the above provisions will be issued only by the highest organs of the Occupying Authorities and only to the highest German territorial authority.

9. The right of veto shall only be brought to bear against a duly enacted German law if it is likely to endanger the realization of the purpose of the occupation. Unless within twenty-one days of the enactment of law the Military Governors acting together do not object to it, the law enters into force.

10. In the sphere of democratization of political and social life, and of education, the Occupying Authorities will limit themselves to observation, advice and assistance.

11. The independence as well as the territorial and material universality (territoriale und sachliche Universalität) of German judicature is acknowledged.

12. The jurisdiction of occupation courts is limited to: (a) Non-German members of the Occupying Forces and the occupation administration and members of their families;

(b) Crimes and offences against the security or property of the Occupying Powers or against their personnel.

13. For litigation between Germans and members of the Occupation Powers mixed courts shall be established.

ii

Universal human rights as well as civil rights and freedoms shall be guaranteed to the German population, also in its relations with the organs of the Occupying Powers.

iii

1. Material and personal services shall be demanded, only on such a scale as is necessary to satisfy the requirements of the forces and administration of the Occupying Powers. They must be in proportion to the resources of the country.

2. The nature and scope of material and personal services to be rendered and the way in which they are to be paid for will be determined by the Military Governors acting together. A special procedure for the making and meeting of such demands will be established, in the execution of which German authorities are to take part.

3. Occupation costs shall be established for one year in advance. All German services described in the previous two sub-paragraphs are to be included. Occupation costs shall be a fixed sum and may not exceed a fixed percentage of the regular expenditure under the normal budget. They shall be determined in consultation with the competent German authorities.

iv

A special procedure shall be provided for to guarantee the payment of reparations and the advance claims on such German reparation obligations as have not yet been fixed. The same applies to restitutions. Such a procedure shall provide for the effective participation of German organs.

v

Arbitration and conciliation authorities shall be established for settling differences of opinion on the interpretation and application of the occupation statute.

vi

Should the Military Governors regard it necessary to resume the exercise of their full powers they will do so only as an emergency measure and as a result of a decision taken in common, and only if an emergency situation threatens security or it appears necessary to enforce observance of the constitution and the occupation statute.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1148: Telegram

[Document 263]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, July 11, 1948—4 p. m.

1661. Department’s 2591 to London, July 71 and subsequent telegrams from Department, London and Paris re working party on western German boundaries.

There is no objection here to the meeting now suggested for July 20 at Paris. It seems fairly obvious that the news of the meeting may leak to the press as things sometimes do in Paris and that there will be exploitation thereof and distortions appearing in Soviet licensed German press. If this happens it will not ease our situation in Germany and in Berlin. Germans in our zone are already beginning to refer to the London decisions in terms of Versailles. However, our London policies having been adopted, we must be prepared to meet whatever resistance develops with appropriate means. I would like to say in that connection that our French friends should understand that if western Germans are in any way encouraged to oppose certain features of London such as constitutional government, the entire program may be endangered. I believe that French representatives have spoken informally to a number of Germans throwing cold water on the London proposal for constitutional government and that German elements (Bavarians for example) respond accordingly. With the French Scylla to the west and the Soviet Charybdis to the east, German Minister Presidents will tack their canvas until the outcome of the tug of war is more apparent.

Replying to Department’s question, OMGUS hopes to provide the small number of technical personnel suggested in Department’s 1199 July 7,2 for Paris working party, but specifications would be appreciated as soon as may be convenient.

Repeated London as 329, Paris as 324.

Murphy

1 The message under reference is not printed. For documentation on the meetings of the Working Party on Western German Boundaries, which began in Paris on July 22, see pp. 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, and Doc. 412] ff.

2 Not printed.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1448: Telegram

[Document 264]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Frankfurt, July 14, 1948—6 p. m.

47. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. Deptel 1225, July 10,1 and mytel 1653 of July 9.2 Proposals made by Ministers President at Coblenz Conference. Mytel 1663 of July 12 transmits texts of letter written by Ministers President to Military Governors together with those supporting papers.3

First important point of difference between German viewpoint and London decisions, as we see it, is German desire to emphasize provisional nature of governmental arrangements to be made. They desire to avoid establishment of “constitutional assembly,” “constitution,” and “government.” In short, they have to avoid any step which to them seems to mean the establishment of a “state”. This hesitancy I believe, stems from their fear of being party to a formal splitting of their country. Closely analyzed, however, their counterproposals appear to give much of the substance of what was proposed at London, instead of “constitutional assembly” elected either by Landtage or by the people they proposed “parliamentary council” elected by the Landtage. This “parliamentary council” would draw up a document which the Germans prefer to carry as “basic law” rather than as “constitution.” But this document would be substantially a constitution which would delineate the structure of the government and regulate its powers and relationships to the Laender.

The second point of difference noted is that the Germans do not wish to submit this provisional “basic law” to popular vote. This appears to us to be one point on which we must insist upon the acceptance of the London decisions. We believe that it should be impressed upon the Germans that if they are going to go forward with an increasingly responsible governmental arrangement in the west it should rest firmly upon phases of popular consent and not upon mere approval by Landtage or even less upon mere approval by Ministers President. There is reason to believe that the political parties themselves do not approve of the Ministers President proposals in this respect and they could probably be persuaded that a popular referendum would in no wise disturb the provisional character of the document drafted.

Thirdly, the Germans suggest that the occupation statute should be promulgated before a constitution in order that the constitutional assembly (parliamentary council) should know what kind of government it can plan for. This point appears to us to be well taken and not seriously to clash with the intent of the London decisions.

The Ministers President do not wish at present to make proposals about changes in state boundaries. While this might be acceptable to the British and ourselves it would conflict with French views.

The draft occupation statute submitted by the Ministers President differs somewhat in phraseology and detail from that proposed by the London conference. Close study of this draft indicates that it might be substantially acceptable as a satisfactory basis for negotiation of a final occupation statute. The desire to omit any mention of the Ruhr authority, or of clause limiting the jurisdiction of MG courts and clause proposing an arbitration mechanism for settling disputes over interpretation of occupation statute are no doubt unacceptable, but there is reason to believe that a satisfactory decision on these points can be induced by negotiation. We have discussed this matter with General Clay and CAD and we have today proceeded to Frankfurt where this evening we will have a preliminary meeting with the Ministers President of the US zone. Tomorrow there is planned a conference of the three Military Governors followed by a conference of the three Military Governors and the 11 Ministers President although it is possible that the French Ministers President may not be present. While Clay’s first reaction has been that the counterproposals of the Ministers President should be flatly rejected and they should be informed that the proposals made to them as a result of the London meeting are governmental procedures which the Ministers President have no authority to modify, I hope that as a result of today’s meeting with the Ministers President of the US zone that there may be some relaxation in this position. Friedrich and Litchfield over the weekend contacted some of the Ministers President and are persuaded that they held the view that the proposals made to them on June 30 were in the nature of suggestions calling for an expression of their ideas. Friedrich states that this view was strengthened by the impression which the German Social Democrats who visited London last week obtained in their conversations with representatives of the British Labor Party. A reference in that connection is made particularly to a conversation which Mr. Bevin had with Heine. According to the German version when Heine outlined to Bevin German Ministers President counterproposals, Bevin expressed no objection saying in effect that they were interesting and deserved study. That, of course, was the preliminary reaction of Robertson and Steele.

I believe that it was not the intention of the Ministers President to reject the London proposals and this is confirmed by both Friedrich’s and Litchfield’s conversations.

With reference to the German desire to call the constitution a “basic law for the uniform administration of the occupation zones of Western Germany,” Germans pointed out that in so doing they follow French tradition. In 1875 French representatives under Prussian military occupation also declined to call the constitution then enacted in that name, using instead the title “organic law.” According to the same sources, Ministers President were under impression that French Government would not object to postponement of constitution and substitution of provisional program. (It was so reported at Coblenz by CDU Ministers President from French zone.) It also believed that some of the Ministers President understood that British Government would be ready to acquiesce in the changes they were suggesting.

There is also little doubt that the Berlin situation and the current tension between the western powers and the Soviet Union are exercising a profound effect on German thought. This was demonstrated by the urgent recommendations made by Berlin’s Mayor Frau Schroeder that the Coblenz conference avoid precipitate action relating to establishment Western German Government because it would have effect of splitting Berlin and provoking more drastic Soviet measures against Berlin population in western sectors.

It is hoped that with the current meetings at Frankfurt that the Military Governors may be able to adjust matters on a Military Government level and that their conversations with the Ministers President will enable them later to regulate their resolutions in closer harmony with the London proposals.

Sent Department, repeated London 13, Paris 16.

Murphy

1 Not printed. It noted that Murphy’s messages and press accounts indicated a reluctance on the part of certain German leaders to proceed with arrangements for the establishment of a full-scale government for Western Germany under an occupation statute. The Department was hesitant to move precipitately in a matter of long-range import and asked Murphy for his views. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1048).

2 Not printed; it reported that preliminary information from the meeting of western Ministers President at Koblenz was not encouraging. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–948)

3 The telegram under reference is not printed; for the letter of the Ministers President, see p. 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 259].

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1448: Telegram

[Document 265]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

secret Washington, July 15, 1948—7 p. m.

1248. For Murphy (Eyes Only). Approach indicated urtel 47 from Frankfurt1 seems reasonable and we hope due consideration will be given German views on governmental arrangements, particularly as this seems significant occasion when Germans themselves have taken initiative in making concrete proposals. For your own info this is likewise concern interested branches Army Dept. We believe that it would be preferable to have basic law submitted to popular vote, but we would be ready to accept approval by Landtag vote. Mere approval by Ministers-President even with “consultation” with Landtage appears objectionable. We may have certain observations re minor points in proposals of Ministers-President transmitted urtel 16632 but before commenting further will await report from you on future German meeting with Mil Govs.

Marshall

1  Ante, p. 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264].

2 Not printed; it transmitted the text of the letter of the Ministers President, July 10, p. 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 259].

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1548: Telegram

[Document 266]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Frankfurt, July 15, 1948—6 p. m.

51. I attended a meeting at Frankfurt of the three military governors today.1 This was an informal meeting presided by Koenig to discuss the reply of the Ministers-President to the three proposals made to them 30 June regarding political structure, Land boundaries and occupational statute.2 General Koenig presumed that each military governor had now received a new directive from his government and inquired whether the directives had enough in common to enable military governors come to agreement so that there could be a meeting with the Ministers-President. He said that obviously the replies of the Ministers-President are far away from London decision.

Koenig discussed the question of constitution stating that the Germans have indicated that they don’t want to assume responsibility for dismemberment of Germany and wish to substitute certain words which would be less compromising, thus “parliamentary council” instead of “constitutional assembly”, “basic law” instead of “constitution”, “executive organizations” instead of “government”. It is clear, he said, that Germans would rather have a German administration than a government. This assumption leads to consideration of a third proposal regarding occupational statute. He inquired whether military governors could consider a form of occupational statute different from that proposed in London and thus arrive at a solution of the administration question. Within this responsibility military governors could then leave to Germans those necessary agencies after further discussion with the Ministers-President, develop some form of German administration directed either by military governors or Ministers President, and perhaps grant authority for a Parliamentary Council. The latter in Koenig’s opinion seems to be an interesting agency which could itself eventually draft a constitution. The foregoing said Koenig ties in proposals 1 and 3. He added that the Germans do not seem to have made any comments on proposal 3 but rather to have submitted a new form of occupational statute which we could not accept but it could be studied. As to proposal 2 land boundaries Koenig said that this was not an offer to the Germans but a requirement. The German answer was not satisfactory. Koenig said that he could understand Germans’ request for more time but that Germans should not be allowed to refuse by simply suggesting changes in southwestern Germany. If Germans prefer status quo in Bavaria and elsewhere they should say so. Koenig also said that London proposals provide that Constitutional Assembly would not be established until boundary question has been settled.

General Robertson said that he would discuss the broad issues. (1) In view of the general international situation is it imperative that we press ahead with plans for western Germany and not let them slip into indecision. The question of provocation is past history. The question now is not to demonstrate weakness. (2) These German counter-proposals do two things (a) they mark certain departures from the London decisions and (b) they disappoint each of the military governors but for reasons that may be different in each case. Robertson stated his conclusions to the effect that military governors should work on German proposals with the object of bringing them back into the framework of London decisions. If military governors fail to do this then they must remit questions back to their governments but Robertson expressed hope that new intergovernmental decisions could be avoided because if that happened military governors would be delayed for another 6 or 9 months. Robertson agreed with Koenig that Germans fear to take responsibility for splitting Germany. He said that we want Germans to be responsible for conduct of affairs in western Germany which is all of Germany that is now available. Under present counter-proposals while Germans accept authority they do not want to accept the incident responsibility. Military governors must insist that they do so. Koenig, however, had not made it clear to what extent German counter-proposals regarding government Structure pleased or displeased the French. Instead of bringing matter closer to the London decisions Robertson said Koenig’s suggestions tend to take them farther away. Robertson suggested that we try to find a name for the Parliamentary Council which gives the effect we want and to do the same with the word “constitution”. Robertson doubted that it was intended at London to have a constitution developed which would not be changeable when Germany as a whole is available but would that happen it is obvious that the Russians would insist on changes in the constitution. Robertson stated the desire to see prepared constitution embodying federal principles which could not be changed without our permission.

Regarding the basic law Robertson said that the proposals eliminate the idea that it should be approved by popular vote. That however is a point on which we must insist, otherwise the Germans will not be undertaking the responsibility desired.

As to boundaries Robertson said quite frankly the UK is not particularly interested in changes but as the UK has undertaken this obligation it will live up to it but that he felt that his French and US colleagues should take the initiative on this point.

As to the occupation statute Robertson said that the Germans have clearly stepped out of their province and that he did not see the possibility of changing the statute as desired by them.

To this Koenig stated that in his opinion only one thing is necessary and that is an occupational statute and that a constitution is not necessary.

In turn General Clay said that military governors evidently had failed to make clear to the Germans those things we could negotiate and those things which we cannot negotiate. Koenig raised the question of Land boundaries, he said that the US would accept that although not attaching much importance to it, but Clay added to say to Germans that we give them an occupational statute but not a constitution would lead to further proposals by Germans and under circumstances Germans would probably wish to revert to the form of the London proposals.

Clay suggested that military governors should meet with Ministers President and explain more clearly to them the decisions reached by our governments at London. After providing more adequate explanation military governors should ask for review by the Ministers President of their counter-proposals before military governors refer matter back to governments. Clay emphasized that he was not suggesting a new government conference. If Ministers President agree military governors should allow them more time for further study. Under this arrangement our experts would put entire matter in writing showing where German counter-proposals disagree with London proposals. This is obviously necessary to enable military governments themselves to arrive at agreement. Clay added that the London proposals were made as a whole and that military governors would not be authorized to consider the waiving of any one item without possibly affecting the London proposals in their entirety. He emphasized that in his opinion military governors have not sufficiently informed the Germans regarding the spirit and text of the London proposals.

Koenig stated the fear that the fault is perhaps not that of the military governors but lies in the London proposals themselves. He said that in his opinion the Germans will never agree to forming a government for western Germany; He said that he himself as a Frenchman under similar circumstances would agree to form a government for France but never for western France. He doubts that the military governors will ever be able to persuade the Germans differently.

Koenig then suggested that it might be best to arrange for a team of advisers to deal with the Ministers President at this stage as it might be unpleasant to have them refuse in a meeting with military governors or to be able to charge military governors with exerting pressure on them.

Robertson suggested that it would be the duty of the committee of experts to demonstrate the differences and to suggest how they can be overcome and brought back within the framework of London. He pointed out that there are two kinds of differences: (1) Direct divergence from the London proposals such as that relating to the ratification of the constitution by popular front; military governors would decide to insist on such an item or refer matter back to governments. (2) Regarding titles given to Constitutional Assembly and government body created by it, here it is necessary to take account of anxiety of Ministers President over question of splitting up Germany.

If we were prepared to agree, said Robertson, that there would be a preamble to constitution which showed very clearly that responsibility for splitting Germany is not that of Germans, this might take care of Ministers President anxiety. The other questions whether military governors can consider a change of names of these items without departing from London.

Koenig then stated French view that the formation by the Germans of a constitutional government would be a right arising only from the authority granted them by the occupational statute and that therefore if the Germans reject the idea of a constitution there is nothing left but to offer them an occupation statute. Whether we like it or not, he said, we cannot avoid connecting proposals No. 1 and No. 3.

Robertson said (1) it was essential that military governors should not agree among themselves to impose upon the Germans the details of a constitutional form; (2) military governors must insist that the Germans assume the responsibilities outlined by the London proposals; and (3) if Koenig’s idea is accepted military governors would in effect be tearing up London proposals.

Clay pointed out that London did not specify what name should be given to the political structure for western Germany. In his opinion military governors should explain to Germans that they have the choice between the continuance of the status quo or a constitution and an occupational statute.

Koenig again insisted that the Germans will never agree to a constitution for western Germany. In that connection Robertson and Clay emphasized that Paragraph 6 of TRI/13 does not specify the name of the governmental structure but merely refers to “a governmental structure of federal type best adapted to the eventual reestablishment of German unity at present disrupted”.

It was finally agreed that a committee of experts representing the three military governors would immediately begin an examination of the German counter-proposals and prepare a statement of the differences between such counter-proposals and the London decisions. The purpose would be to effect an arrangement of the German counter-proposals with those of London by insistence on those points which must be accepted in toto or by suggesting alternatives and changes which would not alter the character of the London proposals. This study would be ready for the military governors in Berlin and be considered by the latter at 9 a. m. July 19. Liaison officers will advise Ministers President immediately of this plan and inform them that military governors will meet with them some time next week for a further discussion.

Sent Department 51, repeated London 16, Paris 20.

Murphy

1 Those present at this meeting were as follows: U.S.—General Clay, Major General Hays, and Ambassador Murphy; U.K.—General Robertson and General Brownjohn; France—General Koenig and General Noiret. The minutes of this meeting, document TRIG/M(48) 2, are included in CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 119, File—TRIG/M(48) Documents.

2 Under reference here are the documents identified in the editorial note, p. 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255].

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Frankfurt 740.00119 Council/7–1548: Telegram

[Document 267]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Frankfurt

confidential Washington, July 15, 1948—2 p. m.

30. Fol cable sent through Army to CINCEUR July 14 as War 85721: “Subject is Implementation of Approved Agreements Reached at London Talks on Western Germany.

Your number 5047, 5 July 1948,1 raised question here of providing cooperation with you when implementing London Agreements so that State and Army may have proper understanding of how we should deal with matters here. There follows a list of the decisions made at London (identified with the Conference Report Title2 ) and our proposals as to the manner of handling.

1. Definitive agreement on the Ruhr control authority (Article 12, Annexes C and D). Working party headed by Douglas to include State and OMGUS advisers should meet in London in August or September. Legal problems being explored and general guidance now being prepared here. However, prior to London meeting your views on the form and scope of supplementary agreement would be appreciated.

2. Study of the problem of safeguarding foreign interests in Germany (paragraph 1, Annex E). Such a study is now being prepared by State here and will be forwarded for your comments. After US position formulated our group containing personnel from State, OMGUS and USPolAd should meet with representatives of other countries.

3. Preparation of Occupation Statute (Annex I). It is thought that draft statute would be prepared by CINCEUR on the basis of letter of advice. Additional guidance now being prepared here and referred to in War 85426 of recent date. It is desired then to submit document to governments for final approval.

4. Working party for study external western boundaries (Annex K). Two members from State (one political who would be chairman and one economic) tentatively selected and would be joined in Paris July 20 by representatives OMGUS and USPolAd to form working party with representatives other countries.

5. Modification Laender boundaries (Article 2, Annex F). Recommendations to be made by Germans. Findings and recommendations by Military Governors to be submitted to governments for approval.

6. Drafting of a German Constitution (Annexes F and H). Preliminary draft to be prepared by German Committee for consideration of German Constituent Assembly. Committee under Military Governors to keep in touch with Assembly, giving advice, etc., to ensure Constitution in accord with general principles set forth in letter of advice. State and Army would be afforded opportunity to comment on early draft presented to Constituent Assembly and on draft approved by Constituent Assembly prior to Military Governors’ approval for submission for ratification.

7. Greatly appreciate your thoughts on our proposals above made with a view to a clearer understanding in implementing these talks. Desire also to receive any additional views you have on matters not referenced by us above. For example French participation, JEIA (Annex J) and disarmament and control of industry (Annex L, paragraph 3 II).”

For USPolAd. Assumed you will wish particularly to participate in preparation statute referred to in para 3 above.

Marshall

1 Not printed.

2  Ante, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1648: Telegram

[Document 268]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, July 16, 1948—7 p. m.

1721. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. After meeting of military governors at Frankfurt yesterday, reported in my Frankfurt telegram 51; July 15,1 I had informal conversation with Ministers President Ehard of Bavaria and Kaisen of Bremen regarding three proposals of 30 June. Their attitude was exceedingly cooperative and understanding. Both said that US military governor’s talk with them had clarified their views of governmental question as much as it had surprised them. Up to that time it was the understanding that the London proposal was for negotiation with Germans and that this was confirmed to them by General Koenig who had informed each Minister President that there was no intention to insist on exact terms of proposal regarding political structure nor was there any urgency. Their principal concern, according to them, lies in the fear that the German population of the Soviet zone of occupation may misunderstand action by Germans establishing western German Government. They appreciate that the eastern zone is not now available and thought in making the Coblenz counterproposals that they were substantially meeting the views of the western powers. They had no fear that their action would provoke the Soviet Union but their anxiety related to a possible misunderstanding on the part of the eastern German population. The information they had obtained from General Koenig and other French sources also confused them. I informed Ministers President that we wish to give every consideration to their views of governmental arrangements and desire to avoid impression of imposition. I also stated our preference for the submission of the constitution or basic law to popular vote. With this they seemed to be fully in accord. Both said that whatever name might be given the organization to be set up in western Germany, that every German would understand it is to all intents and purposes a German Government which would hope to hold open the door for the later reception of the eastern compatriots. Both understood the urgency of the situation and were determined to do the best they could with their colleagues.

Regarding Land boundaries, they believe this question should be postponed. I pointed out that it is a requirement that they examine the boundaries and propose such modifications as they wish to recommend. If they do not wish to propose any modifications that will be a matter for their discretion.

They expressed expected disappointment that occupation statute did not grant more latitude but on this point I believe they are talking for the record.

They will have further consultations with their colleagues before again meeting the military governors, presumably next week.

Sent Dept 1721, repeated London as 346, Paris as 340.

Murphy

1  Ante, p. 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266].

Minutes of a Meeting Between the Military Governors and the Ministers President of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, Frankfurt, July 20, 1948, 3 p. m. USPolAd Germany Files: Box 119: File—MGMP/M Documents

[Document 269]

Minutes of a Meeting Between the Military Governors and the Ministers President of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, Frankfurt, July 20, 1948, 3 p. m.

restricted [Frankfurt, July 20, 1948.]

MGMP/M(48) 2

Present General Robertson (Chairman)

General Koenig

General Clay

Also Present

United Kingdom France United States

Mr. Steel Ambassador [Tarbé] de St. Hardouin Ambassador Murphy

Mr. Chaputde Saintonge Dr. Litchfield

Genera] Noiret

M. Seydoux

M. [Lefebvre] de Laboulaye

Ministers President Present

UK Zone French Zone US Zone

Hr. Arnold Hr. Altmeier Dr. Ehard

Hr. Kopf Hr. Wohleb Hr. Stock

Hr. Luedemann Dr. Bock Dr. Maier

Hr. Brauer Hr. Kaisen

Also present: Herren Pfeiffer, Brill and Appelt

General Robertson , in the chair, opened the meeting with the following statement:1

“Gentlemen,

“On behalf of my two colleagues and myself I wish to make some general observations before we enter into the detail of the work with which this meeting is concerned.

“In the first place, we feel that we owe you an apology for the shortness of the notice given to you in regard to this meeting. As you probably know, we met among ourselves yesterday in Berlin to discuss these questions. When we came to fixing a date for our meeting with you we found that some of us had certain engagements in the near future which could not be changed and we had to choose between asking you at very short notice to meet us today, or alternatively postponing our meeting for rather longer than seemed desirable to us. We are much impressed by the importance of moving forward rapidly in these matters and we believe that we have your support in that regard.

“When we met you on 1st July we presented you with certain proposals2 and we asked you for your observations upon them. We have now received your observations3 and we have studied them very carefully. Before, however, we deal with your observations at all, it is my duty to explain to you the origin and character of the proposals which we put forward because we feel that in some respects these things have not been clearly understood by you.

“The proposals which we laid before you were the result of instructions which we had received from our Governments, and those instructions were based upon governmental decisions reached in consequence of the conversations held earlier in London. We want you to understand that the decisions arising from the London conversations were themselves the result of long and very careful deliberations between the representatives of our three Governments. It follows from this that any attempt to depart from those decisions may create difficulties. Moreover, the decisions form a whole; an alteration in one part actually can upset not only that part but also the whole.

“Another very important feature of the London decisions which I would wish to emphasize is this. Our Governments in arriving at their decisions accepted the desirability of entrusting to German political organisms a wider degree of political authority than they possess in the three Zones at present. However, they were motivated not merely by a desire to hand over authority but much more importantly by a desire to obtain acceptance by the Germans of responsibility within the scope of the authority awarded to them. This is a principle which we wish you to keep very clearly in mind. We are prepared to hand over a large degree of authority only on the condition that within the scope of that authority responsibility is also accepted.

“We are not asking you to accept responsibility for matters which you are unable to control. We are not, for example, asking you to accept responsibility for the present unhappy division of your country, which is something that we regret as much as you do. We are not asking you to accept responsibility for those matters in regard to which we have reserved the powers and authority to ourselves. We are, on the other hand, asking that the German people in our Zones should accept responsibility for the direction of their own affairs through their chosen representatives within the limit set by the powers entrusted to them under our proposals and by the circumstances which exist in Germany today.

I have already told you that the proposals which we placed in front of you are based upon governmental decisions and governmental instructions to ourselves. Now your observations—which indeed can be regarded to some extent as counter-proposals—show in various instances divergences from these governmental decisions. Some of these divergences are of a minor order but several of them are of major importance. As Military Governors we have no authority at the moment to agree to divergences, particularly those of a major character from our instructions. Before we can do that we should have to make reference to our Governments. That is something which we may be prepared to do. We do not however wish to do it until it is quite clear that such reference is necessary and until we have carefully examined each point of divergence so as to be able to assess accurately its intention and its importance.

“Our object today is to point out to you where major divergences exist between the proposals which we placed before you and the observations, or counter-proposals, which you have put forward. We propose to do that now. When we have done it we think that it may be well to have a short adjournment so that you can discuss what we have said among yourselves. Then we should suggest that we meet again later this evening in case you would like to ask us some questions or obtain further clarification of the comments which we have made.

“Incidentally, in the letter which you addressed to us you have already told us that you would like to make some further oral explanations yourselves in addition to the written observations with which you have provided us. This second session of our meeting will provide you with an opportunity for doing so. We think that it will be helpful to you to have had our observations first before you make your own comments.

“Even at this second session this evening we shall not ask you to give us your final view. Indeed, I should like to emphasize that it is in no way our intention today to present you with any kind of ultimatum. It is our idea that after the conclusion of this second session we should disperse for an interval of a few days so that you may discuss these matters between yourselves and also with others whom you may wish to consult. Then we shall meet again and at that meeting we shall want to know your final answer on each point. We shall then be able to make up our own minds whether, within the framework of our instructions, we are able to meet you on those matters to which you still attach importance, or whether we must refer to our Governments to find out whether they are prepared to concede certain matters to which you are attached but which we cannot accept under our present instructions.

“In telling you that we are bound to refer to our Governments for agreement to any divergence from the London decisions I would say that the extent to which such reference will cause delays or difficulties is bound to be determined by the nature and the number of these divergences. That is one reason why we cannot deal with each point in isolation. One must see the picture as a whole. The greater the extent to which we can reconcile your views with our own instructions at this and at our next meeting, the easier will it be for our Governments to givers prompt authority to proceed.”

General Koenig continued the meeting by reading the following statement on constitutional development:

“Comment to German Reply Regarding Document I

“General Robertson has just informed you that the Commanders-in-Chief would be obliged to go back to their Governments if the basis on which you intend to establish a German political organization differs too widely from the documents which were handed to you on July 1, as a consequence of the agreement concluded between our three Governments in London.

“It is my special task to point out to you the principal items of Appendix 1 to your letter of July 10, upon which my colleagues and myself consider it impossible to deviate from the London recommendations without referring to our Governments.

“The London agreement provided that a constituent assembly would be convened in view of establishing a constitution. If we do not stress the importance of the name which you wish to confer upon the assembly nor of the one which will be given to the future structure, we on the other hand consider that the expression “basic law” that you suggest carries too different a meaning from the one our Governments intended to convey by the word “Constitution” that they used.

“It being well understood that each one of you is entirely at liberty to make individually to his own Landtag such recommendations as he deems suitable as regards” methods of election to the assembly entrusted with the drafting of the constitution, it remains obvious that the decision upon that question lies with each of the Landtage.

“I have also to point out that the question of the elections to any such body provided for by the constitution belongs to the competence of the assembly insofar as it does not belong to the competence of the participating states.

“Furthermore, the competence of the assembly is exclusive as regards the determination of the date for the holding of elections to such bodies as are provided for by the constitution and for the definition of the respective functions of each one of those organs whether parliamentary or executive which will be set up—providing the principles such as the federal structure of Germany for instance which have been previously outlined to you are respected.

“I will now broach a major question. Our Governments have deemed it necessary that the political organizations which will be set up be ratified by the people of each state. A procedure that would fail to provide for the ratification of the decisions of the assembly by the people of the different states, would remove the element of responsibility which is necessarily linked with the authority our Governments are ready to entrust to you, as well as to the future German governmental organs.”

General Robertson then commented on territorial reorganization as follows: (Document II)

“The Ministers-President must state clearly whether they have any changes to propose to Land boundaries and, if so, they must set forth those changes. It should also be understood that the order and the procedure which were established in this connection by the agreements made in London must be followed.

“We wish you to appreciate that this question of Land boundaries is one of great importance to us. We feel that the present is an appropriate time to deal with it, and we are ready to do so. However, it would be much more difficult for us to deal with it later on. It has, for example, reactions with regard to our own zonal boundaries. We do not feel that we should be willing to deal with the subject again at a later date prior to the conclusion of a peace treaty.

“Moreover, the fixing of Land boundaries is important in relation to the constitution itself. We believe that we should recommend to our Governments that the boundaries which were recognized during the drafting of this constitution should remain unchanged, at least until a peace treaty is signed.”

General Clay made the following comments with regard to the question of the occupation statute: (Document III)

“At our last meeting with you we advised you of the general principles to be contained in the occupation statute and asked that you submit to us your observations on these principles. We have now received your observations and we wish to assure you that they will receive detailed consideration.

“Under the terms of the London Conference, the basic principles of the occupation statute are to be given to the assembly which prepares the constitution or ‘basic law’. Prior to placing these basic principles before the assembly, we shall be very glad indeed to advise you of the results of our consideration of your proposals and to obtain your further comment.

“We cannot here and now agree to promulgate the occupation statute in full prior to the meeting of the assembly and its draft of the constitution, as to do so would be to deviate from the agreement reached in London.

“You will realize that the preparation in detail of the occupation statute is a difficult legal task. Moreover, we would expect to receive from the assembly its observations on the principles of the occupation statute prior to its final drafting.

“As we proceed with the drafting of the occupation statute and prior to its publication, we shall be glad to have our liaison officers keep you advised as it progresses and also the constituent assembly. Thus we—I mean by this we, you, ourselves and the constituent assembly—will be able to be familiar with the general context of the occupation statute as it advances to completion.

“When we have received and have announced our approval for the submission of the constitutional paper to the states, we will be prepared to publish simultaneously the occupation statute which will incorporate the principles to which we have agreed so that the people of the states may fully understand that the acceptance of the constitutional paper is within the framework of an occupation statute.”

General Robertson then explained that the Military Governors had completed their outline on the extent to which the Coblenz resolutions departed from the London agreement and indicated that the Military Governors proposed a short adjournment during which the Ministers-President could consider these statements and return later in the day to ask further questions.

Minister-President Stock (serving as temporary chairman for Ministers-President) indicated that they also agreed that an adjournment would be in order.

Senate-President Kaisen interrupted by saying he thought the Military Governors should understand that all the Ministers-President were extremely anxious to speed the work in the development of western political organization. He added that it would be very helpful to the Ministers-President if they could have an unequivocal answer as to which of the points in the Coblenz decisions the Military Governors would consider it impossible to change, and which, on the other hand, could be made acceptable.

General Robertson said this was a very difficult question to answer because the London agreements must be considered as a whole. He indicated that while it was true that some points were more important than others, it was equally true that any one of the deviations outlined in the preceding statements would necessitate a reference to the three Governments for decision. He added that “we don’t today say that any one is inalterable, but we do say that the more numerous and more profound the divergencies, the greater the probable delay”.

Buergermeister Brauer indicated that he would like to simplify Senator-President Kaisen’s point. He said it would simplify matters if the Military Governors could say on which points specified changes could be accepted and on which points the Military Governors had no authority to authorize changes. For example, he said, the question of a popular referendum on the constitution is one on which the London decisions are inalterable.

General Robertson replied to this specific question by saying it was quite certain that this was an issue which the Military Governors could not compromise and which would need to go to governmental level for decision.

Buergermeister Brauer said that his second question related to the terms “constitution”, “basic law”, and “provisional constitution”. He expressed the opinion that perhaps “provisional constitution” would come closest to that which the Military Governors desired.

General Clay said that while he had no instructions from his Government on this issue, he felt that it would attach great importance to this problem. He said that if this issue were isolated, it would not be a problem but if combined with other deviations from the London agreements which would lessen the broad popular base of the constitution, he felt convinced it would give the US Government grave concern.

The meeting reconvened and General Robertson turned the floor over to Minister-President Stock to speak on behalf of the Ministers-President. Minister-President Stock said they would prefer to refrain from comments on Documents I, II and III as originally given them by the Military Governors on 1 July and from any further comments regarding the Coblenz decisions. He emphasized that their desire was to go forward and not to explain or justify past actions. He said that the Ministers-President agreed with the Military Governors as to the desirability of creating a political framework within the London agreements and which would at the same time feed a stable political situation in western Germany which would be based upon federal organization of the several Laender. He further requested a protocol of both this and previous meetings between the Ministers-President and the Military Governors. He closed by saying that the Ministers-President proposed to go to Niederwald Castle4 tonight to meet on these subjects and would be prepared to discuss the matter with the liaison officers on Wednesday.

General Robertson said that the Military Governors welcomed the Ministers-President desire to proceed with dispatch, that the liaison officers would be available, and that they would bring with them a record of what was said in the course of today’s meeting. He said that the Military Governors were anxious that this should not be regarded as a formal protocol and certainly opposed to have it circulated outside.

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Military Governors and the Ministers-President would take place in the afternoon of Monday, 26 July 1948.

1 General Robertson’s opening statement and the subsequent statements read by Generals Koenig, Robertson, and Clay were circulated separately as document MGMP/P(48)6, July 20, and Appendices “A”, “B”, and “C” thereto (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 119, File—MGMP/P Documents).

2 See the editorial note, p. 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255].

3 See the letter of the Ministers President, July 10, p. 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 259].

4 Near Ruedesheim, Hesse.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2648: Telegram

[Document 270]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Frankfurt, July 26, 1948—8 p. m.

65. I attended meeting at Frankfurt of three Military Governors with 11 Ministers President Western Zones.1 Agenda included German answers to proposals made by Military Governors under London decisions.2 Minister President Stock as German chairman stated that Ministers President welcomed chance to discuss entire problem and are willing and eager to create an organization for the economic and pool reconstruction of Western Germany. They are also willing and eager to reach agreement with Military Governors. Minister President Arnold of North Rhine Westphalia and Minister President Luedemann of Schleswig Holstein were assigned to present German statements regarding documents one and two respectively.

Arnold stated German eagerness for prompt solution and immediate launching into discussion of question of ratification of basic constitutional law by popular referendum. Stated question of greatest importance and Germans also of opinion referendum should be carried out on as broad a popular basis as possible. Germans have, however, serious reservations because if basic law is put to referendum it will develop an ugly and, in his opinion, electoral campaign. [sic] According to Arnold, Communist and destructive elements will exploit campaign to embitter controversy between East and West Germany. Communists will assert in public rallies that issue is not of German law but allied imposition. This may deteriorate into a vote against the occupying powers. Extremist and destructive elements might unite in voting down law and a vote of one-third would be sufficient to defeat measure. This would mean repudiation of law [of both] Coblenz and London and would be catastrophic not only for Germany but for whole of Europe. However, Arnold said Ministers President are in fundamental agreement that this law should be accepted on broadest possible popular basis. He stated that members of state parliaments have been elected by secret popular vote and are democratic representatives of German people. If Landtage accept law by large majority Germans feel popular base would be sure. This takes care both of interests of Military Government and German people. He stated also that Germans have no objection to adding to the terminology “basic law” additional title of “provisional constitution” as all are agreed that whole structure will have to be provisional. In Arnold’s opinion changes suggested can be made to accord with London decisions.

Minister President Luedemann then discussed question state boundaries and replying to questions whether Minister President recognize need for changes and if so what recommendations they wish to make stated that the first question is answered in the affirmative and that they did desire to make recommendations. He raised a question regarding the date on which the recommendations would be made, referring to the date of September 1 for the projected directions to the Constituent Assembly and pointed out that only about 4 weeks remain for delineation of boundaries. This period in German opinion is too short. For that reason Coblenz meeting proposed elections to Assembly by Landtag instead of popular vote and on basis of one delegate per 750,000 population. We assume there is agreement on that point but it has not yet been stated. Luedemann also informed Military Governors that a special commission, to handle boundaries problem has been set up and would commence its work tomorrow.

Minister President Brauer made declaration to the effect that attitude of all Ministers President toward London agreements is positive and that Ministers President are urgently interested in speedy implementation of London. Germans feel that if these measures not taken it will endanger ERP and German reconstruction and it lies in German interest to arrive at rapid solution. Difficulties lie only in mechanics and not in the goal. Germans are prepared not to make an issue of these questions if compromising entire plan is risk. Stated Germans would like to reach agreement today within the framework of Military Governors instruction and relieve state of uncertainty.

After consultation Military Governors informed Ministers President that they were not in a position to agree to deviation from London agreements with reference of questions back to governments and that this actually would entail delays. Germans were advised that if such reference were made Germans would be informed of replies from governments at earliest possible moment. German Chairman Stock inquired as to what points deviated and Koenig replied (1) question of referendum; (2) name of basic law; (3) time limit for recommendations regarding state boundaries.

At this point and as promised me informally by Minister President Ehard of Bavaria, latter speaking in behalf of Ministers President stated that it was not German intention to end conversations in this fashion. Germans wanted to explain the reasons for the attitude they took at Coblenz and to learn whether Military Governors were able to approve these reasons or not. They had had honest doubts regarding the dangers inherent in a popular referendum and believe that their preference for the name of the basic law was justified and also thought that additional time was necessary to translate the recommendations regarding land boundaries. However, they were as eager as Military Governors for progress and willing to accept proposals rather than provoke further delay. Ehard was followed by Minister President Kaisen of Bremen who announced German acceptance of the London agreements with the request that the German observations on the points made regarding referendum be conveyed to governments but that Germans would if authorized start the immediate implementation of the London agreements.

After further consultation Koenig announced on behalf of Military Governors that no difficulty is seen regarding the title of the basic law provisional constitution and that the observations of the Ministers President regarding the referendum question and that time limit for the recommendations regarding state boundaries should be conveyed to governments. Authorization was then given Ministers President to proceed with implementation London agreements. A joint communiqué by Ministers President and Military Governors repeated in following telegram was approved.3

Sent Department 65; repeated London 21, Paris 28.

Murphy

1 The same persons were present for this (Third) meeting of the Military Governors and Ministers President as were present for the Second Meeting, July 20 (see the American minutes of that meeting, p. 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]). The full text of the minutes of this (Third) meeting, designated document MGMP/M(48)3, July 26, is printed in Litchfield, Governing Postwar Germany, pp. 552–561, or Documents on the Creation of the German Federal Constitution, pp. 45–49. A substantially complete text of these minutes appears in Ruhm von Oppen, Documents on Germany, pp. 322–330.

2 The proposals of the Military Governors, the so-called “German Documents” or “London Documents”, are those described in the editorial note, p. 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]. The texts of the replies of the Ministers President, prepared at their conference at Koblenz, are printed on pp. 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 259], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263].

3 Telegram 66, July 26, from Frankfurt, not printed. For the text of the communiqué issued to the press, see Ruhm von Oppen, Documents on Germany, p. 330 or Documents on the Creation of the German Federal Constitution, p. 49.

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army USPolAd Germany Files: 801.1 Ministers President: Telegram

[Document 271]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

secret
priority [Berlin,] July 27, 1948.

CC–5332. Dept of Army for CSCAD Personal for Noce, from CINCEUR Personal from Clay. At meeting with Minister Presidents yesterday, they accepted unconditionally the London Conference proposals and the responsibility to place them in motion. They did ask that the Constitution be called the “Basic Law (Provisional Constitution)” to which the 3 Military Governors agreed.

They also asked for further consideration of the requirement for ratification of the Basic Law to be by direct vote of the people, being in favor of ratification by the Landtage of the several States. Their reason was their fear that a Communist sponsored national constitution in the East with support from those Germans “tired of being occupied” might well result in a substantial vote against the Constitution. While they did not believe that such a vote would prevent its acceptance, they felt that a large opposition vote would damage the prestige of the Constitution. There is merit in their contention. However, it would seem to me too early to judge as there is also much merit in having the Constitution receive the approval of a majority of the people. I would like discretionary authority to approve whichever method seems more appropriate under the conditions which will exist as the preparation of the Constitution draws to a conclusion. Of course the French will welcome ratification by the Landtage and the British are prepared to accept.

The Minister Presidents also asked for a delay beyond 1 September to make their recommendations with respect to state boundaries. This is a question which was of particular interest to the French and I would like authority to go along with whatever extension of time the French are willing to accept.1

The meeting was an excellent one and I believe that our program is now launched in an atmosphere of understanding which will lead to quick and satisfactory developments.

[ Clay ]

1 Message WX–86782, August 1, to Berlin, not printed, stated that the State and Army Departments approved the authority requested in this message by General Clay. The German requests appeared to be reasonable and acceptable provided that the British and French also agreed (USPolAd Files: 801.1 Ministers President).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 862.014/8–248: Telegram

[Document 272]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret Berlin, August 2, 1948—8 p. m.

415. Personal for Douglas. Re London’s 3459 July 30 and Department’s 1346 July 31.1 Confirming our telephone conversation regarding desirability of postponement settlement state boundaries and popular ratification basic constitutional law,2 we feel strongly here that no indication should be given at the present stage either to British or French that our position on question of popular ratification is subject to change. We feel that as question actually will not arise for some time, it would be far better to maintain firm bargaining position. In the interval, German developments would be carefully studied and if possibly 2 months from now there would be reason to review our position, there will be ample time to do so then. Certainly, if there has been any validity in both the British and US positions through the months of the London conference to the effect that popular ratification of the constitutional provision has political value, then there is no need to back away from that position because of mild doubts expressed by a few Germans in the preliminary stage of this operation.

Sent London 415, repeated Department 1909, Paris 422.

Murphy

1 Neither printed.

2 No record has been found of the telephone conversation under reference.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.011/8–1348: Telegram

[Document 273]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

confidential Berlin, August 13, 1948—7 p. m.

2033. Preparatory Constitutional Committee appointed by 11 Ministers President and including Suhr from Berlin has met this week at Herrenchiemsee, Bavaria.1 Sessions will continue next week. Only scattered indications yet available as to course of committee’s thinking. Military Government maintaining hands-off attitude. Responsible authorities here feel importance of committee’s work should not be overemphasized. SPD, CDU and others will likewise have draft constitutions ready for consideration by Parliamentary Council. Civil administration division, OMGUS, believes Ministers President committee draft will not have as much influence as CDU draft, since CDU will have largest single representation in Council meeting.

Ministers President are reported favoring Bonn as Parliamentary Council site with Karlsruhe runner-up.

Repeated London as 473.

Murphy

1 The Preparatory Constitutional Committee (or Committee of Experts) met at Herrenchiemsee from August 10 to August 23. Regarding the transactions of the conference and the report submitted to the Ministers President, see the editorial note, p. 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280].

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.014/8–1448: Telegram

[Document 274]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

confidential Berlin, August 14, 1948—8 p. m.

2039. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. General Clay tells me that exercising the discretion granted him he authorized Litchfield in discussing question of time limitation on recommendations to be made by Ministers President regarding Land boundaries under London agreements to agree to postponement until October 15. This, Litchfield did in informal conversations with subordinate members Saint Hardouin’s staff. Also the liaison officers of the three military governors have apparently informed Minister President Stock (Hesse), Arnold (North Rhine Westphalia) and Altmeier (Rhine Palatinate) that date for submission of proposals for changes in Laender boundaries has been postponed to October 15.1

I gather from conversation with De Noblet yesterday that the French have very much in mind a postponement of convention of constituent assembly and believe they will link this question with the postponement of the report on Laender boundaries. De Noblet also informed me that his government was very much opposed to the inclusion in the constituent assembly of delegations from the city of Berlin on the theory that this would be an added irritant in the present complicated situation and that his government in any event was opposed to it in principle.

Sent Department 2039; repeated London 476, Paris 482.

Murphy

1 According to document MGMP/Memo(48) 4, August 17, not printed, the Liaison Officers of the Military Governors (Litchfield, Chaput de Saintonge, and Joos) met on August 12 in Frankfurt with Ministers President Stock, Arnold, and Altmeir (representing all the Ministers President of the Western Zones of Occupation). The text of a statement by the three Military Governors extending to October 15 the time limit for the proposals of the Ministers President concerning changes of Laender boundaries was presented to and accepted by the Ministers President. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–3148)

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin 862.011/8–2748: Telegram

[Document 275]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

secret Washington, August 27, 1948—7 p. m.

1543. Under instructions from Paris French Emb today made representations concerning possibility that Germans would be allowed to have representatives from Berlin participate in West German Parliamentary Council on an informal basis without the right to vote, it being understood that the military governors had, reurtels 2117, Aug 21,1 and 2159, Aug 262 refused Berlin representation in a voting capacity. French feel that even a limited and unofficial representation from Berlin might aggravate the situation during the Moscow conversations but would be willing to reexamine this question if the Moscow conversations are successful.3 We informed them that we would naturally bring these views to your attention but we wished to be informed of your judgment before making any definitive reply.

Marshall

1 Not printed; it reported that at a recent meeting the three Military Governors had expressed the hope that the Germans themselves would dispose of the question of participation of delegates from Berlin in the Parliamentary Council. Should the Germans insist, however, that Berlin be represented by voting delegates, the Military Governors would intervene and deny permission in order to avoid providing ammunition for a Soviet propaganda attack. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2148)

2 Not printed; it reported that the German authorities were apparently proceeding on the assumption that it would still be possible to have representatives from Berlin at the Parliamentary Council (862.011/8–2648).

3 For documentation on the conversations under reference here see pp. 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592] ff.

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin 862.011/8–2748: Telegram

[Document 276]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin 1

secret
us urgent Washington, August 28, 1948—3 p. m.

1546. While we concur in Military Governors position expressed urtel 21172 that Berlin representatives should not vote, we would not object to Berlin attendance at Bonn meeting as we feel this is question primarily for German decision. We note however that Brit and Fr will probably block this. Your tel 21733 apparently crossed Deptel 1543.4 In the circumstances we should not press matter.

Marshall

1 The substance of this message was also sent by Under Secretary Draper to General Clay as telegram W–88381, August 29, not printed.

2 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 1543, August 27, to Berlin, supra.

3 Not printed; it reported that the British Political Adviser had urged Berlin political leaders to give up their plans to participate in the forthcoming Parliamentary Council. Ambassador Murphy foresaw a troublesome situation if the Berlin leaders persisted in their intention and asked for instructions from the Department (862.011/8–2748).

4  Supra.

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin 862.011/8–2848: Telegram

[Document 277]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

secret Washington, August 28, 1948—3 p. m.

1547. Personal for Murphy. Urtel 2172 Aug. 27.1 We believe that military governors should not attend personally opening session of German parliamentary council because of current Berlin situation and present status Moscow negotiations. If Mil Govrs, as appears likely, receive in next few days directive to make, in shortest time possible, detailed arrangements for implementation of Moscow decisions, it would appear highly inappropriate for Western Mil Governors to leave Four-Power negotiations in Berlin to attend German parliamentary council meeting. Of course, there should be Mil Govt representation at Bonn. We leave to your discretion whether political advisers or other Mil Govt representative should attend Bonn meeting.

Marshall

1 Not printed.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.011/8–2848: Telegram

[Document 278]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent Berlin, August 28, 1948—4 p. m.

2176. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. Mytel 2173, August 271 and Deptel 1543, August 27.2 Clay has received message from Draper to effect that Department is cabling regarding French desire to exclude even Berlin German observers from Parliamentary Council’s meeting September 1. Clay has replied this morning as follows: “Have agreed with French that Berlin representatives may not be voting members nor can Berlin be a participating state in Constituent Assembly. However, I do not see how we can deny Berlin representatives the right to attend as observers and even to participate in discussion. At London and later here, it was contemplated Minister-Presidents would make some gestures to non-participating areas. If such attendance of Berlin representatives will provoke Soviets then a solution of our present problem is impossible. After all, western Germans do need some assurance that we are men not mice.”3

I have not yet received an indication of the Department’s views on this question and you will have noted Mytel 2172, August 27.4 I not only see no objection to attendance of Berlin delegates as observers but I feel that we would be playing directly into the hands of Soviet propagandists’ charge that our purpose is to split Germany if we do not permit some gesture to east German representatives. This is particularly true in the case of representatives from Berlin because we are able to grant latter facilities, whereas this is not the case in respect of representatives from the Soviet zone of occupation. I believe French apprehensions would be taken care of by limitation that Berlin representatives would not be voting members of parliamentary council.

Murphy

1 Not printed, but see footnote 3 above.

2  Ante, p. 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276].

3 The message quoted here was sent by General Clay as CC–5732, August 28. Telegram 2204, August 31, from Berlin, not printed, reported General Clay had announced on August 30 that Berlin participation in the Parliamentary Council with voting rights would not be in accord with the four-power status of Berlin, but that he had no objection to Berlin representatives attending the Council sessions as observers without voting rights (862.011/8–3148).

4 Not printed.

Editorial Note [Document 279]

Editorial Note

A Committee of Territorial Reorganization (sometimes referred to as the Boundary Commission) met at Mannheim on August 26–27 and agreed to recommend to the Ministers President of the three Western Zones of Occupation the merger of the three southwestern states of Baden, Wuerttemberg-Baden, and Wuerttemberg-Hohenzollern. At their meeting at Jagdschloss Niederwald (Ruedesheim) on August 31, the eleven Ministers President adopted the proposal of the Committee. No other boundary changes were recommended to or considered by the Ministers President.

Earlier in August, a Committee of Ten, appointed by the Ministers President of the three southwestern states, had conducted discussions regarding a possible union of the three states. Tentative agreement regarding such a merger was reached by the Committee at a meeting at Karlsruhe on August 24, but the agreement was not approved by the governments of the three states involved.

Editorial Note [Document 280]

Editorial Note

The Preparatory Constitutional Committee (Commission of Experts), which had been appointed by the Ministers President of the three Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, met at Herrenchiem-see, Bavaria, from August 10 to August 23, 1948. The Committee consisted of approximately thirty-five delegates and was under the chairmanship of Dr. Anton Pfeiffer. The final report of the Committee (Bericht über den Verfassungskonvent auf Herrenchiemsee von 10. bis 23. August 1948), which comprised several hundred pages, was presented to and accepted by the Ministers President at their meeting at Jagdschloss Niederwald (Ruedesheim) on August 31. Included as an appendix to the Report was a complete draft constitution, subsequently referred to as the “Chiemsee draft” or the “Chiemsee proposal”. The body of the Report consisted of an extensive analysis of the considerations underlying the draft constitution and a commentary on individual articles of the draft. For the English text of the Chiemsee draft as translated and summarized by the Civil Administration Division of OMGUS, see Documents on the Creation of the German Federal Constitution, pages 64–77. Ambassador Murphy transmitted to the Department of State a summary of the Chiemsee report as an enclosure to his despatch 1335, September 11, from Berlin, neither printed (862.011/9–1148). In a report dated August 31, not printed, Carl J. Friedrich, Government Affairs Expert of OMGUS, reviewed the work of the Preparatory Constitutional Committee and observed that the result of the Committee’s work was gratifying from the standpoint of American policy. The Chiemsee proposals were clearly those of a democratic constitution, the governmental structure was definitely of a federal type providing for eventual German unity, the rights of the states were protected, adequate central authority was provided, and individual rights and freedoms were effectively guaranteed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–3148).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.011/9–148: Telegram

[Document 281]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, September 1, 1948—midnight.

2213. Together with UK and French PolAds and representatives from MG and staff this mission, I attended today the opening session of the Parliamentary Council at Bonn. While no American officers were there in uniform, several UK and French and Belgian officers in uniform attended.

As the Department is aware the Parliamentary Council is composed of 65 members selected by the 11 western German states and divided according to following political party affiliations: CDU 27, SPD, 27; Democrats,1 5, Deutsche Party, 2; KPD 2 and Zentrum, 2.

In his address of greeting Minister President Karl Arnold of North Rhine–Westphalia emphasized new beginning of German statehood represented by Parliamentary Council even though, through no fault of Germans, the Soviet Zone, Polish administered territories and Saar could not yet participate. He stressed democratic origin and nature of Council and opportunity it has to give Germany provisional government to take place in family of nations. He turned over to Council preparatory work done by Ministers President and their representatives. Minister President Stock of Hesse then sketched out reconstitution of German Government under occupation from local and Land units through US Zone Laenderrat and UK Zonal Beirat to Bizonal Economic Council and this gathering. Stock said that while all previous stages had been accomplished as result of MG decisions, this one stemmed from agreement of Germans with the MG after Allied Governments at London had provided framework within which Germans could act. Stock rejected and threw back all charges of splitting Germany, saying Germans from all areas where they could decide freely, including Berlin, were represented at Bonn.

The keynote of both Arnold and Stock speeches was the rebirth of Germany under a system of “freedom, law and peace” which would lead to the political, economic and social reconstruction of the German state. The basic law which it would be the duty of the Council to prepare should represent the first step toward eventual German unity. Germany had before it a long road of reconstruction, and Arnold spoke of the atonement yet to come.

After these speeches and orchestral interludes, Parliamentary Council moved to its permanent hall, newly repaired teachers college, where under the chairmanship of its oldest member, Schoenfelder (SPD, Hamburg), it constituted itself. CDU leader Konrad Adenauer was elected president and Schoenfelder first vice president, together with two other vice presidents, unopposed and all by acclamation, with the two Communist members abstaining.

Carlo Schmid for SPD faction then paid tribute to Berlin fight for freedom and introduced resolution to seat the 5 Berlin delegates in advisory role.2 This was greeted with enthusiastic applause and seconded by Anton Pfeiffer for CDU, center and democratic party factions who declared that CDU had independently prepared similar resolution. Before motion could be voted, Max Reimann (KPD) rose to point of order. He hysterically denounced Council for splitting Germany, branded it illegal and undemocratic, and said that its very meeting embarrassed the relations among occupying powers which the KPD was anxious to better. A delegate from the floor called out “You have neglected that for 3 years.” Reimann introduced resolution that Council should dissolve itself and let democratic party leaders contact Peoples Council to constitute truly national democratic constitutional assembly. Chairman proposed that with voting on Schmid resolution Council should be constituted under permanent officers. Reimann however angrily demanded and took floor amidst rising tempers, repeated his denunciations and insisted on immediate vote “to put the splittings on record”. His resolution was overwhelmingly defeated and Schmid resolution carried, both against two Communist votes.

Adenauer then took chair and gave brief ‘and dignified speech reiterating main points of Arnold and Stock speeches and asking Berlin delegates to take their seats. This mission’s delegates were obliged to return to Berlin at this point of debate. Communists wanted to read declaration but were instructed by Adenauer to wait until agenda was completed.

The proceedings were conducted earnestly and in dignified simplicity which augurs well for successful accomplishment of task of drafting German provisional constitutional act.

Sent Department as 2213; repeated London 554, Paris 568, Department pass Moscow 465.

Murphy

1 i.e., Free Democratic Party (FDP) in the British Zone and in Bavaria; Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) in Berlin and Hesse.

2 For the text of Schmid’s resolution, see O. M. von der Gablentz, editor, Documents on the Status of Berlin, 1944–1959 (München: R. Oldenbourg Verlag, 1959), p. 102.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Beam) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1648

[Document 282]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Beam)

personal and secret Frankfurt, September 16, 1948.

Dear Jake : We are concerned over a tendency of the Parliamentary Council at Bonn to expand its activities beyond the terms of its reference.1 The latest development is the resolution regarding the Berlin situation which was passed yesterday,2 The Council is also occupying itself with reparations matters.

Last evening Clay, incensed over the Berlin resolution, was all for some public denunciation on his part of their action. I believe I have dissuaded him, but I am not sure. While I share his feeling, my advice is that he and Robertson call old man Adenauer down here and possibly some of us would also have talks with Reuter and Kaisen, and Schmid, for the purpose of driving home to these gentlemen that they are doing their own cause damage by distorting the use of the Parliamentary Council to purposes for which it is not intended. As you know, there isn’t a great deal that we can teach these people about small-time party politics, and that particular form of indoor sport is developing too rapidly to suit my taste. There is an obvious tendency to play around with the Parliamentary Council for party political purposes, and there is, of course, a great deal of jockeying by individuals for place. A number of them see in the present circumstances a good opportunity to make capital over such issues as reparations and the Berlin situation, and there is a tendency to drag heels on the constitutional work for which the Council is designed.

Yesterday at the meeting we had with the German Bi-Zone officials at Frankfurt I also detected a certain discouragement on their part. Obviously, the impending formation of a West German Government, if it is impending, leaves the present Bi-Zonal group fairly well suspended in the air as far as their own individual futures are concerned. This is reflected in their approach to the job in hand. We had a long dissertation from several of them yesterday and I find a growing tendency on their part also to take for granted the U.S. financial contribution, and to regard what they are now getting as a minimum which is to be expanded on in the years to come. While they went through the form of telling us that they were grateful for the larger ECA allocation of $414,000,000, which as you know was obtained only after a terrific wrangle in Paris where it had been contemplated to give the Bi-Zonal area only $364,000,000 with an unfavorable differential of $90,000,000 on foreign trade account, I do not believe that the Germans realize how difficult it was to get this money. As they become more and more convinced that Western Germany is the key to European recovery I am sure that their demands will increase.

The Germans, of course, also are most eager to get rid of JEIA, and miss no opportunity to criticise that organization. Logan’s people, on the other hand, do freeze the Germans out it seems to me, and there is a lack of coordination. The JEIA people know that the Germans don’t like JEIA and, of course, some of the people in JEIA would like to keep those particular jobs.

Sincerely yours,

Robert Murphy

1 After holding its opening session on September 1 (see telegram 2213, September 1, from Berlin, supra), the Parliamentary Council held further plenary sessions on September 8, 9, and 15. For excerpts from some of the speeches delivered at the September 8 and 9 sessions, see Documents on the Creation of a German Federal Constitution, pp. 77–86. Ten Committees concerned with the consideration of individual constitutional questions began meeting on September 15.

2 In special session on September 15, the Parliamentary Council passed a resolution condemning, in the name of all West German political parties except the Communists, the repressive conduct of Soviet authorities in East Germany in connection with recent Berlin anti-Communist demonstrations. For the text of the declaration, see Documents on the Creation of a German Federal Constitution, p. 87. According to a draft telegram prepared by Ambassador Murphy but never sent, American and British authorities advised against the declaration as a matter extraneous to the Parliamentary Council’s prime function and because of the possibility that the Council’s final document could be attacked as being biased. General Clay considered issuing a strong press statement condemning the Council’s action, but was dissuaded by Ambassador Murphy. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1848)

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Beam) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1648

[Document 283]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Beam)

[Extract]

personal and secret [Frankfurt,] September 16, 1948.

Dear Jake : I attach a copy of a letter addressed by General Koenig both to General Robertson and to General Clay.1 You will note that he is critical of the tendency of the Parliamentary Council to go beyond its terms of reference and he objects to the admission of the Berlin representatives as consultants. He also objects to the delegates regarding themselves as representatives of the parties rather than of the Laender, and he believes also that the delegates do not show the proper attitude in regard to federalism.

The letter also contains a reference to the implementation of certain features of the London Agreements, especially the work of the committees which were established as you know by the three Military Governors, and a reference to the so-called harmonization of economic and financial policies in the Western Zones pending Tri-Zonal fusion. Koenig plans to organize what he refers to as an adequately staffed mission, including German experts, to conduct negotiations and continue the work of implementing the London Agreements so that there will be close coordination up to the time that the Tri-Zone is definitely established.

I attended a meeting last Monday at Gen. Koenig’s headquarters in Berlin at which time the contents of this letter were discussed. Robertson was pretty frigid about it and obviously did not like the letter, nor did General Clay. Both felt that General Koenig who was suffering from the gout was bored waiting in Berlin on account of the Moscow negotiations and had nothing better to do so that he took occasion to write the attached letter. However, there was a useful discussion of the subject matter and a clarification of views regarding the work of the Parliamentary Council. Koenig was definitely told, however, that neither Clay nor Robertson was able to establish the committees to implement the London Agreements at Frankfurt, as suggested by General Koenig, because under the circumstances both Robertson and Clay maintain the personnel they use for this purpose at Berlin. Until present circumstances change, if they do, it is not possible to have this personnel both at Frankfurt and Berlin. Therefore, it would be necessary for General Koenig to accommodate his organization to that situation.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Sincerely yours,

Robert Murphy

1 Not printed.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.032/9–2348: Telegram

[Document 284]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

restricted Berlin, September 23, 1948—7 p. m.

2375. Following are recent developments at Parliamentary Council in Bonn.

Significant decision was reached by Committee on Basic Questions (Grundsatzfragen) in determining that field of basic civil rights (Grundrechte) should be reserved to federal rather than Land constitutions and in accepting principle that such civil rights will take precedence not only over administrative and judicial determinations, as in Weimar Constitution, but also over legislative enactments. Subcommittee was established to formulate basic civil rights.

Organization Committee discussed question of second parliamentary chamber, specifically whether it should be in form of federal council or senate. SPD favored latter and CDU/CSU former.

During 20-minute plenary session of Parliamentary Council on Wednesday, September 22 agenda was approved against opposition only of Communists, and an 11-man committee created on FDP initiative to deal with revision of Laender boundaries. No date was set for next plenary session.

An Electoral Law Committee under chairmanship Dr. Becker (LDP) discussion centered on important distinction between vote by single constituency majority or by proportional representation. Dr. Diedrichs (SPD) in supporting a “refined form” of proportional representation and Dr. Kroll (CSU) who favored single constituency majority vote stressed that their views were personal rather than party.1

Committee for Questions of Competence (Zustaendigkeitsfragen) resolved that federal government should have exclusive legislative jurisdiction over following: Foreign relations, citizenship for federal state and Laender, freedom of movement, extradition, passports, immigration and emigration, unified customs and trade, currency questions, freedom of movement for goods traffic, weights and measures, copyrights, printing rights and industrial legal protection (patents, trade marks, etc.). Basic concept that federal law takes precedence over state law was established. Committee also ruled that in instances where legislative power lies with federal state, Laender would be enabled to legislate only if authorized by federal government and if latter had not already exercised its legislative authority in that specific field.

Discussions in committees and decisions reached to date clearly indicate growing favor for concept of reasonably strong central state as compared with extreme federalism. No doubt in future committee meetings and plenary sessions there will be considerable political horse-trading with respect to these powers but it seems evident that extreme federalist views are being increasingly pushed into background.2

Sent Department as 2375; repeated London 656; Paris 67.

Murphy

1 Telegram 2390, September 25, from Berlin, not printed, reported that in the Electoral Law Committee, the Social Democrat, Free Democrat, and Communist spokesmen voted for proportional representation while the Christian Democratic Union favored single constituencies (862.00/9–2548).

2 Telegram 2390, September 25, from Berlin, reported that there were indications that Christian Democratic leaders were dragging their heels in Bonn in the expectation that delay would favor their party in future elections. On the other hand, the Social Democrats favored going ahead as rapidly as possible and having a draft constitution ready by November 1.

Draft Letter From the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany to the President of the Parliamentary Council (Adenauer) EUR Files: Lot 52 D 324: File—G–801 Govt

[Document 285]

Draft Letter From the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany to the President of the Parliamentary Council (Adenauer)1

[Berlin ?,] 29th September 1948.

Dear Herr Adenauer : The Parliamentary Council has been advised by the Ministers President that on the basis of the London agreement it is charged by the Military Governors of the United States, the United Kingdom and France with the preparation of a basic Law (Provisional Constitution) for ratification by the German states after it has received the approval of the Military Governors.

It cannot be determined whether the letter was also signed by General Robertson and General Koenig and actually sent to Adenauer.

The jurisdiction of the Parliamentary Council conferred by the Military Governors is limited to this field. The Military Governors wish it to be clearly understood that the Parliamentary Council has no authority to depart from the task with which it is charged.

_________________________
(P. Koenig , Général D’Armée.)

_________________________
(Lucius D. Clay , General.)

__________________________
(B. H. Robertson , General.)

1 The source text was transmitted by Ambassador Murphy to Jacob Beam under cover of the following letter dated September 28: “Remembering our previous messages regarding the action to be taken by the three Western Military Governors, as a result of the resolution passed by the Parliamentary Council at Bonn on the subject of the Berlin situation, General Clay has now signed with my concurrence the joint letter dated 29 September addressed to Herr Adenauer, copy of which is attached.”

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Forrestal) 033.1100/10–148

[Document 286]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Forrestal)

confidential Washington, October 1, 1948.

Dear Jim : Yesterday afternoon Senators Fulbright and Scott W. Lucas reported to me at length about their trip to Europe, including their visit to Berlin. They were very complimentary about the job General Lucius D. Clay is doing but expressed serious concern with the impression they received in conversation with OMGUS governmental experts that the U.S. authorities in Germany favor the principle of proportional representation in the drafting of the future constitution for western Germany. Both Senators felt very strongly that the proposals reportedly encouraged by our authorities are theoretical, textbook procedures which have proved unworkable in our own unhappy experience with proportional representation. They mentioned in particular that New York State had tried it and had abandoned it this year. It was their opinion that the new German constitution, if it accepted the principle of proportional representation and multiple parties as a basis for a parliamentary system, would play directly into the hands of the communist and the splinter parties by enabling them to control blocks of votes and thereby put them in a position to obstruct and disrupt the German government. Both Senators asked me to take this matter up with our military authorities here, as they themselves proposed to do.

Our Department has received no information about OMGUS policy regarding this question and we cannot be sure that our State Department mission in Germany has been kept informed, since we have had no reports from Ambassador Murphy. In our own planning for recent sessions of the Council of Foreign Ministers dealing with Germany, the Department has felt it should reserve its decision with respect to proportional representation until duly representative Germans had an opportunity to debate the matter fully. We appreciate that proportional representation is a part of German experience but we understand that a large section of the German population became disillusioned with its practicability because of its operation under the Weimar Republic. We are skeptical of the merits of proportional representation as a device for insuring democratic representation and in any event we would oppose the adoption of proportional representation in a form which would lead to the fragmentation of political parties, tending to render impossible the existence of responsible and efficient democratic government. We believe our authorities here should be kept fully informed about any OMGUS policy respecting the question of proportional representation.

Both Senators Fulbright and Lucas urged that former Senator Robert LaFollette be assigned to the task of advising the Germans in the drafting of their constitution. They felt that his long background in the practical aspects of political and governmental organization would be invaluable if he could be sent over promptly. I have not, of course, approached Mr. LaFollette and I do not know whether he would be available but I strongly recommend that an attempt be made to obtain his services for this job as I am sure he could be of great assistance.

I would appreciate receiving your views concerning the questions raised by Senators Fulbright and Lucas and the suggestion they made to me. I am sending a copy of this letter to Kenneth Royall.

Sincerely yours,

Robert A. Lovett

Resolution by the Conference of the Ministers President of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany USPolAd Germany Files: File—801.1 Ministers President Meetings

[Document 287]

Resolution by the Conference of the Ministers President of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany 1

Jagdschloss Niederwald, [undated.]

Resolution on the Question Raised by Document II2 Adopted by the Ministers President on 1 October 1948

The Ministers President of the Laender of the American, British and French Zones of Occupation propose the following in accordance with Document II handed to them at Frankfurt on 1 July 1948: (a) In the question of reorganization of the Laender Baden, Wuerttemberg–Baden and Wuerttemberg–Hohenzollern the procedure according to the resolutions contained in the annex shall be applied.

(b) A separate Land Suedschleswig shall not be created. The creation of so small and not viable a Land would in their view but impair a sound federal organization of Germany and moreover be in conflict with the guiding principles of Document II.

(c) Prior to the ratification of the Basic Law the Laender concerned in each case shall settle their enclaves and exclaves as well as reunite the communities now crossed by zonal borders.

The Lindau question is deemed a question not affected by the problem of reorganization of the Laender boundaries. Therefore, regardless of the prevailing occupation situation, the administrative community between Bavaria and the Kreis Lindau should be reestablished.

Although the Ministers President have come to the conclusion that, also beyond the proposals made under (a) and (c), alterations of Laender boundaries are desirable, the majority of the Ministers President consider it advisable to refrain from further proposals, holding the view that solutions which could be regarded as satisfactory and lasting would presently meet with insurmountable difiiculties and that further transitional solutions could not now be justified because of the constitutional and administrative disadvantages connected therewith.

On the other hand, the minority believes that, beyond the proposals listed under (a) and (c), already now further changes should be proposed, since the present conditions were unsatisfactory and for that reason even a provisional solution would represent an improvement.

The eleven Ministers President are agreed that the available time is insufficient for proposing solutions satisfactory to all concerned and therefore permanent for an over-all settlement of the inner-German boundary situation.

Christian Stock
Minister President of Hesse
Chairman of the Ministers President Conference

Leo Wohleb
State President of Baden

Dr. Hans Ehard
Minister President of Bavaria

Wilhelm Kaisen
Senate President of Bremen

Max Brauer
Buergermeister of Hamburg

Heinrich Kopf
Minister President of Lower Saxony

Karl Arnold
Minister President of North Rhine Westphalia

Peter Altmeier
Minister President of Rhineland–Palatinate

Hermann Luedemann
Minister President of Schleswig–Holstein

Dr. Reinhold Maier
Minister President of Wuerttemberg–Baden

Dr. Gebhard Mueller
State President of Wuerttemberg–Hohenzollern

[Annex]

Proposals of the heads of the governments of Baden, Wuerttemberg–Baden and Wuerttemberg–Hohenzollern to the Conference of the 11 Ministers President, for forwarding to the three Military Commanders of the Western German zones of occupation, on the reorganization of the three southwestern German Laender in accordance with the resolution of the Conference of the Ministers President of 31 August 19483 and pursuant to the resolutions adopted at Buehl on 16 September 19484 and at Bebenhausen on 28 September 1948.

A. The three heads of government have agreed to recommend to the board of the 11 Ministers President of the Western zones of occupation to propose to the Military Commanders the following question for a plebiscite to be held in the three Laender concerned: “Do you want the three Laender Baden, Wuerttemberg–Baden and Wuerttemberg–Hohenzollern to be merged in one Land in accordance with the following procedure?

An Assembly to be elected by the Landtage of the three Laender from among their members so that to every 100,000 inhabitants one deputy and to a rest number of at least 25,000 inhabitants one additional deputy shall fall, will work out the constitution of the new state and an election law for its first Landtag. Then the population of the three Laender will vote the adoption or rejection of the constitution pursuant to a voting law to be passed by the Assembly”.

The three heads of government hold the unanimous view that the question submitted shall be deemed affirmed only if in each of the former Laender (existing until 1945) Baden and Wuerttemberg (the latter inclusive of Hohenzollern) the majority of the votes cast, counted through separately, affirms the question.

B. The three heads of government recommend to the Conference of the Ministers President to propose to the Military Commanders that in case of rejection of the total merger at the first vote, a second vote take place on the following question: 1) Majority vote of the heads of the governments of Baden and Wuerttemberg–Hohenzollern: “Do you want the reestablishment of the former Land Baden and of the former Land Wuerttemberg (the latter inclusive of Hohenzollern)?”

Note: The merger is considered accomplished in each of these Laender in which a majority votes in favor thereof.

2) Minority vote of the Minister President of Wuerttemberg–Baden: a) “Do you want the Land Wuerttemberg–Baden again separated and the former Laender Baden and Wuerttemberg, the latter inclusive of Hohenzollern, reestablished?

b) “Or do you desire the union of the Land Wuerttemberg–Hohenzollern with the Land Wuerttemberg–Baden?”

Note: As regards the vote on par. a, an affirmation of the question for all three Laender would require a majority of the votes counted through in the three Laender and in addition a majority of the persons voting in the Land section Nordbaden.

1 This document was subsequently submitted to the American, British, and French Military Governors. The date and mode of submission have not been determined. The source text is apparently a translation prepared by OMGUS. A copy of this document, lacking the names of the signatories, was transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 1586, November 5, from Ambassador Murphy in Berlin, not printed (862.00/11–548). In his despatch, Murphy noted that the majority of the Ministers President intended to propose no further changes in Laender boundaries. Murphy felt that the basic reason for the reluctance of the Ministers President to recommend changes was the apprehension that temporary considerations. Such as the attitudes of the various military governments, would play too large a role in decisions on changes of Lander boundaries. Murphy reported further that at a meeting of the American, British, and French Military Governors on October 30, General Robertson stated that his government was not disposed to demand any further Laender boundary changes, since such changes would delay the creation of a trizonal German government. (862.00/11–548)

2 Regarding “Document II” under reference here, see editorial note, p. 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255].

3 Regarding the meeting of the Ministers President at Niederwald (Ruedesheim) on August 31, see the editorial notes, pp. 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281].

4 Telegram 313, September 20, from the Consulate at Stuttgart, not printed, reported that at a meeting at Buehl, on September 16, the Ministers President of Wuerttemberg–Baden, Wuerttemberg–Hohenzollern, and South Baden agreed on the terms for two plebiscites regarding the creation of a new southwestern German state. The terms of the plebiscites are those set forth in this document. (862.00/9–2048)

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin 740.00119 Council/10–548: Telegram

[Document 288]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

secret Washington, October 6, 1948—6 p. m.

1694. Personal for Murphy from Saltzman and Hickerson. Dept believes US Mil Govt should support approval recommendation consolidation Wuerttemberg, Baden and Hohenzollern (urtel 2443, Oct 51 ).

Although such consolidation might in a sense be considered deviation from traditional pattern, nevertheless state thus established would neither be too large in area nor in population in comparison with other states. In fact, its size would coordinate this area better in new general pattern of German Laender. Former boundary bet Baden and Wuerttemberg was irregular and arbitrary. Consolidation would facilitate local administration and create a state economically more balanced than any its components.

We understand in accordance with Part 2, Annex F London Report2 that people affected areas will have opportunity vote on proposal.

Lovett

1 Not printed; it reported that the Ministers President at their meeting on October 1 had decided to make only one affirmative recommendation regarding the change of Laender boundaries, i.e. the consolidation of Wuerttemberg Baden, Wuerttemberg Hohenzollern and South Baden. Ambassador asked for views on the attitude to be taken by U.S. military government authorities in the matter (862.014/10–548). Regarding the proposed changes in Laender boundaries, see the Resolution of the Conference of Ministers President, supra.

2 See p. 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205], footnote 1.

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Under Secretary of the Army (Draper) 862.011/10–2348: Telegram

[Document 289]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Under Secretary of the Army (Draper)

confidential
priority [Berlin,] October 8, 1948.

CC–6242. To Dept of the Army Personal for Draper from CINCEUR signed Clay. Regarding your W–90340.1 You are absolutely correct about our policy regarding proportional representation. We have never in the past and do not now favor proportional representation. In the early days we faced this issue and decided that whatever our own preferences might be that both because of Germany’s historical acceptance of proportional representation and the fact that it is widely used in democratic countries all over the world made it impossible for us to maintain that it was so undemocratic as to necessitate its prohibition. In working with the Laender Constitutional Conventions we urged the insertion of 10% clauses to prevent fragmentation of political parties under PR in order that we might mitigate precisely the conditions to which Senators Fulbright and Lucas refer.

Litchfield explained all of this to the Senators and mentioned also that today in the Constitutional Assembly in Bonn there is considerable debate about proportional representation and a real possibility that for future national elections PR will be either eliminated or substantially modified. Insofar as it is consistent with our general policy of adhering to the London agreements regarding the constitution, we are urging the Germans in Bonn to so modify or eliminate proportional representation.

I believe our policy in the past has been sound and believe we should continue to adhere to it. While we do not personally believe in proportional representation we have no authority under the London agreements nor in my judgment would it ever have been wise to have arbitrarily prohibited this system.2

[ Clay ]

1 In his message W–90340, October 6, to General Clay at Berlin, not printed, Under Secretary of the Army Draper explained that Senators Fulbright and Lucas, who had just returned from a visit to Germany, had expressed to him concern about proportional representation. Fulbright and Lucas had gotten the impression that OMGUS authorities favored this principle in connection with the drafting of a German constitution. The Senators feared that proportional representation would play into the hands of the Communists and splinter parties and would obstruct and disrupt the forthcoming German government. Draper had the impression that OMGUS had probably advised against proportional representation. (862.011/10–2348)

2 In his message W–91403, October 26, to General Clay at Berlin, not printed, Under Secretary Draper replied that this message had been discussed with Secretary Royall, Under Secretary Lovett, and with Senators Fulbright, Lucas, and Hayden. All were in agreement with General Clay’s point of view, but all hoped that every effort, short of directing the Germans, would be made by OMGUS to avoid proportional representation. USPolAd Germany Files, 800 Germany)

Record Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting of the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, Frankfurt, October 16, 1948 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–1748

[Document 290]

Record Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting of the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, Frankfurt, October 16, 1948 1

[Extract]

secret [Undated.]

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17. There followed a lengthy discussion regarding Laender boundaries with General Noiret pointing out that the French believed in only one of two possible solutions regarding Wuerttemberg–Baden: (1) Consolidation of the two entire states, or (2) the establishment of two separate states with their former boundaries. General Clay pointed out that this would seem logical but that we had not contemplated imposing conditions on the Germans except that under the text of the London Agreements they were to adhere as much as possible to traditional patterns. The French referred again to their desire to refer this question back to the Ministers President requesting them to review their recommendations without the two veto restrictions regarding North Rhine Westphalia and Bavaria which are specified in Annex G of the London Agreements.

18. General Robertson said that while he had been willing to go along with this French proposal he now objected to it because he had discovered that Ambassador Massigli in London had approached the British Government on the same question and he felt that now he could do no more than refer the question back to his government. General Robertson also said that in 1947 he had rearranged certain Laender boundaries in the British Zone abolishing certain small states such as Oldenburg, Schaumburg–Lippe and Lippe–Detmold. He had given an assurance of a referendum after five years to see whether Lippe–Detmold would wish to be attached to lower Saxony or North Rhine Westphalia. Territory now forms part of North Rhine Westphalia. Military Governors agreed that Robertson’s promise should be honored.

19. General Robertson referred to a thought which he had in mind as to whether our governments have considered the question what form, if any, of declaration should be issued at the time of an establishment of a Western German government regarding the termination of hostilities such as in the case of Austria. This had nothing to do with the question of a peace treaty. (I think this question should be taken up with the Department of State.)

20. General Noiret then exposed [expressed?] the French apprehension regarding the trend in the Parliamentary Council at Bonn toward centralization of finance and police powers. General Robertson pointed out that Annex H 1(d) of the London Agreements2 specifies the limitations which the Germans must observe and he saw no cause for alarm. Mr. Litchfield pointed out that the conversations on this subject at Bonn thus far had occurred only on subcommittee level and he saw no cause for alarm. Generals Clay and Robertson also pointed out that the provision of paragraph 1c, Annex H, requests the Military Governors to decide in detail what powers the federal government should have as regards police. It was agreed that work on this subject should be undertaken as soon as possible.

Robert Murphy

1 The source text was sent to the Department of State as an enclosure to a brief transmittal letter of October 17 from Ambassador Murphy to Assistant Secretary of State Saltzman, not printed. The source text does not contain a list of participants, but the record indicates that the discussion was carried between Generals Clay, Robertson, and Noiret (substituting for General Koenig). Also present for the United States were Ambassador Murphy and OMGUS Finance Adviser Jack Bennett.

For another portion of this record dealing with the problem of trizonal fusion, see p. 676. Other topics dealt with at this meeting included the draft occupation statute, foreign investment policy, and the Berlin currency question. For documentation on these matters, see pp. 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373] ff: and 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416] ff., and the index entry “Berlin Blockade: Currency for Berlin”.

2 The reference here is to document TRI/15 (Final), May 12, p. 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], which was included as Annex H to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, June 1, p. 309.

Notes Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting of the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, at Frankfurt, November 4, 1948 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–448

[Document 291]

Notes Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting of the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, at Frankfurt, November 4, 1948 1

[Extracts]

top secret [Undated.]

General Koenig opened the meeting by referring to the French preoccupation which he had expressed at the end of the last meeting of the Military Governors at Frankfurt on October 302 regarding the general trend manifested in the Bizone. General Koenig stated specifically that his views are supported by his Government. In referring to the general evolution of the work of the Military Governors since the London Agreements, General Koenig referred to: (1) The inclusion of Berlin in Western Germany. Because of the deadlock in the Berlin situation and the ACC, the idea at London was to organize the three western zones. There then developed the blockade situation and now we find Western Germany drawn towards Berlin. Whether we like it or not, we permitted Berlin representatives, to come to Bonn. General Koenig said that he was told by Mr. Schuman that Reuter had proposed that Berlin should pay part of the Bonn expenses. It is clear, said General Koenig, that the Berlin representatives want to play a larger role at Bonn and draw Western Germany to Berlin. Berlin for the Germans is a symbol of nationalism and military traditions—it was the capital of Prussia. This evolution was not intended by the London Agreements.

(2) Regarding the Bonn Parliamentary Council, the text of the Constitutional Law has now been studied for more than a month. The first tendencies do not please us. General Koenig referred to the financial powers under consideration for allocation to the Central Government and the general tendency to give a higher degree of centralization and powers to the Federal Government than the French would like. General Koenig also referred to the distribution of powers between the lower and upper houses, emphasizing that the French preferred that both possess equal powers.

(3) General Koenig said that there is a matter which is even more disturbing and that is the present “climate” in Western Germany. Now Germany has its chance and one is looking forward to the reconstruction but, said General Koenig, that chance is really too beautiful. He mentioned concern on the subject of the ownership of the Ruhr mines and coal and steel industries; protection of allied interests in Germany; the prohibition and limitation of certain industries and reparations, merely indicating that he found the trend under these headings unsatisfactory. We know, said General Koenig, that a series of decisions are now in progress in the Bizone and as France is not a member, it is not consulted in the preparation of these decisions. Therefore, if later we participate in a Trizone, we will be faced with a whole series of decisions which may be contrary to our interests.

General Koenig stated in conclusion that if in the coming weeks things do not better reconcile themselves with French views, he probably will not be able to approve the Bonn text which may be presented.

General Clay then stated that having listened to General Koenig’s remarks, he felt that the Military Governors at this point should stop negotiations on trizonal matters and report General Koenig’s views to governments. General Koenig said that he had the right to state his preoccupations and General Clay of course the privilege of reporting to his government. General Koenig, however, wished to be frank.

General Clay said he stood by the London Agreements and that he would live up to them. General Koenig had brought up the question of reparations and said that he was aware of U.S. policy and Mr. Hoffman’s preoccupation. General Clay was not authorized to negotiate on question of German government if reparations are in question as the latter matter is now being handled on governmental level. General Clay found it necessary to remind General Koenig of the U.S. contribution of millions of dollars to support Germany and the desire of the U.S. to cease those payments as soon as possible. General Clay was not authorized to negotiate on this question. As far as Berlin is concerned, General Clay thought we stood for a unified Germany. He pointed out that it was noticeable in the recent Moscow–Berlin negotiations that the French were quite willing in the case of Berlin for the Soviet Zone Deutsche Notenbank to control the currency of Berlin but that in the discussions regarding the eventual control by the Bank Deutsche Laender of the currency of western Berlin, the French found objection. It could be inferred therefrom that the French were willing to see Berlin tied into eastern Germany but objected to its being [tied] into the West. General Clay said he would immediately report to his Government and request instructions.

General Robertson said that he had this in common with General Clay. He found it difficult, even impossible, to reply to Part (3) of General Koenig’s remarks which concerned major political issues. He recalled having said a long time ago in ACC that the only people who eventually would get anything out of this whole business would be the Germans, who would profit by Allied disaccord. Regarding (1) and (2), these matters would require discussion. He said that if General Koenig meant that Berlin should not be the capital of Germany, he believed that Koenig was tilting at windmills.

General Robertson felt that General Koenig was justified in bringing up the question of the Berlin representatives participating in the Bonn Parliamentary Council. It had been agreed to permit them to attend as observers only. Robertson said that he had not studied the question of Berlin pretentions to representation in a future German Parliament. This would be for discussion. Robertson felt that we should avoid a situation where a constitutional text would be presented by the Germans and disapproved by the Military Governors. If Military Governors have a strong objection to what the Germans are doing, we should advise them. Robertson felt that he is bound by the letter of instructions and guidance to the Military Governors in the London Agreements. He felt that some thinking at Bonn seems to go beyond the scope of the London Agreements. He referred to Paragraph (d) in the letter of guidance to the Military Governors. He said to Koenig that the latter undoubtedly believed that the powers demanded by the Central Government were large and that naturally the expenses would be in proportion. While Robertson would be willing to discuss this, he would not be prepared to go farther than the text of the London Agreements.

General Koenig emphasized that he had not meant to be threatening. He said that would be ridiculous as we were all friendly. He did, however, think the moment right to indicate to the Germans that the text as now proposed would have to be disapproved.

General Clay said that he was not prepared now to say whether it was the right moment to intervene but he felt that General Koenig’s statement goes way beyond the question and that if what Koenig had said represented the actual position no German Government could succeed. General Clay said he must report the situation to his Government.

General Koenig said he had no objection and General Robertson said he agreed with General Clay.

[Here follow Ambassador Murphy’s notes on those portions of the discussion dealing with the Berlin currency question, possible financial contributions by the Laender of Western Germany to the support of West Berlin, the proposal for a Combined Travel Board, and the question of the treatment of German prisoners held at Spandau Prison under quadripartite agreement.]

Occupation Statute and Trizone Fusion

General Clay inquired whether General Koenig would be willing to send his representative to Berlin to sit on these committees for a straight period of about thirty days without interruption for the purpose of bringing these matters to a conclusion.

General Koenig said that as everyone knew he preferred Frankfurt. However, he agreed to send his representatives to sit on the committee regarding the occupation statute. He thought, however, with respect to tripartite control that not much progress would be accomplished at the present. He agreed to send Mr. Sabatier to Berlin to sit on committee dealing with the occupation statute only.

Land Boundaries

There was a lengthy discussion of the question of Land Boundaries with particular reference to Wuerttemberg-Baden. General Koenig raised the question of Wuerttemberg-Baden and the three types of referendum included in the recommendations of the Ministers President. He wanted it understood that should the first referendum, which would propose the consolidation of the two states of Wuerttemberg and Baden, be disapproved by vote that the Military Governors would agree that a second referendum would be had in which the electorate would have an opportunity to say whether the former states of Wuerttemberg and Baden should be restored. General Clay said that he could not agree to this proposition as he felt that the second referendum would really not be necessary but that he and General Koenig could make this decision administratively. He had no doubt in his own mind that if the Germans did not want to consolidate the two states they would wish for the restoration of Wuerttemberg and Baden. It was the occupying powers who had disturbed this administrative outline in the first place and there could be no doubt that the Germans would want the consolidation [restoration?] if they did not want the two states consolidated. General Koenig said he would report this matter to Paris.

There was a discussion regarding the provision to be made in the German constitution for changes in Land Boundaries. The French delegate stated the apprehension that if the Germans were authorized by the Constitution to make changes in the Land Boundaries that there was a possibility that every two months some change would be suggested which the Allies could not accept. That the Land Boundaries should remain until the peace treaty had been concluded, the French position is that during the period between the German Constitution and the conclusion of the peace treaty, that the German Land Boundaries should remain unchanged.

General Robertson said that he could find no reason to be alarmed over the French apprehension because if the Germans did come forth with recommendations for changes in the Land Boundaries, it would be easy enough for the Military Governors to approve or disapprove.

Military Governors agreed to meet again at Frankfurt at 2:30 pm November 16, 1948.

Robert Murphy

1 The source text was transmitted to Washington under cover of a letter from Ambassador Murphy to Jacob Beam, dated November 4, which in the main read as follows: “I have written to Ambassador Caffery and Chip Bohlen in Paris saying that ‘I am in doubt whether the views expressed by General Koenig actually do represent Foreign Office and French Government thinking. We hear a number of stories regarding Mr. Schuman’s conversations with the Germans and of alleged differences of views between Mr. Schuman and others including General Koenig. We would like to be sure that General Koenig in stating these views really does represent French Government position. I have a feeling that Mr. Schuman has; opinions of his own and that they may not always coincide with General Koenig’s.’”

In his telegram 5818, November 10, from Paris, repeated as 694 to Berlin, not printed, Ambassador Caffery reported that Premier Schuman had told him that the French Government had no intention of withdrawing its agreement to proceed with the carrying out of the London Agreements. Schuman did say that the French would be upset if German reconstruction developed “too rapidly” to the detriment of France. Schuman promised to communicate with General Koenig: (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1048).

For General Clay’s report on this meeting of the Military Governors, see telegram 2686, November 5, from Berlin, infra.

2 For General Clay’s report on the October 30 meeting of the Military Governors, see message CC–6525, November 1, p. 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382].

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–548: Telegram

[Document 292]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret Berlin, November 5, 1948—8 p. m.

2686. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. As result of meeting I attended at Frankfurt yesterday of three Western military governors, Clay has sent following message to Department of Army which I repeated for your information. I am forwarding by air pouch more complete notes1 which I made of the discussions. Clay would be glad to have Paris’s confidential comment re the question whether General Koenig’s remarks reflect view of French Government.

“Yesterday I attended conference with Koenig and Robertson which had been called by Koenig to discuss the general situation, particularly progress within Parliamentary Council at Bonn. The conference was very disturbing to me because it plainly indicated state of mind of French representative in Germany which does not seem consistent with agreements and statements of French Government. Koenig expressed his apprehension with respect to tendency of Parliamentary Council to give too much financial responsibility to the central government and also to a tentative provision for partial participation by Berlin in Western German Government. Obviously his apprehensions with respect to these provisions of the constitution have validity and are certainly open to discussion within the terms of London agreement. However Koenig did not stop at this point, but continued to say that the ‘climate’ in Germany was becoming such that he had grave doubts as to whether he would be able to approve a constitution and the subsequent formation of Western German Government.

He then elaborated to say that the proposed change in reparations program was an example of what he meant by ‘climate’. He also stated that Germany, and particularly the Ruhr, was being allowed to come back too rapidly. In this connection, he expressed himself particularly as dissatisfied with the too lenient policies of US and UK with respect to prohibited and restricted industries. He raised again questions of international ownership of Ruhr mines and special protection for foreign interests. He further expressed himself as dissatisfied with the Land boundary proposals of the Minister Presidents although done within framework of the London agreement. Finally he expressed himself as bitterly opposed to any drawing of Berlin to the West, not only through its limited inclusion in Western German Government but also to its inclusion in Western German financial system. He clearly indicated that he did not desire Berlin to be considered as a part of the West and thereby tacitly admitted that loss of Berlin by the West to the East would be of no concern. Concluded by stating that all of these conditions forced him to express doubt now as to his willingness to sign any constitution which might be submitted by the German officials.

In reply I stated that our position with respect to the constitution was clearly defined in London agreement and that we would join quickly in disapproving any German proposal which went beyond the London agreement. However we could not consider disapproving proposals which did not violate the London agreement.

I stated further that Koenig had brought up matters that were beyond our purview as military governors; that he knew full well that question of reparations was being determined at governmental level and that likewise Mr. Hoffman’s decisions in this respect would influence materially our determinations on prohibited and restricted industries. I further stated that I was not prepared to further discuss the constitutional questions if in fact Koenig’s actions with respect to the constitution and Western German Government were to be influenced by these other matters not within our purview. Moreover, I stated that I was unwilling to consider these constitutional questions under such an implied threat. Koenig then somewhat withdrew from his initial position, stating that he did not mean to imply that satisfactory solutions to these other proposals were basic to a satisfactory solution of the constitutional proposal, but that he did feel that the ‘climate’ was not good. I reminded Koenig that our rebuilding of Germany was essential for it to become self-sustaining and to relieve as soon as possible an intolerable burden upon the American people. General Robertson proposed that the two constitutional questions be referred immediately to a working party. I demurred to this proposal, stating that in view of General Koenig’s overall statement, I desired to report to my government and to receive further instructions before proceeding.

Obviously I do not expect further instructions, but I did not wish to rush into an agreed study of the constitutional questions as I felt that a delay might impress upon Koenig the seriousness with which we regard his overall attitude.

I do not believe that Koenig’s remarks reflect view of present French Government. Mr. Schuman has publicly expressed his willingness to reconsider question of reparations and has also acknowledged necessity for rebuilding German economy in interests of Europe. Nevertheless Koenig’s position will make it difficult to reconcile our views with respect to the constitution, the occupation statute, and trizonal fusion.

[Here follows General Clay’s report on the discussion regarding the Berlin currency question. For documentation on this topic see index entry “Berlin Blockade: Currency question”.]

Subsequently Koenig insisted that work on occupation statute be completed prior to further work on trizonal fusion, to which I consented, subject however to other studies such as prohibited and restricted industries likewise being deferred. In the discussion which followed Koenig finally agreed to concurrent studies on all questions.

I am reporting this conference in detail because it has indicated clearly what I have suspected for some time, and that is that Koenig is giving lukewarm support at best to London agreements and may be expected in next several months to try every possible way to delay and obstruct progress in their accomplishment.

At this conference we all agreed that treatment of Nuremberg prisoners at Spandau jail under quadripartite government was inhumane. We further agreed to advise our governments that we proposed to inform Soviet military administration that since the ACC was not functioning due to Soviet action, we considered that quadripartite control of Spandau under the ACC could not be sustained until ACC started functioning again. Thus, tripartitely, we would arrange for better prison management.” End Clay’s message.

Sent Department 2686, repeated Paris for Caffery and Bohlen 887.

Murphy

1 The notes under reference are printed supra.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1748: Telegram

[Document 293]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

[Extracts]1 secret Frankfurt, November 17, 1948—1 p.m.

266. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. I attended at Frankfurt yesterday a meeting of the three Military Governors for a discussion of the following subjects:2

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4. Koenig also discussed draft of provisional constitutional law, but suggested that the time had come to tell the Parliamentary Council at Bonn that it is taking the wrong road, that is, attempting to concentrate excessive powers particularly in finance field, in central government.3 Koenig also raised the question of the participation of Berlin. There was a lengthy discussion regarding the method which should be employed to insure that the German text as it eventually emanates from Bonn will be within the framework of the London agreement. General Clay pointed out that apart from the scanty information given to the Germans on July 1, they had never been adequately informed regarding the substance of the London agreements relating to this question. Robertson recommended that the Military Governors meet with the representatives of the Parliamentary Council for the purpose of informing them specifically regarding the features of Annex H, but this was disapproved and it was agreed that the political advisers should prepare an unsigned aide-mémoire in the form of guide and which would include paragraphs (A) to (F) Annex H.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8. Basic law (provisional constitution).4 There was a lengthy discussion of some features of the preliminary basic law text, particularly Article 47 regarding political parties and Article 62 regarding civil servants. British are particularly concerned regarding the question whether civil servants would be authorized under the new German constitution also to serve in the legislative branch. Robertson suggested that the Military Governors instruct the committee on administration of legislature to prepare a military government law which would prohibit civil servants being seated in legislatures. Koenig agreed and Clay agreed in principle subject to further study. It was agreed that this item would foe included in the aide-mémoire to be left with the Parliamentary Council by the Military Governors.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Murphy

1 For another portion of this telegram, reporting on the discussion of limited and prohibited indutries in Western Germany, see p. 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496].

2 For portions of General Clay’s report on this meeting dealing with the discussion of the work of the Committee on Allied Controls and the Tripartite Working Party on the Occupation Statute, see message CC–6781, November 18, from General Clay, p. 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]. Clay’s message also includes a report on the brief consideration by the Military Governors of a proposal to send to the Parliamentary Council a précis of the draft occupation statute.

3 Under consideration at this point was document TRIB/P(48)6, November 13, “Comparison of Letter of Advice to Military Governors with the first draft of the Basic Law”, a report of the Liaison Officers of the Military Governors to the Parliamentary Council. A copy of this document was transmitted to the Department of State by Ambassador Murphy as an enclosure to his letter of November 17 to John D. Hickerson, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1748). The “Letter of Advice” referred to here is document TRI/15 (Final), May 12, p. 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], which was appended to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, June 1, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], as Annex H.

4 Under consideration at this point was document TRIB/P(48) 8, November 13, “Preliminary Comments on the First Draft of the Basic Law”, a report prepared by the Liaison Officers of the Military Governors. A copy of this report was transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to Ambassador Murphy’s November 17 letter to John D. Hickerson, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1748). The first draft of the basic law was passed by the Main Committee of the Parliamentary Council in first reading between November 11 and December 10. This first draft together with summary presentations of the main German political parties and their votes, OMGUS and tripartite views and comments on specific articles, and comparisons with corresponding parts of the Weimar Constitution were prepared as a booklet by the Civil Affairs Division of OMGUS. A copy of this booklet is included in the files at 862.044/1–1949.

The Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany to the Parliamentary Council 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2348

[Document 294]

The Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany to the Parliamentary Council 1

November 22, 1948

Aide-Mémoire

1. “As you are well aware, the Parliamentary Council was convened in order to draft a democratic constitution which will establish for the participating states a governmental structure of federal type, will protect the rights of the participating states, provide adequate central authority and contain guarantees of individual rights and freedoms. During the last eleven weeks the Parliamentary Council in plenary session as well as in its several committees has freely discussed those principles and drafted a basic law (provisional constitution) which is now before the main committee.

2. In view of the advanced stage now reached in the work of the Parliamentary Council, the Military Governors consider it advisable at this time to give the Council some indication of the interpretation which they will apply to the general principles set out in Document No. 1.2 Since there are several ways in which democratic federal government can be obtained, they intend to consider the provisions of the basic law in their whole context. Nevertheless, they believe that the basic law should, to the maximum extent possible, provide: (a) for a Bicameral legislative system in which one of the houses must represent the individual states and must have sufficient power to safeguard the interests of the states;

(b) that the executive must only have those powers which are definitely prescribed by the constitution, and that emergency powers if any, of the executive must be so limited as to require prompt legislative or judicial review;

(c) that the powers of the federal government shall be limited to those expressly enumerated in the constitution and in any case, shall not include education, cultural and religious affairs, local government and public health (except in this last case, to secure such coordination as essential to safeguard the health of the people in the several states) that its powers in the field of public welfare be limited to those necessary for the co-ordination of social security measures, that its powers in the police field be limited to those especially approved by the Military Governors, during the occupation period;

(d) that the powers of the federal government in the field of public finance shall be limited to the disposal of monies including the raising of revenue for purposes for which it is responsible, that the federal government may set rates and legislate on the general principles of assessment with regard to other taxes for which the uniformity is essential. The collection and utilization of such taxes being left to the individual states, and that it may appropriate funds only for the purpose for which it is responsible under the constitution;

(e) that the constitution should provide for an independent judiciary to review federal legislation, to review the exercise of federal executive power, and to adjudicate conflicts between federal and land authorities as well as between land authorities, and to protect the civil rights and freedom of the individual;

(f) that the powers of the federal government to establish federal agencies for the execution and administration of its responsibilities should be clearly defined and should be limited to those fields in which it is clear that state implementation is impracticable;

(g) that each citizen has access to public office, with appointment and promotion being based solely on his fitness to discharge the responsibilities of the position, and that the Civil Service should be non-political in character;

(h) that a public servant if elected to the federal legislature, shall resign his office with the agency where he is employed before he accepts election.

3. The Military Governors will be guided by these principles in their final examination of the basic law (provisional constitution) and any subsequent amendments thereto, and they will consider the basic law (provisional constitution) as a whole in order to determine whether or not the broad requirements of Document 1 have been met.”

1 The source text was transmitted to the Department in airgram A–887, November 23, from Berlin, not printed. The aide-mémoire was left with Dr. Adenauer, the President of the Parliamentary Council, by the Liaison Officers of the Military Governors on November 22. The aide-mémoire was prepared and delivered by the Liaison Officers in accordance with the decision of the Military Governors at their meeting of November 16 (see telegram 266, November 17, from Frankfurt, p. 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]).

2 The reference here is to the statement by General Clay at the meeting at Frankfurt on July 1 between the Military Governors and the Ministers President. See editorial note, p. 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) 862.01/11–2448

[Document 295]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)1

secret Berlin, November 24, 1948.

Dr. Adenauer, President of the Parliamentary Council at Bonn, called on me today at his request.2 He desired to make a courtesy call as we had never had an opportunity to get together. I told him that we had been disappointed two or three times in the past as we had hoped to see him in Berlin before this. He said in explanation of his failure to visit Berlin in 1946–47 that he was determined to have no dealings with the Soviet Military Administration representatives. He had been under considerable pressure from members of his Party in the East Zone who felt that an understanding with the Russians was possible. Adenauer had never shared this view and did not desire to compromise himself. A number of suggestions had been made that he should get together with Colonel Tulpanov, for example, and he had steadfastly refused. Adenauer declared with feeling that he had always regarded the present Soviet regime as an enemy of our civilization, based on evil. He said that he had never had any faith in Russian sincerity to achieve a peaceful and friendly understanding with the West. On the other hand, he believed they were taking every advantage to achieve their own ends and that their approach to quadripartite control of Germany had always been cynical and dishonest. Adenauer had been happy to come to Berlin at this time and felt that his meetings here had been successful. He spoke warmly in praise of the attitude of the Berlin population.

We discussed the work of the Parliamentary Council at Bonn and I inquired regarding Dr. Adenauer’s estimate of timing. He said that he thought the work of the Council would be finished before Christmas. He said that he estimated that the Military Governors would then probably require one month to pass upon the text and that six weeks would be required for the Referendum. Following that, the preparations for the election of the members of the future German Parliament would require also about six weeks; therefore, it might be possible to establish the new government by the end of April or the beginning of May 1949.

Dr. Adenauer said in that connection that in his opinion the principal difficulty lay in reconciling the views of his Party with the Social Democrats. At the moment he said that he was at sea over their attitude on several questions.

He said that one feature which had been neglected thus far in the directives and in the discussions at Bonn is the matter of an election law. He urged that this question be considered by Military Government, if it has not already been thought of, and that some indication be given to the Parliamentary Council as to the views of the Military Governors on this subject.

I discussed with Dr. Adenauer his recent conversation with the French Foreign Minister, M. Schuman. Adenauer said that during the course of the two-and-a-half hours interview, Schuman made it clear that he believed that the ancient feud between France and Germany should end and that this is the time to work for a real rapprochement. Dr. Adenauer said he fully understands French apprehensions regarding future German aggression but he is convinced that with a determined effort to achieve an understanding these apprehensions can be proved unfounded. He said quite frankly that in his opinion the way of life and ideas of the population in West Germany lent itself far better to such an end than is the case in some sections at least of East Germany where Marxism and exaggerated nationalism have taken a firmer grip on the people. He attributed this in part to the religious influences of West Germany which, he said, are absent in many parts of East Germany. While Dr. Adenauer did not say so in so many words, he left with me the clear impression that he does not look for nor hope for the inclusion of parts of East Germany in the government now under consideration at Bonn.

In that connection, Dr. Adenauer told me in confidence that Schuman had advanced a personal theory on the question of state boundaries. According to this personal theory, Germany would be divided into three grand sub-divisions, which Schuman named a Rhine State, a Danube State, and an Elbe State. Adenauer said that Schuman was a little vague on the question whether he visualized a federal system (Bundestaat) or a federated state (Staatenbund). Dr. Adenauer also said that much to his surprise Schuman brought up the question of French intervention in German cultural affairs and had voluntarily said that he, Schuman, disapproved of many things that the French had been doing in this field, particularly French interference in educational affairs, Schuman said that he had given orders to change this policy and to stop much of the interference in German cultural matters. Dr. Adenauer said that whether Schuman’s orders are obeyed or not will remain to be seen.

I asked Adenauer how the CDU relationship with the CSU in Bavaria stood at the moment, noting that he had recently visited Munich. He said he was satisfied that things party-wise were not going too badly but that the leadership in Bavaria left much to be desired. He is happy about the Bavarian Minister President, Dr. Ehard, but expressed a low opinion of Josef Mueller’s influence on the party. He characterized him as an adventurer who would not last. On the other hand, he respects Dr. Hundhammer.

I asked Dr. Adenauer regarding the relationship of Military Government Liaison Officers with the Parliamentary Council Group at Bonn and he spoke in complimentary terms of U.S. liaison, especially Mr. Simons, and said that the relationship between the Germans and the US/UK and French Liaison Officers is entirely satisfactory. He said that the Liaison Officers perhaps were apt to entertain a little too much and that Germans are prone to talk too freely under the influence of alcohol, but apart from that he had no comment.

Robert Murphy

1 This memorandum was transmitted to the Department under cover of a brief personal letter from Ambassador Murphy to Jacob Beam on November 24, not printed.

2 On November 23 and 24 Dr. Adenauer paid a brief electoral campaign visit to Berlin. In his airgram A–892, November 24, from Berlin, not printed, Ambassador Murphy commented that the Adenauer visit was “an event of primary political importance.” Murphy, in reporting on Adenauer’s campaign activities, concluded that Adenauer was undoubtedly the undisputed leader of the Christian Democratic Union. (862.00/11–2448)

Record Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting Between the American and British Military Governors and the Ministers President of the Bizonal (U.S–U.K.) Area 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–648

[Document 296]

Record Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting Between the American and British Military Governors and the Ministers President of the Bizonal (U.S–U.K.) Area 1

[Extracts]

secret Frankfurt, November 30, 1948.

Herr Luedemann, Minister President of Schleswig–Holstein, expressed the Minister Presidents’ appreciation for the action taken by the Western Allies in Berlin.

[Here follows a discussion of the problem of supplying food to West Berlin. For documentation on the Berlin situation, see pages 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517] ff.]

The Ministers President brought up the subject of the Parliamentary Council now meeting at Bonn, stating that they had done everything in their power to facilitate the work of the Council allowing it full freedom in carrying out its work. However, after carefully observing the work over a period of weeks, the Ministers President admitted to a feeling of growing anxiety regarding the progress of the work which they want expedited. Herr Luedemann stated that they would request an assurance that more rapid progress be made and will (approach the President, Adenauer, on this matter immediately. The Military Governors concurred. Herr Luedemann stated that the Ministers President had hoped that elections could possibly be held in December. He had noted that Carlo Schmid had estimated that the work could be finished by December 15 but the Ministers President doubt it and therefore intend to request Adenauer for assurance that December 15 will be the deadline. The Ministers President estimated that after the Military Governors had approved the text of the new constitutions that about two months would be required for ratification and elections. There was a lengthy discussion regarding the form of ratification to be adopted—whether by popular referendum or by referendum to the Landtag. It was noted that the US and UK prefer the popular referendum whereas the French prefer the referendum by the Landtag. The US prefers to leave the matter to the individual Laender. No decision was reached on this point which remains unsettled.

[The remainder of the discussion was concerned with frontier control and the activities of foreigners in Germany.]

Robert Murphy

1 The source text was transmitted to the Department under cover of a brief letter of December 6 from Ambassador Murphy to Jacob Beam, not printed. The source text does not indicate the names of participants in the meeting.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.00/12–248: Telegram

[Document 297]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

restricted Berlin, December 2, 1948—8 p. m.

2860. Two of principal difficulties delaying work of Parliamentary Council at Bonn appear to have been resolved in main committee (Hauptausschuss) sessions this week, namely form of second chamber and question whether Bundespraesident should take office prior to unification of all Germany.

By vote of 16 to 1 committee agreed to creation of a pure Bundesrat constituted on following basis: deputies will be appointed by Laender governments and will be subject to recall by them. Laender having population under two million will contribute three deputies; those having between two and six million, four deputies; those having more than six million, five deputies. Berlin was specifically included in membership of Bundesrat on same basis as western Laender. Compromise reached between major parties was evident in agreement on distribution of legislative powers between Bundesrat and Bundestag (lower chamber). Bundesrat will have equal legislative powers with Bundestag on (1) taxes, when revenue belongs only to Laender and communities or when revenue shared by Bund and Laender; (2) finance equalization; (3) establishment of new Bund agencies; (4) changes in competence Bund vis-à-vis Laender. Bundesrat will have veto right on all other legislation but Bundestag will be able to override veto by two-thirds majority. Laws amending constitution will require two thirds majority in both chambers. Such laws will be promulgated 2 weeks after passage and during this period one third of members of both chambers can demand popular referendum.

Article 75, providing for election of a Bundespraesident of western German union by a National Assembly, was carried by 11 SPD, FDP and KPD votes against nine CDU and Deutschepartei with Zentrum members abstaining. Thesis that Bundespraesident should not be elected until unification of all Germany achieved was thus rejected by slim majority.

Reaction to tripartite aide-mémoire (my airgram A–887, November 231 ) was mixed, with some initial resentment shown. Parliamentary Council finally adopted an SPD motion stating that Council saw in aide-mémoire a detailed explanation of Military Governors document No. 1 and that it was willing to carry on its work on basic law in accordance with mandate given it by German people. Some delegates expressed doubt as to Allied wisdom in formally presenting aide-mémoire at this time on ground that it might discredit federalism by demonstrating to the German people that adoption of this concept came as result of pressure from occupying powers rather than from German members of Parliamentary Council.

Ministers President of three western zones presented a memorandum to President of Parliamentary Council December 1 emphasizing importance of creating a truly federal state and welcoming move by Parliamentary Council to speed up its work.

Present schedule anticipates first reading of draft constitution in main committee by December 6 and second reading by December 8.2 Plenary session of Parliamentary Council expected to complete first reading about December 15. Council then expects to adjourn over Christmas holidays. Delegates reportedly hope that occupation statute will be made available to Council before subsequent readings in early January.

Sent Department 2860 pouched London Paris.

Murphy

1 The airgram under reference is not printed, but see footnote 1 to the aide-mémoire from the Military Governors to the Parliamentary Council, p. 442.

2 The first reading of the draft constitution was completed on December 10.

Editorial Note [Document 298]

Editorial Note

On December 12 the Main Committee of the Parliamentary Council adopted a resolution commenting upon the preparation of an Occupation Statute; for the text of the resolution, see page 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]. On December 16 and again on December 17 a delegation from the Parliamentary Council, headed by Dr. Adenauer, met with the American, British, and French Military Governors at Frankfurt to present suggestions regarding the development of the Occupation Statute and to discuss other outstanding issues confronting the Parliamentary Council; for records of the meetings, see pages 641–650 [Pgs. 641–650 include portions of Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, and Doc. 394].

B. The London Conference on the Ruhr, November 11–December 24, 1948B. The London Conference on the Ruhr, November 11–December 24, 1948

Contents

1. Preparations for the Conference1. Preparations for the Conference

[299] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, September 15, 1948—7 p. m.

840.50 Recovery/8–2448: Telegram

[300] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

[Berlin,] 3 October 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[301] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

Paris, October 6, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–648

[302] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, October 9, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Council/10–948: Telegram

[303] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, October 19, 1948—noon.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–1948: Telegram

[304] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] October 27, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2748

[305] The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

[Washington, October 27, 1948.]

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 133: File—Ruhr Authority, Vol. I

[306] Editorial Note

[307] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Geoffrey W. Lewis, Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas

[Washington,] November 10, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1048

[308] Editorial Note

[309] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas)

[Washington,] November 10, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1048

[310] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, November 11, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1148: Telegram

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 840.50 Recovery/8–2448: Telegram

[Document 299]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

secret Washington, September 15, 1948—7 p. m.

3652. For Harriman. Re draft agreement for international control of Ruhr (ur Aug 24, unnumbered1 ). Meeting will probably be held Oct rather than Sep. Exact site not decided. Meeting for purpose drafting convention establish control authority, on basis principles already agreed at London six-power talks.

Meeting will be primarily technical although certain policy issues will undoubtedly arise, particularly connection determination of relationship between Germany and control authority. London Agreement leaves unclear whether Germans are initially to make allocations, subject to review by control authority, or whether control authority will itself make allocations. US thinking is Germans should make initial allocations, which is related our general desire avoid control authority getting too deeply into matters which are fundamentally matters of German domestic policy and operations.

We have not been able do much work actual drafting convention and no decision has been made re principal US representative.

You will be kept informed and be given opportunity comment on questions policy accordance your request.

Marshall

1 Not printed; in it Ambassador Harriman asked for information regarding the forthcoming conference for the preparation of an agreement on the international control of the Ruhr. The United States, the United Kingdom, and France had agreed in July that such a conference should take place in London not earlier than September.

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[Document 300]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

secret
priority [Berlin,] 3 October 1948.

CC–6171. To Dept of Army for Chief of Staff for CSCAD from CINCEUR sgd Clay. Reur W–90212.1 Our proposal as to draft charter has been painstakingly developed reflect agreement reached at London2 without imposing further restrictions. We regret delay in submission to you. Text follows:

Charter of the International Authority for the Ruhr 3

i. declaration of purposes

Whereas permanent international security and the general economic recovery of Europe require that the coal, coke and steel resources of the Ruhr shall not in the future be used for the purpose of aggression, but shall be dedicated to the ends of enduring peace and that in furtherance of their common political and economic well-being, the countries of Europe cooperating in the common economic good shall, without discrimination, hereafter be guaranteed access to said resources.

Now Therefore, to accomplish the purposes of the foregoing declaration and to carry out the provisions of the London Agreements, the Govts of the United States, the United Kingdom, the Republic of France and the Govts of the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg (hereinafter referred to as the “Signatory Governments”), solemnly declare and mutually agree that control of the coal, coke and steel resources of the Ruhr shall be exercised by an international body whose composition, rights, powers and obligations shall be as hereinafter provided.

ii. organization and membership

1. There is hereby established an agency to be known as the International Authority for the Ruhr (hereinafter referred to as “the Authority”) consisting of seven (7) members, six of whom shall severally be designated by the Signatory Govts. The seventh member shall represent the interests of Germany and shall be appointed as hereinafter provided.

2. The German member of the Authority shall initially be designated by the Signatory Govts who share the responsibility for the economic administration of that part of Germany which includes the Ruhr (hereinafter referred to as the “Occupying Powers concerned”). Such designation shall be after consultation with the responsible German authorities. As and when a provisional Government is established for that part of Germany which includes the Ruhr (hereinafter referred to as “the German Govt”), such German Govt shall have the right to confirm the representative selected by the Occupying Powers concerned, or at its option to appoint some other representative.

iii. determinations of the authority

1. All determinations and decisions of the Authority shall be reached by a numerical majority of the aggregate of votes allotted to its several members.

2. The voting rights of the several members of the Authority shall be as follows:

United States: three (3) votes

United Kingdom: three (3) votes

France: three (3) votes

Germany: three (3) votes

The Netherlands: one (1) vote

Belgium: one (1) vote

Luxembourg: one (1) vote

3. Unless and until the Signatory Govts agree otherwise, the votes allotted to Germany shall be trusteed with and shall be cast by, the Occupying Powers concerned.

4. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, Germany shall not be entitled to vote on any question or matter involving: a. Her default or alleged default in the performance of any obligations hereafter imposed upon her pursuant to the terms hereof.

b. The supply of coal, coke and steel products to any German industry which is or may hereafter be prohibited or limited in the interests of disarmament or security.

iv. functions of the authority

The functions of the Authority, which shall be implemented as specifically set forth in Article V hereof, shall be as follows: 1. Allocations of Coal, Coke and Steel The Authority shall make the division, as between German consumption and export, of coal, coke and steel from the Ruhr. Such division shall: a. be subject to the provisions of any pertinent existing or future agreements among the Signatory Powers, with respect to the allocation of coal, coke and steel.

b. take due regard of the essential needs of Germany to achieve the reestablishment of a reasonable standard of living on a self-sufficiency basis.

c. Be consistent with the programs approved by the Organization for European Economic Cooperation, for the recovery of the participating countries thereof.

2. Uneconomic Practices The Authority shall ensure that the German Authorities do not institute, carry out or permit artificial measures or discriminatory practices which would distort the movement of Ruhr coal, coke and steel in international trade, except for such measures of protection as may be approved by the Authority.

3. Protection of Foreign Interests Within the framework of existing or future agreements among the Signatory Governments, the Authority shall bring to the attention of the Military Governors of the Occupying Powers concerned measures which would ensure protection for coal, coke and steel enterprises in the Ruhr which involve foreign interests.

4. Information and Investigations In order to carry out its fuctions under this Article IV hereof, the Authority is empowered: a. to request and receive such regular and special reports on production, distribution and consumption of Ruhr coal, coke and steel as may be necessary or appropriate.

b. to verify the information so received or otherwise at its disposal by enquiries on the spot and by the subpoena and examination of witnesses.

c. to call for information about supplies of coal, coke and steel from sources other than the Ruhr.

v. implementation of functions

1. During the Control Period During the period (hereinafter referred to as the Control Period) in which the Occupying Powers concerned exercise ultimate authority over that portion of Germany which includes the Ruhr, the determinations and findings of the Authority shall be transmitted to the Military Governors of the Occupying Powers concerned for implementation. During the Control Period the Authority will look to the Military Governors of the Occupying Powers concerned to effect compliance on the part of the German Govt with the determinations of the Authority. During said period, the provisions of Article VII hereof shall not be applicable and may not be invoked by the Authority.

Said Military Governors shall under the provisions of the London Agreements, retain and maintain adequate control over the management of the coal and coke industry of the Ruhr, and will, during the Control Period, or until such earlier time as may be agreed upon among the Signatory Govts, maintain or cause to be maintained that degree of control in respect of the coal, coke and steel industries of the Ruhr as may be necessary or appropriate fully to effectuate the determinations of the Authority.

2. After the Control Period As and when the Military Governors of the Occupying Powers concerned have relinquished ultimate authority and control over the coal, coke and steel industries of the Ruhr, the implementation of the functions of the Authority as set forth in Article IV hereof shall cease to be the responsibility of the Military Governors of the Occupying Powers concerned and shall become the responsibility of the German Govt. The German Govt shall be required to maintain such controls as may be imposed upon it and as may be necessary for such implementation, unless a relaxation or modification thereof is approved by the Authority.

vi. control of prohibited or limited industries

The Signatory Governments mutually agree that the disarmament and demilitarization of Germany, particularly in respect of the industrial potential of the Ruhr, is a matter of paramount concern to them and accordingly:

1. During the Control Period, the Authority will look to the Military Governors of the Occupying Powers concerned to retain and maintain such powers and controls as may be necessary to enforce the disarmament of Germany, including the power to control the supply of coal, coke and steel from the Ruhr to any industries which, in the interests of security, may be prohibited or limited pursuant to the terms of any existing security or disarmament agreements among the Signatory Governments or any future international agreement of like character to which said Signatory Governments may become parties.

2. At or prior to the expiration of the Control Period, the powers and controls referred to in Section 1 of this Article VI shall be transferred by the Military Governors of the Occupying Powers concerned to such International Security organizations as may be designated pursuant to the terms of the Peace Settlement or in default of such designations, to such security agency as the Signatory Powers may agree to establish for the purpose of implementing any security or disarmament agreements with respect to Germany to which they may then be parties.

vii. defaults and remedies

1. Anticipatory Default Should the German Govt fail to implement any determination of the Authority duly made pursuant to the provisions hereof, the Authority may, after a majority vote of the representatives of the Signatory Governments thereon, call the attention of the German Govt to such failure by service of notice thereof in writing upon the German member of the Authority. Such notice shall afford the German Govt a reasonable time within which to correct such failure, or in the alternative, to appear before the representatives of the Signatory Governments on the Authority and show cause why it should not be declared in default in its obligations hereunder.

2. Declaration of Default In the event of wilful refusal on the part of the German Govt to carry out the determinations of the Authority hereunder, or in the event of its continued failure so to do after receiving notice of said failure as provided in Section 1 of this Article VII, the representatives of the Signatory Governments, by a majority vote, may declare the German Govt to be in default in its obligations hereunder.

3. Procedure on Default In the event that a default is declared as herein provided, written notice thereof accompanied by a bill of particulars with respect to said default, shall be transmitted by the Authority to the Signatory Governments. Such notice shall include the Authority’s recommendations as to the necessary and appropriate enforcement measures to be applied in the premises.

The German Govt shall have the right voluntarily to cure any default hereunder at any time prior to the institution of enforcement measures.

viii. provisions for legislation

It is understood and agreed that the Military Governors of the Occupying Powers concerned will enact, or cause to be enacted, in that part of Germany which includes the Ruhr, such legislation as in their opinion will be necessary or appropriate to carry out the provisions of this Charter.

ix. administration

1. Effective Date This Charter shall come into effect_____________.

2. Domicile The Authority shall be domiciled and its principal place of business shall be in the city ______________ Land Nord-Rhein-Westphalia.

3. Organization and By-Laws The Authority shall fix its by-laws, its rules of conduct, the pattern and size of its organization as well as its internal and external administrative procedures.

4. Chairmanship During the Control Period, the Chairmanship of the Authority shall be rotated {Semi-annually Quarterly Monthly} among the representatives of the Authority of the Occupying Powers concerned. Thereafter it shall be rotated among the representatives of all the Signatory Governments.

5. Meetings Stated meetings of the Authority shall be held monthly at its principal place of business. Special meetings of the Authority may be convened by the Chairmen upon such notice as the by-laws of the Authority may prescribe. The Authority shall keep minutes of its meetings and shall maintain a register of its determinations.

6. Executive Action The Authority shall act in an executive capacity through its Chairman. Between meetings of the Authority, its business shall be carried on by an Executive Director, selected by the representatives of the Signatory Governments, and an appropriate staff. The Executive Director shall be administratively responsible to the Chairman of the Authority.

7. Budget The Authority shall, within thirty days of its first meeting, determine its initial budget and shall thereafter determine its annual budget at least ninety days in advance of each ensuing fiscal year.

8. Costs Each Signatory Government shall be individually responsible for compensating its representative. Aside from this, the cost of the operation and maintenance of the Authority shall be borne by the Signatory Governments and Germany, in direct proportion to their respective voting power as set forth in Article III hereof. Contributions shall be deposited into the Treasury of the Authority on call of its Controller at such times and in such currencies as the Authority may determine.

9. Duration This Charter shall continue in force and effect until amended, modified or rescinded by the Signatory Powers.

In Witness Whereof the undersigned have hereunto affixed their hands and seals under the authority of their respective governments this day of October, Nineteen Hundred and Forty-Eight in the City of ____________

United States The Netherlands

United Kingdom Belgium

Republic of France Luxembourg

I note State message to Harriman 4 speaks of “convention” and you refer to “statute”, whereas Annex C to London talks provides for “agreement”. In our opinion, the basic agreement can best be set forth in a charter of the Ruhr Authority, and we are unable to see justification for adoption of a statute.

Do not understand statement “London agreement leaves unclear whether Germans are initially to make allocations, etc”. Annex C,5 para 5, could hardly be more explicit, and we have never had any doubt that the recommendation of allocation between export and internal use was a function of the Authority alone. On the other hand, we never conceived that the Authority would have anything to say about use made of internal allocations except in regard to limited and prohibited industries, as provided in para 9b of Annex C.

I feel that negotiation of Ruhr agreement will be difficult and devious, and consider it of great importance that our representative not only be completely briefed but be of sufficient stature to ensure proper defense of our position. We shall, of course, be prepared to assist him in every way. Would appreciate being kept informed of development of your thinking, and of your reaction to our draft charter.

[ Clay ]

1 Not printed.

2 Documents. TRI/16 (Final), May 26 and TRI/23 (Final), May 26, pp. 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190] and 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193].

3 An earlier version of this draft charter consisted of two documents: a draft charter and a draft directive by the Military Governors, both dated September 19. Copies of these two draft documents were transmitted to the Department under cover of a brief letter from Ambassador Murphy to Assistant Secretary of State Saltzman, dated September 30, none printed. (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 133, File—Ruhr Authority, volume i )

4 Telegram 3652, September 15, to Paris, supra.

5 For document TRI/16 (Final), May 26 (Annex C to the Report of the London Conference on Germany) see p. 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–648

[Document 301]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 1

[Extract]

top secret Paris, October 6, 1948.

Participants: Secretary Marshall

Mr. Schuman, French Delegation

Mr. Bevin, British Delegation

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Schuman then requested that the negotiations regarding the Ruhr should be opened before the end of October. I asked if he was referring to the drafting of the charter and he said he was.

Mr. Bevin suggested that we were so busy now that it could not well be taken up before the middle of November. Mr. Schuman agreed. I agreed.

A discussion then followed as to where the meetings were to take place. Mr. Schuman was inclined to Paris, Mr. Bevin to London because the American Ambassador was our leading representative in the discussions and his man was there, and there were now too many activities in Paris. I commented on the fact that there were three matters to be settled having a general relationship to each other. Two of the meetings were now scheduled for Paris.2 I thought the Ruhr meeting should be in London. Mr. Schuman agreed.3

G. C. M[arshall]

1 The meeting took place at the French Foreign Ministry, October 6, 3:30 p. m. Secretary Marshall, Foreign Secretary Bevin, and Foreign Minister Schuman headed delegations to the united Nations General Assembly then meeting in Paris.

2 Presumably the two other meetings under reference were the meetings of the United Nations Security Council devoted to consideration of the Berlin question and the six-power meetings regarding foreign investment in Western Germany.

3 The united States, United Kingdom, French, Belgian, Netherlands, and Luxembourg Governments subsequently mutually agreed to open the conference on the Ruhr at London on November 11.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/10–948: Telegram

[Document 302]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, October 9, 1948—4 p. m.

2474. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. Your 1696.1 I suppose you have seen OMGUS CC–6214, October 7 re safeguarding foreign interests in Germany.2 I attended October 7 meeting US/UK Military Governors with French and Benelux representatives in order to comply with provisions London agreements re consultation. Clay opened meeting with statement that French and Benelux were invited in connection with the proposed trusteeship to be established for the coal and steel industries in the Ruhr,3 reminding them that one of prime objectives we have had in Germany is to break up certain large combines that previously existed. This applied particularly to coal and steel industries. Present plan contemplated trusteeship, purpose of which is to give responsibility of ownership to management of these plants without attempting at moment to resolve future ownership. Copies of proposed ordinances had been provided French and Benelux and reply received from French expresses satisfaction with arrangements for protection of foreign interests but objects to proposal because it does not contemplate future international ownership. Clay pointed out that international ownership of Ruhr industries was not accepted at London and that we propose to operate in accordance with London agreements as German economy cannot be operated on basis of what may happen in future conferences or what may happen as result of eventual peace treaty. French right to object to measure on this ground and reserve position recognized but it is essential that steps be taken to improve production and management in Ruhr. Clay added that Benelux countries had expressed general satisfaction with protection contemplated for foreign interests particularly in permitting them return to management field but expressed desire explain in more detail their position and suggested that question be laid over until government committee on safeguarding foreign interests completed studies.

Benelux representatives in commenting on US/UK plan had advised that proposed reorganization of coal, iron and steel industries would influence so radically allied interests in these branches of industry that joint discussions by experts considered indispensable.

At meeting Benelux representatives submitted written comments which are briefly summarized as follows: (1) Preliminary survey leads to conclusion that by permitting future German Government decide pattern of ownership for coal, iron and steel industries possibility provided for dangerous concentration economic power;

(2) Benelux insists on (a) effective protection of allied interests in case of socialization, (b) not only majority allied interests should be protected but also minority interests by pooling or otherwise, (c) accurate info requested concerning extent of powers to be granted representatives of foreign owners holding powers of attorney, (d) Benelux liaison representatives should be appointed to US/UK Steel Control Group as is now case with US/UK coal control group, and (e) re management of allied enterprises meetings of stockholders and boards of directors should be authorized.

Robertson stated Military Governors do not believe that governmental committee would be suitable body for discussion practical and detailed scheme of this nature. He also emphasized urgency of matter in order give impetus to German recovery upon which western European economy is largely dependent. This was confirmed by General Clay who stated that this is a pressing matter which cannot be allowed to go unresolved much longer without serious effect on production. Benelux stated they would have to refer matter back to governments and it was agreed that a further meeting would be held within approximately one week. Robertson emphasized that not more than one meeting on this subject would be held.

I am forwarding by airmail text of US/UK plan for appointment of trustees in coal, iron and steel industries, together with copy letter September 16, from Benelux representatives and September 23 from French as well as copy of views of Benelux submitted at October 7 meeting.4

Sent Department 2474, repeated London 711, to Paris 759.

Murphy

1 Not printed.

2 General Clay’s message under reference here is not printed. Regarding the intergovernmental discussions on safeguarding foreign interests in Western Germany, see pp. 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416] ff.

3 The Bipartite (U.S.–U.K.) Board first transmitted its proposed plan for the reorganization of the West German coal, iron and steel industry to French and Benelux representatives during August 1948. For a brief chronology of events leading to this discussion, see General Clay’s message CC–6717, November 13, from Berlin, p. 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]. Regarding the plan as eventually promulgated on November 10 as U.S. and U.K. Military Government Law No. 75, see the editorial note, p. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309].

4 None printed.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–1948: Telegram

[Document 303]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, October 19, 1948—noon.

2537. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. My 2474, October 9.1 I attended a meeting yesterday afternoon of US and UK military governors with representatives of France and Benelux for discussion of (1) Ruhr trusteeship, (2) lifting of moratorium on foreign investments, and (3) signing of JEIA agreement with French2 (see mytel 2474, October 9).

1. Benelux presented a paper setting forth further views of Benelux countries on the proposals for appointment of German trustees for coal, iron and steel industries. Text will be forwarded by mail.3 US/UK military governors gave substantial satisfaction to these Benelux suggestions.4 US and UK military governors pointed out that in this paper they are not trying to resolve the question re socialization of industry and therefore paper would not be subject to study by governmental working party considering foreign investments. They understand that before socialization or nationalization of mines there would have to be opportunity for governments to be heard. General Bapst for French, stating French point of view on final ownership of coal and iron and steel industries, reasserted position taken by General Koenig in his communication of September 235 which has been reported to Department. He stated that as question of ownership has not been subject of any decision by governments that French Government does not believe the commanders-in-chief should publish a statement to effect that the question of final ownership would be left to the German people as this is matter which should rest with governments. He requested the withdrawal of the draft statement on the ground that it was not necessary for the trusteeship scheme. He stated that French government will not recognize such a statement if made by US/UK military governors pending governmental decision.

General Clay replied that as US position has been stated previously he had nothing further to add. General Robertson referred also to previously stated British position, adding however that as French Government has now taken up this matter in London it was now under consideration by his government.6

2. In referring to the proposed joint recommendations by US/UK military governors re lifting of moratorium on foreign investments Clay stated that copy of these has already been handed to French and copy is now presented to Benelux colleagues. In asking for Benelux comments it was requested that these be limited to observations within scope of present outline and that the matter be treated confidentially. We would hope for the Benelux comments within a week.7

3. Agreement re French participation in JEIA was signed by US/UK military governors with General Bapst who stated that he had been authorized by French Government to sign in their behalf. Text of agreement will be transmitted by mail.8

Sent Department 2537; repeated Paris 800, London 745.

Murphy

1  Supra.

2 Under cover of a brief transmittal letter of October 23 to Jacob Beam, not printed, Ambassador Murphy transmitted the verbatim record of this meeting (740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–1848). According to that record, twenty-two persons were present for the meeting. The principal participants were: General Clay, General Robertson, Lieutenant General Goethals (for Belgium), Baron van Voorst tot Voorst (for the Netherlands), and Lieutenant Dhur (for Luxembourg). Also included in the United States Delegation were Ambassador Murphy, OMGUS Economic Adviser Wilkinson, and OMGUS Finance Adviser Bennett.

3 A copy of a paper entitled “Further Views of the Benelux Countries Concerning Reorganization of the Coal and Iron and Steel Industries” was transmitted to the Department of State by Ambassador Murphy under cover of a brief letter of October 26 to John D. Hickerson, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2648). For a brief chronology of the events attending the preparation of Military Government Law No. 75 on the reorganization, of the coal, iron and steel industries, see General Clay’s message CC–6717, November 13, p. 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319].

4 On October 19, Generals Clay and Robertson addressed a letter to Lieutenant General Goethals confirming the verbal answers given by the Military Governors in reply to the Benelux memorandum referred to in the previous footnote. A copy of the Clay–Robertson letter was transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to Ambassador Murphy’s letter of October 28 to Assistant Secretary of State Saltzman, neither printed. (740.00119 (Germany)/10–2848)

5 Not printed.

6  In a letter of October 19 to General Koenig, Clay and Robertson confirmed the verbal statements made to the French representative at this meeting. The letter, a copy of which was transmitted as an enclosure to the Murphy letter cited in footnote 4 above, read in part as follows: “The [U.S.–U.K. Bipartite] Board has noted the French position on the question of the final settlement of ownership of the Ruhr coal and iron and steel industries and their request that the statement related to this question be withdrawn from the UK/US plan for the appointment of trustees in these industries. The Board has been informed that this question has now been raised by your Government with the U.S. and British Governments, and in view of this action, it becomes apparent that no purpose can be served by further discussions between the Military Governors.”

7 Regarding the inter-governmental discussions on safeguarding foreign investments in Western Germany, see p. 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416].

8 For the text of the agreement under reference here, see p. 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 410].

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2748

[Document 304]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Acting Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] October 27, 1948.

Subject: French Protest1 Concerning Trusteeship Plan for German Coal, Iron and Steel Industries

On the evening of October 26 Mr. Penson of the British Embassy formally advised me that he had been instructed by his government to say that the British have decided that they cannot give the French any concession regarding the preamble in the Trusteeship Plan for the German coal, iron and steel industries and propose to inform the French that the scheme must be implemented as it stands.2 This would mean that the statement to the effect that eventual ownership of these industries should be left to the determination of a freely elected German Government and remain in the preamble notwithstanding the French protest on that score.

Mr. Penson told me that the British Government considers it highly important that the statement remain in the preamble in order to give firm reassurance to the Germans. They consider that any French protest will not in fact be particularly strong and that the French would probably protest anyway if we were to adopt the compromise suggestion of omitting the statement from the preamble and instead putting it in the form of a public statement by the Military Governors.

After weighing all the considerations I now agree with the British position and I recommend that the U.S. reply to the French in a similar vein. Mr. Hickerson concurs in this view. If you approve I shall see that General Clay and the British are so notified and that a suitable note to the French is prepared.3

C[harles] E. S[altzman]

1 Ambassador Bonnet called upon Under Secretary of State Lovett on October 14. According to Lovett’s memorandum of the conversation, not printed, Bonnet said that his Government strongly objected to the provision on ownership of German coal, iron and steel industries in the preamble of the Bipartite Board’s proposed plan for the reorganization of those industries. Lovett observed that the Department of State had not yet received the full text of the proposed reorganization plan and would like to have an opportunity to study the preamble before commenting upon the views of the French Government (740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–1448). Bonnet called on Lovett again on October 19 to present an aide-mémoire setting forth the strong objections of the French Government to the proposed U.S.–U.K. plan for the reorganization of the German coal, iron and steel industries. In his conversation with Lovett, Bonnet orally repeated the substance of the objections and warned that if the American and British Military Governors insisted upon issuing the reorganization plan and included the contested preamble, the French Government would have to issue a public declaration disassociating itself from the proposal. (Memorandum of conversation by Lovett, October 19, 1948: 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–1948).

2 Several days earlier the British Embassy had informed the Department of State of a proposed concession to the French Government on this matter that was under consideration by the British Foreign Office. The paragraphs in the proposed plan for the reorganization of German coal, iron and steel industry to which the French Government objected would be omitted, and there would be a joint U.S.–U.K. press statement stating that the American and British Governments unilaterally intended to leave the ultimate disposition of the Ruhr properties to the German people to decide through normal democratic processes. See the memorandum of conversation by Assistant Secretary Saltzman of a meeting held in Secretary of the Army Royall’s office on October 21. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2148)

3 The last paragraph of the source text bears Acting Secretary Lovett’s marginal endorsement “OK L”.

The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 133: File—Ruhr Authority, Vol. I

[Document 305]

The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

secret
priority [Washington, October 27, 1948.]

WX–91587. From Dept of Army from CSCAD to OMGUS EUCOM.

1. Reurad Oct CC–6171.1 Our reaction to your draft, which is being carefully considered, will be sent to you piecemeal as developed.

2. State working party2 with Army and ECA observers now developing background material and position papers relative problems Ruhr Control Authority. Working party has so far developed tentative positions as follows on which your comments would be appreciated. A. Definition of coal, coke and steel. Authority should be given power to specify export quotas not only in coal and coke generally but also in terms of such quality, size and other specifications as Authority deems desirable. While State’s preference is to leave open to Authority to decide breakdown according to which allocations are made, it is felt US should be prepared to yield if other countries strongly feel that agreement itself should specify particular product breakdown. Such breakdown would presumably cover separately metallurgical coke, domestic coke, coking coal, steam coal and gas coal. (1) Brown coal should be regarded as included within the definition of coal. Actually very little brown coal is produced in Ruhr and almost none is exported from Germany except in form of briquettes. The main problems in this connection are simply special cases of the gen problems which the Authority will have to face of deciding what conversion ratio to use for different quality and of crediting non-Ruhr exports from Germany toward the agreed export quota.

(2) The definition of steel should include all crude semi-finished and finished steel as defined for purposes of OEEC but including pipe and tubes, and probably fabricated structural shapes and cold finished products other than wire. These products, which are classified as finished steel in this country, should be added to OEEC definition because of the probable importance of Germany’s export of these items to her neighbors. The Authority should be free to establish export quotas for the agreed product whether in terms of total steel or in such product breakdowns as it deems desirable. Castings (except for those made within the steel industries) and fabricated products such as machinery and transportation equipment should not be included with the definition of steel.

(3) Re pig iron and scrap US should not propose including these items but should be willing to reconsider position depending on how strongly and with what justification their inclusion is urged by others. Arguments for not including them are:
(a) Pig iron and scrap are not normally important German exports, (b) control of pig iron and scrap allocations might make it possible for Germany’s competitors in steel trade to deprive her of material required to maintain desirable level of steel production, and (c) scrap, unlike other steel products, is not especially concentrated in the Ruhr. Arguments in favor of including pig iron and scrap are:
(a) Pig iron may in future be important German export since no level of industry limitation governs pig iron production, (b) scrap may well constitute main steel export of Germany for a nbr of yrs to come and should mil control end before Germany’s extraordinary supplies of scrap have been fully utilized some means of assuring continuation of scrap exports in face of already demonstrated German opposition should be provided, and (c) without control over pig iron and scrap it would be possible to divert these metallics into foundry industries, the production of which will not be subj to jurisdiction of Authority.

B. Signatories and eff date. It is contemplated that all six powers will sign the agreement which will become eff upon approval 3 occupying powers. Latter provision to insure Benelux countries cannot delay formation German Govt by withholding approval.

C. Organization and beginning of operation. Organization of Authority should begin upon agreement becoming eff. Operation would begin on date agreed by occupying powers but in any event prior establishment Provisional Govt.

D. Duration. Agreement to continue in force until peace settlement and terminated by 3 occupying powers after consultation with other signatories. Feel necessary provide termination by occupying powers so that way left open for any Quadripartite negotiations.

E. Amendments. Provision should be made for amendment by agreement all signatories upon recommendation Authority.

F. Nature of instrument establishing the Authority. Believe instrument resulting from conference should be designated an agreement and that it should contain an article establishing the Authority, stating that the agreement constitutes its authority and terms of ref and that the Authority should be bound by its provisions. Present plan is to keep instrument in form of executive agreement and to keep out any provisions which might require submission as treaty to Senate. Designation as statute would give instrument character of legislation and would raise problem of whether signatory powers other than occupying powers have authority to issue such legislation. Same problem of Authority raised by designation of instrument as charter.

3. Another question which must be resolved and on which we should like your comments is the definition of the geographic area of the Ruhr. Working party is considering but no definite views yet formulated.3

4. We shall keep you advised to fullest extent possible.4

5. This part of cable being sent to Douglas by State. Pls repeat your comments London, info Douglas. New subj.

6. Douglas now suggesting to British and French that meeting be postponed to Monday 15 Nov. He will advise you if this change is agreed upon.

7. State has designated Wayne G Jackson, Office of European Affairs as Douglas deputy and Daniel F Margolies, Div of Investment and Economic Development, and Ben H Brown, Office of Legal Advisor, as advisors. They plan to arrive in London a few days prior to opening of meeting to allow time for consultation with your representatives and possible British.

8. Would appreciate having names your representatives.

1 October 3, p. 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300].

2 The Informal Working Group on International Control of the Ruhr was organized at the beginning of October 1948. Its purpose was to assist in preparing the U.S. position for the forthcoming London six-power meeting on the Ruhr.

3 Message CC–6562, November 2, from Deputy United States Military Governor Hays to the Department of the Army, not printed, reported that agreement had been reached with the British regarding the definition of the geographic area of the Ruhr. According to that agreed definition, the Ruhr would comprise Regierungsbezirke Duesseldorf, Arnsberg, and Muenster in Land Nordrhein Westfalen, exclusive of the following areas: A. In Regierungsbezirk Duesseldorf: Landkreise Grevenbroich–Neuss, Kempen–Krefeld, and Kleve, a portion of Landkreis Rees, and Stadtkreise Muenchen-Gladbach, Rheydt, and Viersen; B. In Regierungsbezirk Arnsberg: Landkreise Arnsberg, Brilon, Lippstadt, Meschede, Olpe, Wittgenstein, Siegen, and Soest, and Stadtkreis Siegen; C. In Regierungsbezirk Muenster: Landkreise Ahaus, Beckum, Borken, Coesfeld, Luedinghausen, Muenster, Steinfurt, Tecklenburg, and Warendorf, and Stadtkreise Muenster and Bocholt. (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 133, File—Ruhr Authority, volume i )

4 The Informal Working Group on International Control of the Ruhr prepared seven additional progress reports reviewing its recommendations regarding the International Ruhr Control Authority. These reports were transmitted by the Department of the Army to OMGUS authorities in messages Warx 91771, October 30, 91912, November 2, 92003, November 4, 92132, November 5, 92254, November 9, and 92400, November 10. These messages are all included in CFM Files, Lot M–88; Box: 133, File—Ruhr Authority, volume i . For the text of the final, comprehensive instructions to the United States Delegation to the London Conference on the Ruhr, see instruction 459, November 10, to London, p. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309].

Editorial Note [Document 306]

Editorial Note

At a meeting of the United States, United Kingdom, and French Military Governors for Germany at Frankfurt, November 4, General Koenig expressed his dissatisfaction over the plans for international trusteeship for the Ruhr. For records of the meeting, see the notes prepared by Ambassador Murphy and telegram 2686, November 5, from Berlin, pages 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291] and 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292].

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Geoffrey W. Lewis, Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1048

[Document 307]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Geoffrey W. Lewis, Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas

confidential [Washington,] November 10, 1948.

Mr. Penson telephoned me about 11:15 on the morning of November 9 to say that he had received word that his government could not agree to the change of the wording in the preamble of the law reorganizing the Ruhr industries which we had proposed to him the preceding Thursday. This change would have been made in the paragraph which states that—“Military Government has decided that the question of the eventual ownership of the coal and iron and steel industries should be left to the determination of a representative freely elected German Government.” Our proposal was to change the first few words to read: “It is the policy of the Military Government that the question of the eventual ownership——.”

Mr. Penson said that his government felt that the US and UK Governments had made plain at the London conference last spring our views with respect to the question of eventual ownership and that there had been no undertaking to hold the matter open. His government called attention to the fact that while the words “Military Government has decided” certainly implied governmental approval, the fact remains that this is a statement of what is the case. Thirdly, Mr. Penson said that his government feels strongly that the wording of the preamble must remain unchanged because of the bad effect on German opinion of any alteration since some Germans had already seen the document which was to have been promulgated either the 9th or 10th.1 Note: At a meeting in “O”, Mr. Wilds’ office, it was subsequently decided that in view of the British position which had apparently been considered at a very high level in their government there was little point in taking the matter up with them again. Furthermore, time had about run out on us. It was, therefore, decided to make no further effort to change the wording of the preamble. Present at this meeting were Messrs. Beam (CE) Reinstein (E), Lewis (O). Mr. Reber (EUR) was consulted on the telephone and concurred in the decision.

[ Geoffrey W. Lewis ]

1 Regarding the Military Government law for the reorganization of the German coal, iron and steel industries, see the editorial note, infra.

Editorial Note [Document 308]

Editorial Note

On November 10, 1948 the United States and United Kingdom Military Governments published Law No. 75 on the reorganization of the German iron, coal and steel industries. For the text of the U.S. Military Government Law No. 75 together with the text of an OMGUS explanatory press statement, also issued on November 10, see Germany 1947–1949, pages 348–356 [Pgs. 348–356 include portions of Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239]. For the text of U.K. Military Government Law No. 75, see Ruhm von Oppen, Documents on Germany, pages 335–343, or Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, pages 637–645.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1048

[Document 309]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas)1

secret [Washington,] November 10, 1948.

No. 459.

Sir: Reference is made to the Department’s telegram Number 3969 of October 15, 19482 requesting you to serve as the principal representative of the United States at the discussions which are to take place in London in early November to draft a detailed agreement setting up an International Authority for the Ruhr. As you know, in discussions at London earlier this year, an agreement was reached by the United States, Great Britain and France, in consultation with Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands, on the principles which should govern the creation of an International Authority for the Ruhr. The discussions which are now to take place have for their purpose the drafting in proper technical form of an agreement based upon the principles set forth in Annex C of the London Agreement, subject to the various points of clarification included in Annex D of the Agreement.3

2. Annex D of the London Agreement provides that the Governments of the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg shall be fully associated with the preparation of the detailed agreement. The United States Government understands that this means they will participate fully in the forthcoming discussions, without prejudice to the right of the Governments of the United States, Great Britain and France as powers in occupation of the Western Zones of Germany, to make such decisions finally as they may deem appropriate in the light of their special responsibilities as occupying powers.

3. Although the London recommendations were accepted by the French Government, in communicating its acceptance to the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom the French Government stated it had been instructed by the French National Assembly to reaffirm the French position as to the necessity of internationalizing the mines and basic industries of the Ruhr.4 In the light of recent diplomatic correspondence between this Government and the French Government, it is apparent that the French representative at the forthcoming discussions will seek agreement to a revision of the London Agreement of a character which would provide for international ownership and management of the coal and coke resources and steel plants of the Ruhr area. As you know, the United States Government has consistently opposed the vesting in an international body of ownership or management functions with respect to the Ruhr industries. This Government considers that any such arrangement would be unworkable. This matter was discussed in considerable detail in the earlier London discussions and has been discussed on various other occasions. The United States Government believes that the various considerations relating to it have been fully brought out in the past. If the representatives of the French Government request a change in the provisions of the London Agreement along the lines suggested above during the forthcoming discussions, you should make clear that the United States Government is unwilling to consider any change in the basic principles incorporated in the portion of the London Agreement dealing with the Ruhr and considers the meeting to be solely for the purpose of drawing up a detailed agreement on the basis of these principles, as was agreed in paragraph 12 of Annex C of the Agreement.

The French representative may also raise for discussion the effect on the question of the ultimate ownership of Ruhr industries of the plan developed by Military Government in the bizonal area of Germany for the reorganization of German coal, iron and steel industries. You will receive separate instructions5 on how to deal with this issue.

The French representative may also propose that the Ruhr Authority be given power to make allocations of coal, coke and steel to industries within Germany. You should likewise oppose such a proposal as being outside the terms of the London Agreement.

4. The Ruhr control has security implications in denying to Germany the possibility of using exclusive jurisdiction over the resources of the Ruhr area as a means of reviving German aggressive powers or of imposing German economic domination on other countries. The United States wishes to see the project developed not only from this negative viewpoint but as a positive part of the program for European economic recovery and as a step toward the larger degree of Western European cooperation and economic integration which it is one of the objectives of the Recovery Program to foster. While the United States Government looks to the Organization for European Economic Cooperation as the major instrumentality for achieving this objective, it would like to see some provision included in the Ruhr agreement which might be used as a basis for the eventual development of the Ruhr control into a broader approach to the problem of assuring effective utilization of the Ruhr resources, as well as other related resources of Western Europe, for the common good. You will be furnished later with a suggested draft of such a provision.

Although the United States recognizes that the necessity for the establishment of such a control has stemmed from the importance of the Ruhr industrial complex as a base for aggression, it feels that arrangements for the future should not be considered a punitive measure. It believes that the success of any continued arrangement of this character must depend in the long run on a substantial measure of German cooperation, and that the agreement must be so drawn as to encourage such cooperation.

5. It is the desire of the United States Government that the arrangements for the control of the Ruhr be such as to carry out effectively the principles of the London Agreement. The establishment of international control over the resources of an area such as the Ruhr constitutes a novel experiment in international relationships. The Ruhr control owes its existence to security considerations and is made possible by the ability of the Allies to impose it on Germany. While it has therefore limited direct applicability to other problems of access to basic materials, the body of experience developed by the Authority might be of value in dealing with other situations where a concentration of resources could be developed by common action for the common good of the nations dependent on such resources.

6. The discussions which are to take place in London should result in the preparation of a text of a draft agreement which will be submitted to the six Governments with a recommendation that they approve its signature. The Department assumes that one of the Governments participating in the discussions, presumably the British Government, will be asked to assume responsibility for making the necessary arrangements for the signature of the agreement. As you know, under the London Agreement, the International Authority must begin the exercise of its functions prior to the creation of a provisional German government. The United States Government would not wish to have the creation of a provisional German government deferred as a result of delays in connection with the preparation of a Ruhr agreement and attaches importance, therefore, to the speedy conclusion of the drafting of the agreement and its approval and signature by the Governments concerned.

Insofar as the United States is concerned, the present plan is not to submit the agreement to the Senate for advice and consent to ratification in accordance with treaty-making procedure, but to conclude it under the President’s executive powers. For this reason, the United States Government would not wish to have incorporated in the agreement provisions of a character which would be inappropriate for an executive agreement. It is not believed that the United States position on this point should give rise to particular difficulties in the negotiation of the agreement. Most of the matters which would be inappropriate for inclusion in an executive agreement would relate to the period after a peace settlement and cannot be finally resolved at the present time.

7. The arrangements for the control of the Ruhr included in the London Agreement are of continuing character and are designed so that they could extend into the period after a German peace settlement is concluded. At the same time, it must be recognized that the occupying Powers assumed their authority in Germany on behalf of the interests of the United Nations as a whole and that the three Powers do not have the power to bind the other countries at war with Germany with respect to the provisions of a peace settlement. In order to cover this point, the agreement on the Ruhr should provide that the arrangement should continue until the peace settlement and thereafter as provided in the peace settlement.

8. In connection with the discussion of the Berlin case in the Security Council, the United States has stated its willingness under certain conditions to take part in a CFM meeting on Germany. If any such meeting were to take place after the Ruhr Authority agreement had gone into effect, the Western occupying powers must be in a position to negotiate on matters which might touch the Ruhr. If the Ruhr Authority agreement could be modified or terminated only with the consent of the Benelux countries, the occupying powers would have limited their freedom of negotiation. In this connection it should be noted that Annex C of the London Agreement is in form an agreement between the occupying powers “after consultation” with the Benelux Governments and Annex D provides merely that the Benelux countries “shall be fully associated with the preparation” of the definitive agreement. There is no formal commitment that their status should be the same as that of the occupying powers. In addition, as was stated in the Communiqué of June 7, 19486 published at the conclusion of the London discussions, the recommendations reached at the London meeting did not preclude eventual Four Power agreement on the German problem. Accordingly, it is the United States position that the agreement (1) should be subject to amendment only with the consent of all signatories (including the Benelux countries) but (2) should be subject to termination by the occupying powers after consultation with the other signatories, i.e., the Benelux countries.

9. While it is necessary to preserve the power to make changes in the arrangement in the peace settlement and while the freedom of action of the Occupying Powers in any Four Power discussion must be preserved, it is the intention of the United States to support, both in any Four Power discussions which may take place regarding Germany and in the wider discussions which would be involved in the preparation of a German peace settlement, the basic principles of the arrangement for the control of the Ruhr included in the London Agreement. You are authorized to state this position and, if necessary, to confirm it in writing. You should make clear in so doing that the United States does not regard the three Occupying Powers as obligated to insist in any Four Power or broader discussions upon the adoption in all its details of the arrangements agreed by the six powers for the control of the Ruhr.

10. For your confidential information, the trend of thinking within the Department is that, in the context of a quadripartite settlement of the German problem, membership of the Ruhr Authority should probably be confined, after the relinquishment of Allied supreme authority in Germany, to France, the Benelux countries, Great Britain and Germany. Under these conditions both the United States and the Soviet Union would be excluded. This is not, however, a firm Department position. Any proposal of this kind would, of course, be discussed with the British and French Governments before it was suggested at a quadripartite meeting. It is not believed that this line of thinking need affect the drafting of the Ruhr agreement on the basis of the London discussions provided the provision discussed above regarding termination by the three Occupying Powers is included.

11. It is possible that before discussions of the text of the Ruhr agreement are completed, a quadripartite meeting on German problems might be convened. The six Powers have already indicated publicly that the London Agreement does not stand in the way of quadripartite agreement, and, in general, it is the view of this Government that the implementation of the London Agreement should proceed promptly. However, some embarrassment might be involved to the Western Powers if a six-power meeting on the Ruhr without Soviet participation were being carried on at the same time that the Ruhr and other problems were being discussed in the Council of Foreign Ministers. If the problem should arise, it will have to be dealt with in the light of the circumstances prevailing at the time, but it is possible that this Government would wish to have the discussions of the Ruhr meeting recess during the continuation of any quadripartite discussions of Germany.

12. It is believed that the following will probably be the principal points which will arise in connection with the drafting of the Ruhr agreement:

[Here follow sub-sections dealing with the following points: original signatories to the Agreement, accession by other countries, purpose of the Agreement, definition of the Ruhr, products subject to control, standards governing the operation of the Ruhr Authority, representation on the Authority, staff of the Authority, administrative costs, rights reserved to the Military Government, sanctions, and functions of the Authority with respect to property.]

13. Although it is not directly a part of the task to be accomplished at the forthcoming discussions, it is believed that informal discussions might well take place with a view to commencing the organization of the Ruhr Authority. In this connection, there are several points on which discussions can usefully be held coincidentally with the drafting of the agreement. These are (1) the designation of an executive secretary of the Authority; (2) the possibility of an advance to the Authority by the signatory Governments of working funds, pending the establishment of a budget; and (3) the extent to which the assistance of Military Government in Germany will be required to enable the Authority to find suitable quarters and other facilities, and quarters for its staff. With regard to the second point, you will be advised further as to the extent, if any, to which the United States could make some advance on its contribution to the budgetary cost of the Authority.

14. There are being furnished to you separately for your possible use during the negotiations, a draft of an agreement to establish the International Authority for the Ruhr, which has been prepared in the Department, together with memoranda commenting on various problems which arise in the drafting or which may arise otherwise during the course of the discussions.7

15. It has not been possible to reach a full coordination of views on the subjects dealt with in this instruction with the United States Military Governor in Germany. You should, during the course of the discussions, consult with the United States Military Governor in Germany on important matters affecting Military Government. General Clay has been asked to provide you with one or more advisers to assist you during the course of the negotiations, and you will, in the normal course, receive his views through them. For your information, there is attached as Enclosure No. 3 a letter of November 5, 1948 from the Chief of the Civil Affairs Division of the Department of Army which indicates that that Department has authorized General Clay to take initial responsibility on this subject.8 If, in your judgment, any suggestions regarding the draft agreement made by the Office of Military Government conflict with these inductions, you should submit them to the Department, together with your recommendations, for resolution in Washington.

The Economic Cooperation Administration has, at the Department’s request, designated Mr. Saul Nelson to act as an adviser to you for so long as is necessary. He will arrive in London approximately November 27.

Very truly yours,

For the Acting Secretary of State:
Paul H. Nitze

1 This instruction was prepared in draft by Wayne Jackson, Jacques Reinstein, Ben Brown, and Daniel Margolies of the Department of State and embodied the conclusions reached by the Informal Working Group on the International Control of the Ruhr. It was circulated by the Informal Working Group to interested offices of the Department of State as document ICR D–26, November 4, for comment and revision and was subsequently discussed with Ambassador Douglas, who was in Washington briefly on consultation.

2 Not printed.

3 Annex C of the Report of the London Conference on Germany, June 1, 1948 (p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]) is the same as document TRI/16 (Final), May 26, p. 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190]. Annex D is the same as document TRI/23 (Final), May 26, p. 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193].

4 Regarding the French note of June 19 under reference here, see the editorial note, p. 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228].

5 Telegram 4277, ToRuhr 2, November 10, to London, not printed.

6  Ante, p. 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210].

7 The draft agreement promised here was subsequently transmitted to London as an enclosure to instruction 467, November 15, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1548). Regarding this draft and its relationship to the draft agreement circulated to London Conference on the Ruhr as document RC/3, November 12 (p. 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 317]), see footnote 1 to the last-named document.

8 The letter under reference here is not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1148: Telegram

[Document 310]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent London, November 11, 1948—2 p. m.

4824. 1. On arrival in London yesterday afternoon1 I was met with “stink bomb” in announcement Instrument of Trusteeship.2 In view of strong French protest (Paris 5823, November 10, repeated London 12273 ) I believe they will undoubtedly seek to place subject on agenda Ruhr discussions which open this afternoon and may demand its modification as sine qua non to their participation. Moreover even though they do not take any extreme position, at first blush I don’t see how conference can duck discussing the decision stated in the preamble of the trusteeship instrument. In view of this, I feel that matter should have urgent consideration in Department in order that there may be speedy decision and definite instructions sent to us here.

2. I understand the trusteeship arrangement is to become effective immediately.

3. You know all the nuances of the situation.

Douglas

1 Ambassador Douglas had been in Washington briefly on consultation.

2 The reference here is presumably to the announcement of Military Government Law No. 75 on the reorganization of the German coal, iron and steel industries; see the editorial note, p. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309].

3 Not printed. It reported that Foreign Minister Schuman had urgently called Ambassador Caffery to his office that evening to hand him a communication energetically protesting the action of American and British occupation authorities in issuing U.S.–U.K. Military Government Law No. 75 (862.60/11–1048). In his telegram 5836, November 11, from Paris, not printed, Caffery reported that in handing the communication to him, Schuman had observed that the three governments appeared to have been cooperating in the matter and expressed incredulity that the Americans and British would face him with a fait accompli just two days before the convening of the London Conference on the Ruhr. Schuman warned that the Communists and Gaullists would surely exploit the announcement. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1148)

2. Proceedings of the Conference; Conference documents and supplementary papers2. Proceedings of the Conference; Conference documents and supplementary papers

[311] Editorial Note

[312] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State

London, November 11, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1148: Telegram

[313] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State

London, November 11, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1148: Telegram

[314] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Acting Secretary of State

Paris, November 12, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1248: Telegram

[315] The Military Attaché in the United Kingdom (Leonard) to the Department of the Army

London, 12 November 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 133: File—Ruhr Authority, Vol. I: Telegram

[316] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State

London, November 12, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1248: Telegram

[317] Proposal by the United States Delegation to the London Conference on the Ruhr

[London,] 12 November, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 126: File—IAR Documents

[318] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

Washington, November 13, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1348: Telegram

[319] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

[Berlin,] November 13, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1448: Telegram

[320] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in France

Berlin, November 13, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1348: Telegram

[321] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

Frankfurt, 15 November 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 133: File—Ruhr Authority, Vol. I: Telegram

[322] The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

Paris, November 15, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1548: Telegram

[323] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

Washington, November 15, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1548: Telegram

[324] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, November 15, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1348: Telegram

[325] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the French Minister for Foreign Affairs (Schuman)

Paris, November 16, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1648: Telegram

[326] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] November 16, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1648

[327] The Under Secretary of the Army (Draper) to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

[Washington,] 17 November 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 133: File-—Ruhr Authority, Vol. I: Telegram

[328] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Acting Secretary of State

London, November 17, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1748: Telegram

[329] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State

London, November 18, 1948—10 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1848: Telegram

[330] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Berlin, November 18, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1848: Telegram

[331] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, November 18, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1848: Telegram

[332] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State, at Paris

London, November 19, 1948—1 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1948: Telegram

[333] The Deputy Administrator of the Economic Cooperation Administration (Bruce) to the Economic Cooperation Administration Mission in the United Kingdom

[Washington,] November 19, 1948—4 p. m.

London Embassy Files: File—850 Marshall Plan: Telegram

[334] Minutes of a Meeting of Foreign Ministers, Quai d’Orsay, Paris, November 19, 1948, 4 p. m.

[Paris,] November 19, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 123: File—Mtg of ForMins

[335] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman)

Berlin, November 20, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 133: File—Ruhr Authority, Vol. I

[336] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State

London, November 21, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2148: Telegram

[337] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

Berlin, 22 November 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 133: File—Ruhr Authority, Vol. I: Telegram

[338] Memorandum by Michael J. McDermott, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State, of the Secretary of State’s Press and Radio News Conference, November 24, 1948

[Washington, November 24, 1948.]

News Division Files: Secretary’s Press Conferences

[339] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, November 28, 1948—3 p. m.

740.0019 Control (Germany)/11–2848: Telegram

[340] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, November 29, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2148: Telegram

[341] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, November 29, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2948: Telegram

[342] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, November 30, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–3048: Telegram

[343] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 2, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–248: Telegram

[344] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 2, 1948——10 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–248: Telegram

[345] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Under Secretary of the Army (Draper)

Berlin, 3 December 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–448: Telegram

[346] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, December 3, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–348: Telegram

[347] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, December 3, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–348: Telegram

[348] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, December 3, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–348: Telegram

[349] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, December 4, 1948—noon.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2448: Telegram

[350] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 4, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–448: Telegram

[351] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, December 4, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–448: Telegram

[352] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Berlin, December 5, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–548: Telegram

[353] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 5, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–548: Telegram

[354] Editorial Note

[355] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, December 7, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–748: Telegram

[356] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Berlin, December 8, 1948—8 p. m.

London Embassy Files: 800 Germany: Telegram

[357] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 9, 1948—2 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–948: Telegram

[358] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, December 10, 1948—10 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1048: Telegram

[359] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Embassy in France

London, December 10, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1048: Telegram

[360] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 11, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1148: Telegram

[361] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

London, December 13, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1148: Telegram

[362] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 15, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1548: Telegram

[363] The Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Paris, December 16, 1948—6 p. m.

711.51/12–1648: Telegram

[364] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, December 16, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1648: Telegram

[365] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 17, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1748: Telegram

[366] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

[Berlin,] December 18, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[367] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 18, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1848: Telegram

[368] Proposal by the United States Delegation to the London Conference on the Ruhr

[London, undated.]

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–2748

[369] Editorial Note

[370] Communiqué of the London Conference on the Ruhr, December 28, 1948

London, December 28, 1948

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–2848

[371] Draft Agreement for the Establishment of an International Authority for the Ruhr

[London, December 28, 1948.]

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–2948

[372] Agreed Minutes of the London Conference on the Ruhr Regarding the Draft Agreement for the Establishment of an International Authority for the Ruhr

[London, undated.]

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 126: File—Misc Materials

Editorial Note [Document 311]

Editorial Note

From November 11 to December 24, 1948, representatives from the United Kingdom, the United States, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg met in London for talks devoted to the preparation of a draft charter on the international control of the Ruhr. Twenty-five formal meetings were held at the British Foreign Office and twenty-four formal, numbered conference documents were considered. The documents in this section include U.S. Delegation telegraphic reports on the most important formal and informal sessions of the Conference—hereafter referred to as the London Conference on the Ruhr. This section also includes the most important documents, generated or considered by the Conference. In addition there have been included papers regarding instructions to and reports from the U.S. Delegation to the Conference together with supplementary documentation related to the Conference. No official record of meetings or Conference decisions was maintained, but the U.S. Delegation prepared its own minutes of the formal meetings. The telegraphic reports on Conference meetings bear annotations indicating the Department file location of the appropriate U.S. Delegation minutes. A complete set of the U.S. Delegation minutes together with a complete set of the formal numbered documents is included in CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 126. The list of delegations set forth below is derived from papers in the files of the Department of State. The list is not complete, but it includes the principal participants at Conference sessions.

List of Delegations to the London Conference on the Ruhr

United Kingdom

Representative (and permanent Conference Chairman)

Roger B. Stevens, Assistant Under-Secretary of State, Foreign Office

Advisers

John W. Nicholls, Head, German Commercial Relations and Industry Department, Foreign Office

James A. M. Marjoribanks, Assistant Head, German Political Department, Foreign Office

Dermot F. MacDermot, Foreign Office

Miss E. Ackroyd, Steel Expert, Ministry of Supply

Francis B. Richards, German Political Department, Foreign Office

Miss A. D. Stevens, Economist, Board of Trade

E. J. Meadon, Coal Expert, Ministry of Trade and Power

E. T. Lewis, German Commercial Relations and Industry Department, Foreign Office

United States

Representative

Lewis W. Douglas, Ambassador in the United Kingdom

Alternate Representative

Wayne G. Jackson, Special Assistant to the Director, Office of European Affairs, Department of State

Advisers

Benjamin H. Brown, Jr., Office of the Legal Adviser, Department, of State

Daniel F. Margolies, Acting Chief, Central European Branch, Division of Investment and Economic Development, Department of State

Forrest G. Hannaman, Special Assistant for Policy Coordination, OMGUS

William C. Trimble, First Secretary, Embassy in the United Kingdom

Fritz Oppenheimer, Consultant, Department of State

Saul Nelson, Economic Cooperation Administration

France

Representative

Hervé Alphand, Director General for Economic and Financial Affairs, Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Advisers

André Gros, Legal Adviser, Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Francois Valery, Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Paul Leroy Beaulieu, Economic and Financial Adviser, French High Command in Germany

Louis de Guiringaud, First Secretary, Embassy in the United Kingdom

Georges Perrineau, Director of Mines, Ministry of Industry and Commerce

Georges Louis Parisot, Adviser, Ministry of Industry and Commerce

M. Burau (or Bureau), Director, Office of Iron Production, Ministry of Industry and Commerce

Belgium

Representative

Vicomte Alain Obert de Thieusies, Ambassador in the United Kingdom

Alternate Representatives

Jean Salmon, Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Amaury Holvoet, First Secretary, Embassy in the United Kingdom

Advisers

Olivier Gerard, Acting Deputy Director General for External Trade

Prince Werner de Merode, Second Secretary, Embassy in the United Kingdom

Netherlands

Representative

Joseph M. A. H. Luns, First Secretary, Embassy in the United Kingdom

Adviser

J.G. deVooys, Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Luxembourg

Representative

André Clasen, Minister in the United Kingdom

Alternate Representative

Georges Heisbourg, Secretary, Legation in the United Kingdom

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1148: Telegram

[Document 312]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State

confidential London, November 11, 1948—2 p. m.

4825. Ruhrto 1. Ruhr talks: Preliminary conversations with British held November 10 to discuss organization of conference and principal issues.1 British offered new draft (being pouched despatch 2235) containing minor revisions of draft received from British Embassy Washington.2 No major differences with British have yet emerged.

1. Anticipated French position. British anticipate strong French effort to expand talks beyond Annex C of London agreement3 in line with French note June 19. British favored holding to Annex C and attempting to minimize French discussions of extraneous issues. British particularly anticipating strong French effort to extend maintenance of control of coal and coke management beyond end of control period.

2. Timing. British expressed view that authority should not be organized with attendant publicity at time of referendum on German constitution. Suggested first organization meeting two weeks before referendum and anticipated Ruhr authority would actually begin to function some time after provisional government established. USDel indicated this would require further study although agreed that publicity factor should be taken into account.

3. Ruhr area. British anticipated French would wish to extend Ruhr area south of Cologne and München-Gladbach and suggested we might compromise if necessary by agreeing to include München-Gladbach provided French agree to exclude Geldern and Moers.

4. Accession. British explained article on accession was intended to provide protection against Soviet and other criticism of exclusive nature of Ruhr authority but do not feel strongly.

5. Designation of instrument. After explanation USDel position re calling document agreement British stated preferred statute since it could then be confined to matters relating strictly to establishment and immediate powers of authority and protect against insertion of extraneous matters. Under this theory Annex C would continue in effect, merely being supplemented by statute. USDel expressed concern that such procedure would lead to numerous complications and questions of interpretation particularly where statute overlaps provisions Annex C. British contemplated putting statute into effect by short agreement to which statute would be annexed. Matter to be discussed further with British.

6. Definition of Germany. USDel pointed out need for defining Germany. British agreed this required further study.

7. Access to Ruhr. USDel indicated desire to protect right of access to Ruhr resources for countries not participating in OEEC. British agreed.

8. Property. British did not expect Paris meeting would result in any agreement which would relieve Ruhr authority of responsibility re protection foreign property interests.

9. Agreed that further informal meetings would be held with British.

10. US draft agreement4 discussed with OMGUS representatives and number of points cleared up.

Sent Department 4825, repeated Berlin 586.

Douglas

1 A copy of the U.S. Delegation minutes of this meeting (document USDel/Min/Inf/L/R/1, November 10, 1948) was transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to despatch 2243, November 12, from London, neither printed. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1248)

2 Neither the despatch under reference here nor the enclosed copy of the British draft statute on the Ruhr, subsequently circulated to the London Conference on the Ruhr as document RC/1, November 11, is printed. An earlier version of the British draft statute, dated October 28, had been given to the Department of State where it was circulated by the Informal Working Group on the Ruhr as document ICR D–20, November 3, not printed.

3 Annex C of the Report of the London Conference on Germany, June 1, 1948 (p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]) is the same document as TRI/16 (Final), May 26, p. 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190].

4 Subsequently circulated to the Conference as document RC/3, November 12, p. 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 317].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1148: Telegram

[Document 313]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State

secret London, November 11, 1948—9 p. m.

4830. [Ruhrto 2.] Ruhr Talks: 1. At opening session this afternoon1 after organizational details completed including designation Stevens head UKDel as Permanent Chairman, Alphand, head of French delegation, read prepared statement quoted in full below. US and UK reserved comment pending study of statement.

2. Alphand stated French desire for general discussion re geographic area of Ruhr before reference to a technical committee. British revised draft (sent Department November 10) circulated together with proposed area of Ruhr outlined on map.2 Area same as previous British position except that it includes Altena and conforms with OMGUS position.

3. Alphand stated French draft of agreement would be circulated tonight, covering only principles in Annex C, but not going into question of management which was separate matter. USDel promised to circulate draft also, although indicating certain sections might be withheld and be supplied later.

4. At suggestion USDel, following procedure agreed for press relations. At each meeting question would be raised as to whether meeting with press warranted. If affirmative, each delegate would brief representatives of its own national press although representatives of all delegations would previously coordinate general line to be followed. All remarks to be for background and not for direct quotation. Effort would be made to play down press interest in proceedings on ground that talks concerned with merely technical problems and not high policy. General atmosphere unusually friendly in view strong French reaction to trusteeship matter. Full text Alphand statement follows: “On the occasion of the opening of these conversations, at which a detailed agreement is to be drawn up for the creation of an international authority for the Ruhr, the French delegation, on the instructions of its Government, is obliged to make a preliminary statement:—

“On the 18th June, 1948 when the French Government informed the Governments of the United States of America, the United Kingdom, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg, it accepted the recommendations of the London conference on Germany, which form the basis of our present discussions, it drew the attention of those governments to certain reservations which reflected the unchanging position of the French delegation and which were the result of a resolution of the French National Assembly. These reservations referred to two principal points:— “(1) The French Government declared that the question of the ownership of the mines and basic industries of the Ruhr ought to be settled as soon as possible. It emphasized that it had not yet been possible to reconcile the views of the various allied governments on this question. It expressed the hope that agreement would be reached without difficulty on the principle of the expropriation of the former magnates. For the remainder, it considered, as always, that the establishment of international ownership would be the best solution from every point of view.

“(2) Similarly, the French Government declared that when the occasion arose to take steps on the setting up the international authority for the Ruhr, it would wish to reopen the question of the international control of management of the mines.

“The Anglo-American bizonal authorities have yesterday, 10 November, published a law of which the preamble includes a declaration under the terms of which it would be for a freely elected German Government to determine the final settlement of the ownership of the coal and steel industries. Although this declaration is in accordance with position previously taken up by the American and British Governments and is accompanied by a reservation making it clear that the former magnates and Nazi owners can, under no circumstances, be restored to their properties, it cannot be accepted by the French Government. My Government indicated yesterday that it would not recognize this declaration, nor any other which might be made by the American and British Military Governors concerning the final disposal of the mining and metallurgical properties of the Ruhr, as no agreement had been readied among the governments of the interested powers on the question of eventual ownership. The settlement of the problem which is considered to be of paramount importance, is not a matter for the British and American Commanders-in-Chief but for governments only.

“Although this question of ownership is not on the agenda of these discussions and is being dealt with at present through the normal diplomatic channel, my Government has instructed me to re-state its position in this matter in such a way that it is made quite clear that our participate on in this conference changes in no way the views which it previously expressed on this point.

‘“On the other hand, so far as the control of management is concerned, the French Government hopes, as we said on the 18th June, that this question can be reopened during the present discussions.

“Examination of the text drawn up in May insofar as it concerns the international authority of the Ruhr has confirmed the fears already expressed by the French Government that the control of distribution of the coal, coke and steel of the Ruhr cannot be properly effective if the international authority does not retain certain number of the powers of control over the management of plants now exercised by the allied authorities. I must emphasize once more that we do not wish that management itself should be vested in international authority but that this organization should receive sufficient powers to supervise in particular the drawing up and implementation of programmes of production and re-equipment.

“It is understood that the new and limited powers which would thus be given to the authority would be exercised in conformity with the needs of economic reconstruction in Europe, including Germany.

“That is the declaration which I was charged to make in the name of the French Government, which acts on a formal mandate of its parliament.”3

Above is unofficial hurried Foreign Office translation.

Sent Department; repeated Berlin for Murphy and Clay 587 and Paris 866.

Douglas

1 The U.S. Delegation minutes of this meeting were transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to despatch 2254, November 15, from London, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1548).

2 The British draft statute, together with the attached map under reference here, was circulated to the Conference as document RC/1, November 11, not printed. A copy of RC/1 was transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to despatch 2293, November 19, from London, not printed. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1948)

3 The text of this statement was circulated to the Conference as document RC/2; a copy of that document was transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 2293, November 19, from London, not printed. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1948)

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1248: Telegram

[Document 314]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Acting Secretary of State

secret Paris, November 12, 1948—4 p. m.

5847. Referring to his protest against recent action taken by military commanders at Frankfurt concerning the Ruhr, Schuman said he realizes full well that a good part of French policy towards Germany is not realistic (but the French people in general do not realize that); he knows furthermore that France will have to abandon at least some of her positions in connection with Germany. He said also that in no event would he accept Russian participation in any form in the Ruhr.

What he did resent more than anything else he added was the “timing” of the Frankfurt “affair”.

Caffery

The Military Attaché in the United Kingdom (Leonard) to the Department of the Army CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 133: File—Ruhr Authority, Vol. I: Telegram

[Document 315]

The Military Attaché in the United Kingdom (Leonard) to the Department of the Army

secret
priority London, 12 November 1948.

74227. From MilAttaché London England sgd Leonard fr F S [G] Hannaman to Dept of Army Wash DC for Draper. Have discussed with State representatives and Ambassador Douglas draft Ruhr agreement1 and draft instructions prepared by State2 but not yet coordinated with Army. There are four points which we consider of major importance.

1. State draft adheres to general form of annex C and is a mélange of instructions to the Ruhr authority and to the Military Governors, which we consider undesirable. OMGUS draft3 attempted avoid this difficulty by eliminating any instruction to Military Governors and using such language as “The authority will look to the Military Governors for implementation of its decisions”. British draft4 attempts somewhat less successfully we feel, to do the same thing. OMGUS believes its approach would give the [best solution], provided the concomitant weakening of MG undertakings does not cause the French to take fright. As an alternative; (there could be two documents, one a charter for the authority and the other a directive to the MG. We consider this alternative less desirable and decided against it when preparing OMGUS draft.
In presenting State draft to conference, it is planned to make a specific reserve as to the ultimate form of the agreement/charter, so that we are not committed from the start to the mélange.

2. State draft provides governments shall be members of authority instead of “Representative of occupying powers” as agreed in Annex C. This in itself would probably be of no substantial importance were it not for clearly expressed intent of State draft instructions to have US representative be appointed by Washington for purpose of coordinating various US interests in European political and economic fields, and at the same time to have special Military Government representatives to cast the German vote. See comments our CC 66265 on this point. Both Clay and Douglas recall that at London meetings it was understood that MG would provide US representative on authority and we are at a loss to understand why this change is made or how anyone could expect the US position to be effective on the authority if one US representative is responsible directly to Washington and the other to Washington via Berlin. Do not believe we need further emphasize importance we attach to this point.

3. Appointment of German representative. See our CC 6626, State draft adheres to language of annex C, and delegation has no instructions to alter, although they and Douglas see force of our argument that our language will be of great political and psychological value in Germany and should make possible a more willing and cooperative attitude by Germany than if we hold out no real hope that Germans will be able to name their own representative. If we stick to present state language we do not feel it likely that French will ever be willing to liberalize, so for the moment this paragraph is being cut out of the draft until further instructions are received from Washington.

4. The proposed annex to the agreement regarding relationship of MG–OEEC and the authority is wholly unrealistic to OMGUS, and we strongly urge that it be dropped in its entirety. The authority would be placed in a position where it passed upon the decisions of the Military Governors and dictated the position to be taken by the Bizone representatives on OEEC. To all intents and purposes it would directly control the economic life of the Bizone.

We see no need of any such provisions. The OEEC, on which authority members are represented, will determine whether or not the Bizone programs are acceptable and the authority, as provided in annex C, will then implement such programs by its allocations. To give the authority the right to determine what program Bizone may submit to OEEC is to violate spirit and probably letter of Bizonal undertakings under ECA bilateral agreement and OEEC convention. [If this is done, it completely destroys our rights in financial and economic fields under fusion agreement and makes it virtually impossible for Military Government to be responsible for economic development during period of US financial support.6 ]

In view of fact State draft completely ignores previous OMGUS comments on this point, trust you will take up promptly with State.7 Meanwhile, it has been agreed here not to mention proposed Annex to the meeting. Wilkinson leaving London today. Hannaman remaining. Please cable your comments soonest to CINCEUR Berlin and also CINCEUR Frankfurt Military Post.

[ Hannaman ]

1 The U.S. draft agreement on international authority for the Ruhr, circulated to the London Conference on the Ruhr as document RC/3, November 12, p. 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 317], conforms closely to a draft agreement prepared in Washington by the Informal Working Group on the International Control of the Ruhr. Regarding the relationship between document RC/2 and the draft agreement prepared in Washington, see footnote 1 to the former paper.

2 See instruction 459, November 10, to London, p. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309].

3 See message CC–6171, October 3, from General Clay, p. 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300].

4 Document RC/1, November 11, not printed.

5  OMGUS message CC–6626, November 5, from Berlin, not printed.

6 The bracketed sentence was added to this message as a result of message CC–6714, November 13, from General Clay in Berlin, not printed (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 133, File—Ruhr Authority, volume i ).

7 Department of the Army message Warx–92574, November 15, to General Clay at Berlin, not printed, stated that the Department of State and the Department of the Army had agreed that a resolution of OEEC problem should await the arrival in London of Saul Nelson who would serve as ECA adviser to Ambassador Douglas for the London Conference on the Ruhr. (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 133, File—Ruhr Authority, volume i )

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1248: Telegram

[Document 316]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State

confidential London, November 12, 1948—10 p. m.

4853. Ruhrto 3. 1. At second meeting this afternoon1 Netherlands’ Representative,2 speaking for own country and not for Benelux, made statement reserving right of Netherlands, as was done at spring talks, to raise territorial and economic claims in peace settlement, in accordance with Annex I of memo of 5 November 1946,3 and presentation to CFM deputies. In particular, Netherlands Representative was concerned that any agreement reached here as to geographic area of Ruhr should not prejudice Dutch claims for territorial adjustments and concessions in area west of Rhine or Dutch Treaty rights and privileges in Aachen area which they are seeking to have recognized in connection Paris property conference.4

2. USDel and French introduced drafts agreement for circulation.5 US draft contained changes suggested ToRuhr 36 and other drafting changes agreed with OMGUS representatives. French draft based in part on original British document. Committee of four appointed to collate texts of US, UK and French drafts under appropriate subject headings, showing areas of agreement and disagreement, with instructions to make preliminary report Monday.

3. In outlining general position on geographic area Ruhr, Alphand stated French not concerned with Kreise or political boundaries but with location coal deposits. Believed British area failed to extend far enough north. Also, since IAR concerned with problem of German exports, French consider it essential to include Aachen and Cologne coal fields which contribute substantially toward German coal exports. Aachen, in particular, produces largely for export market. Finally, if IAR was to play useful role in protection foreign property interests, Aachen area should be included since foreign property interests principally found there. At request of chairman, Alphand undertook to provide statistical data in support his contentions Monday.7

4. USDel, in commenting on Alphand statement yesterday referred to June 19 note,8 reserved position pending further study and instructions, but noted that French proposal was being studied in light of Annex C, which provided in Article VIII for control over management coal and coke during control period, in which French could participate through trizonal fusion and in Articles V and IX for protection foreign interests and disarmament, all of which might be objectives of French proposal. Benelux countries stated they had sought instructions. British noted French had served timely notice intention discuss question control management and matter under consideration. International ownership not under discussion although British reiterated preamble trusteeship stated past and present British position.

5. In enlarging on statement yesterday, Alphand explained although question of international ownership being pursued through diplomatic channels, trusteeship matter had caused strong political repercussions and events in ownership field would have bearing on this meeting. Further, technical decisions regarding Ruhr would have political effects. French regarded Article VIII, Annex C provisions regarding control over management incomplete and French wanted more precise arrangements. Would controls lapse at end control period or be transferred to security body? Alphand stated unclear on scope of existing controls exercised by Military Government over German coal management and on plans for continuing present controls. Re French participation in such controls, French anxious to make necessary agreements promptly (not clear whether this meant trizonal fusion) and suggested study of powers to be given Military Security Board9 or other disarmament commission after end control period in regard supervision coal industry with respect production programs, investment policy, right of removal of personnel from agreed key positions, payment of salaries and structure of industry. He hoped these points would be borne in mind in studying his proposals.

6. At informal meeting with British earlier,10 Stevens indicated that French had exploited trusteeship matter to gain public support for French position and British proposed to set out their position in detailed reply to question by MP in Commons Monday.

Sent Department 4853; repeated Paris 871, Berlin 588.

Douglas

1 The U.S. Delegation minutes of this meeting (document USDel/Min/L/R/2, November 12) were transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to despatch 2263, November 16, from London, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1648).

2 Dr. Joseph Luns.

3 Annex I is not printed. For Netherlands memorandum of November 5, 1946, see Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. ii, p. 1016.

4 Regarding the meeting in Paris of the Intergovernmental Group on the Safeguarding of Foreign Interests in Germany, see the editorial note, p. 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416].

5 The U.S. Delegation proposal, document RC/3, November 12, p. 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 317]; the French Delegation proposal, document RC/4, November 12, not printed.

6 Not printed.

7 For the text of Alphand’s statement at the first meeting of the Conference on November 11, see telegram 4830, Ruhrto 2, November 11, p. 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313].

8 Regarding the note under reference here, see the editorial note, p. 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228].

9 For documentation regarding the establishment of the Military Security Board, see pp. 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399] ff.

10 A copy of the U.S. Delegation minutes of this informal meeting, held at the Foreign Office at 11 a. m. (document USDel/Min/Inf/L/R/2, November 12) was transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to despatch 2267, November 16, from London, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1648).

Proposal by the United States Delegation to the London Conference on the Ruhr CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 126: File—IAR Documents

[Document 317]

Proposal by the United States Delegation to the London Conference on the Ruhr 1

secret [London,] 12 November, 1948.

RC/3

Agreement on International Authority for the Ruhr

Whereas international security and the general economic recovery of Europe require that the coal, coke and steel resources of the Ruhr shall not in the future be used for the purpose of aggression, but solely in the interests of peace, and that, in furtherance of their common political and economic well-being, all countries cooperating in the common economic good shall hereafter be assured access to these resources on an equitable basis;

And, whereas it is desirable that there be a close association of the economic life of those countries of Europe, including Germany, which are working together in the common interest, and that trade among them should be facilitated by lowering trade barriers and by other means;

Now, therefore, in furtherance of the foregoing purposes, the governments of Belgium, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America agree as follows:——

article i

the authority

There is hereby established an International Authority for the Ruhr, hereinafter referred to as the “Authority”, the composition, powers and functions of which are as set forth herein.

article ii

definitions

1. The Ruhr

For the purposes of the present agreement, the Ruhr shall mean _____________.

2. Occupying Powers

The term “Occupying Powers”, when used in the present Agreement, shall mean the Government of France, the Government of the United Kingdom and the Government of the United States.

3. Occupation Authorities

The term “Occupation Authorities”, when used in the present Agreement, shall mean the Occupying Powers’ representatives who are exercising occupational responsibility in Germany on behalf of their Governments.

4. Occupying Powers Concerned and Occupation Authorities Concerned

The terms “Occupying Powers Concerned” and “Occupation Authorities Concerned”, when used in the present Agreement, shall mean those Occupying Powers or Occupation Authorities who share the responsibility for the economic administration of that part of Germany which includes the Ruhr.

5. German Government

The term “German Government” when used in the present Agreement shall include any provisional German Government approved by the Occupying Powers.

6. Control Period

The term “Control Period”, when used in the present Agreement, shall mean that period during which the Occupying Powers retain such authority in Germany as will enable them to carry out their undertakings with respect to insuring the implementation of the decisions and the exercise of the rights of the Authority. The Occupying Powers shall determine, for the purposes of the present Agreement when the Control Period has terminated.

article iii

organisation and membership

1. The members of the Authority are the signatory governments and Germany.

2. The functions of the Authority shall be exercised by a Council. membership of which will consist of representatives of the members of the Authority. Alternate representatives may be named at the discretion of the members.

3. (Designation of German Representative)

4. There shall be an Executive Secretary of the Authority, who will serve as head of the staff of the Authority.

5. (Privileges and Immunities)

article iv

administration

1. The headquarters of the Authority shall be at such place in North Rhine-Westphalia as the Council may determine.

2. The Council shall adopt its own rules of procedure.

3. The chairmanship of the Council shall be rotated quarterly among the representatives of the signatory governments on the Council, in such manner as the Council may determine.

4. The Council shall meet as necessary. The Council shall keep minutes of its meetings, and shall maintain a register of its decisions.

5. The Executive Secretary shall be appointed by the Council in accordance with such procedure and on such terms as it may determine, and will be subject to its supervision. He will perform such duties as the Council may determine. He will be entitled to participate, without right of vote, in all meetings of the Council.

6. The Executive Secretary shall appoint his staff in accordance with staff regulations to be approved by the Council, subject to the paramount consideration of securing the highest standards of integrity, efficiency and technical competence. The general pattern of organization of his staff will be approved by the Council.

7. The responsibilities of the Executive Secretary and of the staff shall be exclusively international in character. In the discharge of their duties, they shall not seek or receive instructions from any government or from any other authority. They shall refrain from any action which might prejudice their position as international officials. Each member of the Authority undertakes to respect the international character of the responsibilities of the Executive Secretary and his staff, and will not seek to influence them in the discharge of their duties.

8. The annual budget will be prepared by the Executive Secretary for approval by the Council.

9. Each member government will be responsible for compensating its representative on the Council, and for paying his travelling and subsistence expenses, except in the case of travel on Authority business, costs of which shall be borne by the Authority.

10. The expenses of the Authority will be borne by the members in direct proportion to the respective voting rights, as set forth in Article V hereof. Until a German Government is formed, the expenses to be borne by Germany shall be met in such manner as may be determined by the Occupation Authorities concerned.

11. The official languages of the Authority shall be English, French and German.

article v

voting

1. All decisions of the Authority will be reached by numerical majority of the aggregate of votes allocated to its several members, except as indicated in Articles VIII and IX.

2. The voting rights of the several members of the Authority in its Council shall be as follows:

United States 3 votes

United Kingdom 3 votes

France 3 votes

Germany 3 votes

Netherlands 1 vote

Belgium 1 vote

Luxembourg 1 vote

3. Until the Occupying Powers decide otherwise, the votes allotted to Germany shall be cast by the Occupying Powers concerned.

4. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the votes allotted to Germany shall not be cast on any question or matter involving decisions under Articles VIII or IX.

article vi

functions and powers

1. The Authority shall make a division of coal, coke and steel from the Ruhr as between German consumption and export. Such division shall: (a) ensure adequate access to supplies of these products by countries cooperating in the common economic good, taking into account the essential needs of Germany.

(b) be in accordance with the terms of any existing agreement among the Occupying Powers or extension or other modification thereof, with respect to the allocation of coal and coke.

(c) be consistent with the objectives set forth in The Convention for European Economic Cooperation and with the programs of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation.

The export allocations of the Authority shall be in terms of minimum quantities of coal, coke and steel to be made available for export from the Ruhr.

2. The Authority is authorized to examine governmental measures, price and trade practices, or other commercial arrangements instituted or permitted by the German authorities which affect the coal, coke, and steel of the Ruhr. If the Authority determines that such measures, practices, or arrangements are artificial or discriminatory and are of such a nature as (a) to impede access by other countries to the coal, coke, and steel of the Ruhr, (b) to distort the movements of Ruhr coal, coke and steel in international trade, or (c) otherwise to prejudice the accomplishment of the purposes of the present Agreement, the Authority shall decide that such measures, practices, or arrangements shall be terminated. In making its determinations under this Paragraph the Authority shall have due regard for measures required in the interests of international peace and security, for Germany’s obligations under the Convention, for European Economic Cooperation, and for the need of the German authorities to afford legitimate protection to the commercial and financial position of Germany in international trade.

3. During the Control Period, or until such earlier time or times as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers, decisions under Paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be transmitted by the Authority to the Occupation Authorities concerned for implementation. Thereafter, such decisions shall be transmitted to the German Government for implementation.

4. During the Control Period, the Authority may bring to the attention of the Occupation Authorities concerned measures which would ensure, and thereafter itself ensure, a safeguard and protection for coal, coke and steel enterprises in the Ruhr involving foreign interests, within the framework of existing or future agreements between the signatory governments; provided that when and to the extent that the protection of such foreign interests is entrusted to any agency created or designated by any international agreement to which the signatory governments are parties, the functions of the Authority in this matter shall cease. After the termination of the Control Period the Authority shall issue appropriate orders to the German Government.

5. In order that the Authority may properly perform the functions described in this Article and in order that it may determine whether its decisions are being appropriately carried out, the Authority shall have the right: (a) to receive regular reports and such additional reports as it considers necessary on production, distribution, and consumption of Ruhr coal, coke and steel;

(b) to receive such information as it considers necessary concerning supplies of coal, coke, and steel available to Germany from sources other than the Ruhr, and concerning exports from Germany of such products from sources other than the Ruhr;

(c) to make in Germany such investigations, including the examination of witnesses, as it considers necessary to verify the information at its disposal.

In the exercise of these rights, the Authority is authorized to make inquiries of government officials, firms and individuals, and to examine records and installations.

article vii

implementation

1. During the Control Period, or until such earlier time or times as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers, the Occupation Authority concerned shall: (a) proceed with the implementation of the decisions of the Authority reached under paragraph 1 of Article VI, (i) to the extent consistent with any agreements relative to the provision of financial assistance to Germany which are now in effect or may come into effect between any two or more of the Occupying Powers; and (ii) in accordance with the terms of any existing international agreement among the Occupying Powers, or extensions or modifications thereof, with respect to the allocation of coal and coke.

(b) take appropriate action to ensure the carrying out of the decisions of the Authority made in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article VI.

(c) consider the recommendations of the Authority made in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 4 of Article VI.

(d) take such action as is necessary to enable the Authority to exercise the rights provided for in paragraph 5 of Article VI.

(e) ensure the enjoyment of the privileges and immunities provided for in paragraph 5 of Article III.

2. During the Control Period, the Occupation Authorities shall, in the event the Authority finds the German Government in default, as provided in Article VIII, apply such enforcement measures as they consider necessary and appropriate after considering the recommendation of the Authority with respect thereto.

3. After the Control Period, or after such earlier time or times as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers, the German Government shall be responsible for: (a) the implementation of the decisions of the Authority made in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article VI.

(b) compliance with the orders issued by the Authority under paragraph 4 of Article VI.

(c) taking such action as is necessary to enable the Authority to exercise the rights provided for in paragraph 5 of Article VI.

(d) ensuring the enjoyment of the privileges and immunities provided for in paragraph 5 of Article III.

4. During the Control Period, the Occupation Authorities concerned will maintain adequate control over the management in the Ruhr coal and coke industry.

article viii

default

1. Should the German Government fail to take any action required by paragraph 3 of Article VII of the present agreement, the Authority may, after a decision supported by a majority of the votes allocated to the signatory governments, call the attention of the German Government to such failure, by service of notice thereof in writing upon the German representative on the Authority. Such notice shall afford the German Government a reasonable time within which to correct such failure, or in the alternative, to appear before the representatives of the signatory governments on the Authority and present reasons why it should not be declared in default in its obligations hereunder.

2. In the event the German Government continues its failure to take such action after receiving notice as provided in paragraph 1 of this Article, and in the absence of a showing to the satisfaction of the representatives of the signatory governments on the Authority why it should not be declared in default in its obligations hereunder, the representatives of the signatory governments may, after a decision supported by a majority of the vote allotted to them, declare the German Government to be in default.

3. In the event the German Government is declared to be in default, written notice thereof, accompanied by a statement of the circumstances which resulted in such declaration of default, shall be transmitted to the German Government. The representatives of the signatory governments on the Authority may then, after a decision supported by the majority of votes allotted to them make recommendations as to the necessary and appropriate measures to be applied.

4. During the Control Period, the recommendations provided for in paragraph 3 of this Article shall be made to the Occupation Authorities. Thereafter, the recommendations will be made to the signatory governments.

article ix

disarmament

1. During the Control Period, or until such earlier time as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers, the occupation authorities concerned shall maintain such powers as may be necessary to enforce the disarmament of Germany, including power to control the supply of Ruhr coal, coke and steel to any industry which may be prohibited or limited in the interests of security by agreement among the Occupying Powers or under the terms of any international agreement to which they may become parties.

2. After the termination of the Control Period, or at such earlier time as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers, the powers referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be transferred to such international body as may be designated for these purposes by the peace settlement or by any international agreement to which the signatory governments are parties, and the Authority shall cooperate with that international body in such ways as shall be prescribed by the peace settlement or international agreement. If no such international body is established, these powers shall be transferred to the Authority to be exercised by the representatives of the signatory governments thereon in a manner to be agreed upon at that time by the signatory governments.

article x

general provisions

1. The Authority may establish such formal or informal relationship with the United Nations, its principal organs and subsidiary bodies, and with the Specialized Agencies and other intergovernmental bodies, as may facilitate the performance of its functions.

2. The Authority shall not require any action which would be inconsistent with the obligations which have been assumed on behalf of Germany in Economic Cooperation Agreements with the United States.

3. Nothing in the present Agreement shall affect the obligations of the signatories of the Convention for European Economic Cooperation under that Convention.

article xi

effective date, duration, and provision for amendment

1. The present Agreement shall enter into force as soon as it is signed on behalf of the Government of France, the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the Government of the United States of America and shall, subject to the provisions of paragraph 5 of this Article, continue in force until the coming into effect of a peace settlement for Germany and thereafter as may be provided in such peace settlement.

2. Belgium, Luxembourg, and The Netherlands may become parties to the present Agreement by signature, and the Agreement shall enter into force with respect to each of those states upon signature of the Agreement in its behalf.

3. The organization of the Authority shall begin immediately after the present Agreement comes into force.

4. The International Authority shall begin to exercise its function on a date to be established by the Occupying Powers, but in any event prior to the establishment of a Provisional German Government.

5. The present Agreement may be amended by the agreement of all of the signatory governments on recommendations of the Authority and may be terminated by agreement between the Occupying Powers after consultation with the other signatory governments.

6. The present Agreement is executed in the English, French and German languages, of which the English and French texts are authentic.

7. The original of the present Agreement shall be deposited with the Government of the United Kingdom which shall transmit certified copies thereof to each, of the Governments on behalf of which it is signed.

Opened for signature at London this _________ day of _____ 194 ____.

In Witness Whereof the undersigned representatives, duly authorized by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement on the dates appearing opposite their signatures.

For the Government of Belgium:

For the Government of France:

For the Government of Luxembourg:

For the Government of The Netherlands:

For the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland:

For the Government of the United States of America:

1 The proposal printed here was circulated to the London Conference on the Ruhr at its second meeting, November 12; see telegram 4853, Ruhrto 3, November 12, from London, supra. This draft text conformed closely to a draft agreement prepared by the Department of State’s Informal Working Group on International Control of the Ruhr, designated document ICR 28, November 6. Document ICR 28 appears to be the draft agreement under reference in paragraph 14 of instruction 459, November 10, to London, p. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309]. Copies of ICR 28, the so-called “Washington draft”, appear to have been taken to London by members of the U.S. Delegation to the Conference and discussed with representatives from OMGUS. A copy of ICR 28 was subsequently transmitted to London as an enclosure to instruction 467, November 15, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1548). Variations between the draft printed here and the text of ICR 28 were reported in telegram 4861, Ruhrto 6, November 15, from London, not printed. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1548)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1348: Telegram

[Document 318]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, November 13, 1948—2 p. m.

4400. For the Secretary from Lovett. You are of course aware that the MilGovs trusteeship law with its provision that the pattern of Ruhr ownership will be left to the future German Govt to decide has created universal unfavorable reaction in France. We had doubts concerning the language of this provision and did our best to persuade the British to modify it in the form of a statement of policy rather than a MilGovt decision. You will recall that we and the British at the London conference on Germany made perfectly clear our opposition to international ownership and management on practical grounds but agreed to the establishment of the Ruhr authority with its control over allocation as a measure of security for France. The MilGovs have been endeavoring because of the situation in Germany to clarify the question of ownership in the interest of increased German production from which France would benefit and which is essential for recovery of Western Europe as a whole. The language and timing of the trusteeship law is perhaps unfortunate from French point of view but it has consistently been made clear to French that this is our position.

Whereas the French opposition is concentrated on this specific law, it is, nevertheless, symptomatic of a larger concern and misunderstanding with respect to our policy in Germany which is intensified by the prospects of de Gaulle’s advent to power and his presumed position in regard to Germany. You will have seen Berlin’s 887 to Paris1 reporting Koenig’s statements that France may have to reconsider its German policy because German recovery is being pushed too fast. It is now clear that Koenig’s statements represent French Govt’s position and the same line has been put to us even more emphatically by French Emb reps here. It occurs to us it would be useful if you with Bevin, if possible, could undertake with Schuman a basic review of our common future policy toward Germany with a view to clearing up misunderstandings and reemphasizing the basic objectives with respect to the development of Germany and its relation to French security.2

We feel that in any such review of the situation the time has come to spell out clearly and firmly to the French that only real solution of German problem insofar as France’s security is concerned is within the framework of a stronger economic and political organization of Western Europe in which organization Germany must play an important role. To delay German recovery with its added burdens on the American taxpayer because France’s recovery is not making equal progress would be dangerous to the concept of Western European recovery and consequently to France itself. We cannot, while we are contributing substantial financial help to France, at the same time increase our burden with respect to Germany. With respect to the specific Ruhr problem, we feel strongly that international ownership and management do not increase the safeguards France is seeking but would in fact have the opposite effect either in creating such resentment on the part of Germany that they could not be maintained or in so reducing production that the Ruhr could not contribute to the essential needs of European recovery. We feel that on purely security grounds France is afforded protection through a series of measures which they are perhaps inclined to minimize. First, there is our commitment to them regarding continued German disarmament and development of their security through our support of a North Atlantic security system. Secondly, there is the establishment of the Ruhr authority with power to determine allocations coal, coke and steel, which we are at present discussing in London with a desire of reaching early agreement on the basis of the London program. Thirdly, as regards foreign interests in Germany, we have every intention to see to it that they are afforded adequate and nondiscriminatory treatment.

Finally, we earnestly trust that the French will not retard or hinder a constructive German program when it is just beginning to offer hope that Western Germany will be able to resist Communism and attraction towards the East. We can ask for French understanding for the effort we are making in Berlin to carry out our common determination not to be driven back by Soviet aggression, not only to the jeopardy of our German responsibilities but of the position of Western Europe.

It may be possible through such a meeting to clarify our position vis-à-vis the French Govt but there still remains the problem of how to deal with the French public, which has apparently been aroused over this issue. You may wish to discuss this aspect with Schuman if your conversation with him proves fruitful. We understand Douglas is to be in Paris tomorrow and he may be helpful to you in preparing any approach to Schuman either separately or with the British.

It should be recalled that the French Assembly reconvenes on Tues Nov 16 and that both the deGaullists and Communists are sure to question the Govt on Germany.

Lovett

1 Same as telegram 2686, November 5, from Berlin, p. 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292].

2 The source text bears the following additional sentence at the end of this paragraph which was deleted by Samuel Reber before the telegram was transmitted to Paris: “In this connection it may be helpful to have the MilGovs attend although it must be realized that Koenig doubtless feels himself the agent of de Gaulle.”

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1448: Telegram

[Document 319]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army 1

secret [Berlin,] November 13, 1948.

CC–6717. The French representative here, the French Government, and French press are making much ado about our recently announced plan for Ruhr coal and steel properties. This plan makes no change in Allied Control and is entirely within the framework of the London agreement. French objections were based largely on the clause stating it was US/UK military government policy to leave the question of future ownership to be resolved by the Germans with provision, however, that such ownership could not revert to the former Nazi owners.

The French reaction must be regarded in part as an effort to establish public opinion prior to the Ruhr Conference now commencing in London, and parallels their actions in this respect which occurred during the London Conference of last spring in which the French Government had so influenced its own public opinion as to make acceptance of the London agreement politically difficult. The French are particularly referring to the “fait accompli” which would imply that this program had been placed into execution without permitting the French to express their views.

The following will indicate the extent to which the French were informed and the various opportunities that they were given to express their views.

1. On August 23, the Bipartite Board transmitted to them a copy of the “trustee plan” and requested the comments of the French and Benelux as soon as possible.2

2. On September 20, a follow-up letter3 was dispatched to the French restating the urgency of issuing the plan and indicating that, inasmuch as it was important to implement the plan before October 1, we would appreciate their comments within a week.

3. Under date of 23 September, the French military governor transmitted his comments3 and asked for an exchange of information between experts.

4. A meeting with the Benelux representatives and the French military governor with the Bipartite Board was arranged on October 7 to further hear the point of view of the French and Benelux. The French and Benelux requested a further meeting in approximately one week, at which time they would transmit the final views of their government.4

5. On October 8, the Bipartite Board dispatched another letter to General Koenig,3 commenting on the points raised in his letter of September 23 and upon the French position as stated in the meeting of October 7.

6. The final meeting of the French and Benelux with the Bipartite Board as requested by them was held on October 18. At this meeting the French presented a paper objecting to the inclusion in the “trustee plan” of a statement that the question of socialization should be left to a future German Government.5

7. On October 19, a letter3 was written by the Bipartite Board to General Koenig informing him that it was the understanding of the Bipartite Board that the matter raised in his paper as presented at the meeting of October 8 had been taken up by the French at governmental level and that, therefore, further discussion between the military governors would appear to be called for.

8. On November 9 Bipartite Board informed General Koenig that after careful consideration of the representations made by French Government, US and UK Governments had decided that they were unable to modify the statement concerning the final settlement of ownership. The Board enclosed for General Koenig’s advance information copy of law number 75 together with copy of explanatory speech which was to be made [by] the chairman at several meetings to be held with the Germans on November 10.

It is our understanding that their protests were considered by both the US and UK Governments prior to the implementation of the program. The full story is not known here as to the action at governmental level. Nevertheless, it is clear that the French were fully advised and were given every opportunity to express their views.

The restoration of sound management in the Ruhr steel and coal properties is essential to further progress and our reorganizational steps to this end are sound and cannot be construed in any way as failing to comply strictly with the London agreement.

We are today experiencing work stoppage in Germany which reflects a political unrest in Germany which may be expected to continue unless further political and economic responsibility is given to German representatives. What will happen to the Ruhr is of transcendental importance to the Germans. They have become accustomed to the thought of international control as envisaged in the London agreement. If we go beyond this, I think we may expect a rapid growth of political unrest in the Ruhr area which will be fomented by the Communists into work stoppages and strikes which will interfere seriously with both German and European recovery. We must remember that we are no longer dealing with an inarticulate people and that forty million Germans have their eyes and ears on the Ruhr Conference now under way in London. In almost every constructive move, we are confronted with French opposition which plays into Communist hands, thus, either retarding the constructive move or destroying much of its value. If in fact we have determined economic recovery in Germany to be essential to European recovery, then we must implement our program vigorously and determinedly, depending upon the disarmament controls agreed at London to prevent German recovery again being directed into war purposes.

[ Clay ]

1 The source text was transmitted in telegram 2741, November 14, from Berlin, not printed.

2 Neither the communication of August 23 nor the draft coal, iron and steel reorganization plan is printed. Regarding the plan as ultimately promulgated as Military Government Law No. 75, November 10, see the editorial note, p. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309].

3 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

4 For a report on the meeting under reference here, see telegram 2474, October 9, from Berlin, p. 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302].

3 Not printed.

5 For a report on the meeting of October 18, see telegram 2537, October 19, from Berlin, p. 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303].

3 Not printed.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1348: Telegram

[Document 320]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in France

secret
urgent Berlin, November 13, 1948—2 p. m.

915. Reference Paris 5836, November 11 to Dept.1 We are mystified over statement made by M. Schuman to Ambassador Caffery to effect that he found it almost incredible that US and UK wanted to face him with a fait accompli two days before the beginning of London Conference on the Ruhr. This remark was incident to publication of Law No. 75 re the reorganization (trusteeship) of coal, iron and steel industries in the Ruhr.2 Fait accompli tactics have not been employed in this instance and French Delegation in Germany has been kept advised of development this plan since last August. We have reason to believe that both French Delegation here and Massigli in London no doubt inadvertently have failed to keep M. Schuman informed of this development.

We hope that Ambassador Caffery will find opportunity to emphasize to M. Schuman personally that there has been no intention to employ surprise methods but, on contrary, his representatives have been regularly and adequately informed of the evolution this step. We feel particularly disturbed at this juncture because we were happy over Caffery’s advice in his 694 of November 103 re M. Schuman’s reaction to supervision of western Berlin currency by the Bank Deutscher Laender.

Following indicates extent to which the French were informed and the various opportunities given them to express views.

[Here follows a chronological review of exchanges and meetings with French and Benelux representatives regarding the proposed plan for reorganization of coal, iron and steel industries. The review is virtually identical with that set forth in numbered paragraphs 1 through 8 of Gen. Clay’s message CC–6717, November 13, supra.]

US Economic Adviser OMGUS had just returned from Ruhr meeting in London after having had conversation with Alphand on this subject. According to Wilkinson, Alphand admits that Schuman was not kept informed. Wilkinson said that Alphand evinced a distinct desire to play down the matter. Wilkinson learned from him that due to some inadvertence, Massigli had not conveyed to M. Schuman the recent British note on this subject.

Department, of course, has been kept advised on the progress in this matter. I refer particularly to my telegrams which were repeated to Paris and London, 2474 of October 94 and 2537 of October 195 together with my letter to Mr. Saltzman of October 26.6

Please see Clay’s CC–6717 to Army of today’s date.7

It is requested Ambassador Caffery inform the Secretary of this message as well as General Clay’s CC–6717 which is being repeated to Paris separately.

Sent Paris personal for Caffery 915, repeated Dept [personal for Lovett 2734], London personal for Douglas 845.

Murphy

1 Not printed, but see footnote 3 to telegram 4824, November 11, from London, p. 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311].

2 See the editorial note, p. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309].

3 (Not printed, but see footnote 1 to Ambassador Murphy’s notes of the meeting of the Military Governors on November 4, p. 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291].

4  Ante, p. 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302].

5  Ante, p. 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303].

6 Not printed.

7  Supra.

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 133: File—Ruhr Authority, Vol. I: Telegram

[Document 321]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army 1

secret
priority Frankfurt, 15 November 1948.

FMPC–1008. From FMP Frankfurt Germany from CINCEUR sgn Clay to Chief of Staff Dept of the Army CSCAD Wash DC. Have just seen London 4857 to State Department.2 I would like to make Military Government’s position Ruhr authority clear.

We are interested in only two principles both of which we believe basic.

The United States because of its large financial support of Germany now exercises through its Military Government the controlling voice in German Economy. If during the period of Military Government, it agrees to give to Ruhr authority powers which negate this control, then it has not only made it possible for others to control the German economy but it will also have sacrificed the position of financial and economic control that the Congress demanded.

Secondly, we feel certain that a division of responsibility for economic development in Germany either between US Military Government and a separate US Representative on Ruhr Authority or between Military Government and the Ruhr Authority during the period of Mil Govt would lead to endless friction, relaxed recovery, and also negate our present dominant position.

As matters now stand, US Military Government does control the German economy under policies laid down by our Government which is logical in view of our financial support but it seems unbelievable to me that we should either diminish this control or dilute it with divided responsibilities. Please bring to attention Under Secretary Draper.

[ Clay ]

1 The text of this message was transmitted by Ambassador Murphy in his telegram 262, November 16, from Frankfurt, repeated to London for Douglas and to Paris for Caffery (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1648).

2 Telegram 4857, Ruhrto 5, November 13, from London, not printed, reported that discussions with OMGUS officials in London revealed several differences with the draft instructions to the U.S. Delegation contained in instruction 459, November 10, to London (p. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309]). OMGUS believed that the authorities responsible for German programming should deal directly with the OEEC without any obligation to clear coal, coke and steel figures with the IAR. OMGUS further believed that the IAR would serve two purposes, both principally applicable after the end of the control period of German occupation: (1) to insure the carrying out of OEEC programs by making allocations; (2) to stand by in case OEEC breaks down and fails to agree on programs. OMGUS strongly opposed the concept that the U.S. representatives on the IAR could be other than a member of the staff of the U.S. Military Government. OMGUS also recommended that as soon as a strong German provisional government was established, such a government should have the right to designate its own representative on the IAR. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1348)

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1548: Telegram

[Document 322]

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Paris, November 15, 1948—9 p. m.

5890. For Lovett from the Secretary. Regarding your 4400.1 Bevin [ McNeil?] has made reply in Parliamentary speech to French Ruhr note.2 Understand you have text from London. This will be delivered French as British reply. French Assembly meets 4 p. m. tomorrow. Immediate question is do we take our time, leaving hostile parties to question French Government on issue, or do we rush reply before Assembly meets. Caffery is preparing note which can be delivered before meeting. Essential receive your views and your draft note urgently. British, reply being repeated your information.

[ Marshall ]

1 November 13, p. 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318].

2 The French note under reference here is presumably the communication identified in footnote 3 to telegram 4824, November 11, from London, p. 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]. For the text of McNeil’s statement of November 15 to the House of Commons, see Parliamentary Debates, House of Commons, 5th series, vol. 458, cols. 25–27.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1548: Telegram

[Document 323]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

top secret
us urgent
niact Washington, November 15, 1948—7 p. m.

Gadel 482. For the Secretary from Lovett. We had thought that before despatching any formal note in response to French Ruhr protest, it would have been preferable for you have a talk with Schuman along lines suggested our 44001 if you concur (reurniact 58902 ). We have not therefore prepared draft reply.

If it is impracticable arrange meeting with Schuman and you believe a note should be sent before meeting of Assembly, we agree Caffery might prepare reply as you suggest which, however, in our opinion, should be based in general on our 4400 and stress the positive assurances which have already been given to French in connection with our German policy. In our opinion statement made at House of Commons today while adequate for British consumption will probably not be helpful in respect of French opinion since it emphasizes German requirements. In connection with preparation of note however Berlin’s telegrams nos. 915 and 921 to Paris3 may be helpful.

Lovett

1 November 13, p. 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318].

2  Supra.

3 Telegram 915, from Berlin to Paris, November 13, p. 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]. Telegram 921, November 14, from Berlin to Paris, not printed, transmitted the text of General Clay’s message CC–6717, November 13, p. 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1348: Telegram

[Document 324]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret
us urgent Washington, November 15, 1948—7 p. m.

4310. ToRuhr 4. Re points of difference with OMGUS Ruhrto 5.1

A. Dept and ECA concur your proposal avoid discussion OEEC relationship until Nelson arrives and views other delegations known. We will try defer discussion with Army until you report views other delegations and outcome further talks with OMGUS.

B. Dept and ECA regard as of great importance position that US membership on Authority is governmental representation expressing total US interest. This position no reflection Military Governor. Matter being taken up with Army at high level. ECA invited join these discussions. Neither Reber, Martin, nor Wisner has any recollection discussion this point in London talks last Spring.

C. Re type of agreement. While compromise not foreclosed, Dept concurs desirability initial approach along lines Washington draft which makes clear as far as possible obligations occupying powers and German Government. Experience in drawing up US draft on basis Annex C demonstrated vagueness and ambiguity latter document and necessity for precise language to avoid later misunderstanding.

D. Dept agrees OMGUS suggestion provisional German Govt as soon as established have right designate own representative. However, as concession to French, side understanding this point may be preferable, retaining present language Washington draft for agreement. Decision as between latter suggestion and OMGUS proposal left your discretion depending on assessment French reaction.

Lovett

1 Not printed, but see footnote 2 to message FMPC–1008, November 15, from Frankfurt, p. 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 321].

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the French Minister for Foreign Affairs (Schuman) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1648: Telegram

[Document 325]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the French Minister for Foreign Affairs (Schuman)1

secret Paris, November 16, 1948.

Dear Mr. President: With reference to your communication of November 102 and especially to the last paragraph thereof in which you state that the French Government must protest the procedure of fait accompli adopted by the English and American authorities in regard to the issuance of Bizonal law No. 75 for the reorganization (trusteeship) of the coal, iron and steel industries of the Ruhr, I should like to assure you that it was definitely not the intention of the American authorities to employ surprise tactics. On the contrary, every effort was made by them to advise the French authorities at an early date and to keep them currently and fully informed with regard to the evolution of bipartite plans concerning the Ruhr industries.

[Here follow five paragraphs constituting a close paraphrase of numbered paragraphs 1 through 6 of message CC–6717, November 13, from Berlin, page 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319].]

In view of the situation in Germany the United States has felt it desirable that the question of ownership of the Ruhr coal and iron industries should be clarified as early as possible in the interest of increased German production which France and all other interested powers have agreed is essential for the recovery of Western Europe as a whole. We feel strongly that international ownership and management would not increase the safeguards France is seeking. On the contrary, it is felt that such a solution either could not be maintained or would so reduce production that the Ruhr could not contribute to the essential needs of European recovery. The United States made it entirely clear at the London conference on Germany that it was opposed to international ownership and management on practical grounds but, as a measure of general security, undertook with France and the other interested powers to establish an international authority with power to determine allocations of Ruhr coal, coke, and steel. It is hoped that through the current discussions in London it will be possible to work out promptly equitable and effective operating arrangements for this authority. The United States has also, of course, every intention of seeing to it that foreign interests are afforded adequate and non-discriminatory treatment.

The United States in opposing a particular solution of one aspect of the Ruhr problem is by no means unmindful of France’s problem of security. The United States, however, is of the opinion that the only real solution of the German problem is within the framework of a stronger economic and political organization of Western Europe to which all are agreed Germany should contribute its share. In building up this stronger Western Europe the United States has, of course, committed itself not only to the continued disarmament of Germany but is giving its encouragement to the positive measures for Western European security now being developed.

Very sincerely yours,

Jefferson Caffery

1 The source text was transmitted to the Department in telegram 5899, November 16, 3 p. m., from Paris, not printed, as a proposed text with a request for urgent comment from the Department. In telegram 4428, November 16, to Paris, 6 p. m., not printed, Acting Secretary Lovett stated that the Department thought favorably of the draft. Lovett added that he still thought that it would be useful for Secretary Marshall to have a talk with Foreign Minister Schuman along the lines of telegram 4400, November 13, to Paris (p. 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]) at about the same time that Ambassador Caffery presented this note (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1648). Telegram 1327, November 23, from Paris to London, not printed, confirms that this text was delivered to Schuman on November 16. (London Embassy Files, File—850 Germany)

2 Regarding the communication under reference here, see footnote 3 to telegram 4824, November 11, from London, p. 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1648

[Document 326]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] November 16, 1948.

Participants: Mr. Lovett, the Under Secretary;

M. Bonnet, the French Ambassador;

Mr. Beam, Chief, Division of Central European Affairs

In the interview this afternoon, arranged at his request, M. Bonnet restated the familiar French objections to the Clay-Robertson trusteeship plan for the Ruhr industries, namely: 1. The plan was adopted in spite of the protest of the French Government in Berlin, Washington and Paris regarding the provision that a future German government should determine the ownership question.

2. As in the case of the reorganization of the bizonal agencies in January 1948, France had again been faced with an accomplished fact; the machinery for consultation had again broken down.

3. France continued firmly to believe that adequate security control over the Ruhr could only be exercised through international ownership and management; the Germans would do the work under the supervision of an international board comprising representatives of the interested countries.

4. Neither France nor Germany’s other neighbors, including the eastern countries, would be thoroughly assured respecting Germany until genuine international control was exercised over the Ruhr.

I replied as follows: 1. There had been adequate consultation with the French authorities in Germany, starting last August, as shown by the record we had received from Berlin; consultation with the French need not mean that we had to agree with them in each case, and in the Ruhr matter an honest difference of opinion was involved in the question of ownership of the Ruhr properties.

2. We had consistently favored, and had so stated to the French, leaving the ownership question to a German constitutional government to determine; the Germans under their own management would have an interest in increasing production for general recovery in which France would share; since agreement would be difficult to obtain, international ownership and management was impractical and would frustrate the necessary degree of German production to alleviate the financial burden which the United States is carrying almost single-handedly in Germany.

3. We were in thorough agreement with the French regarding the need of security controls over Germany; at London we had agreed to Germany’s continued disarmament and to a form of international control over Ruhr allocations which would make it impossible for Ruhr resources to be used for aggression; we also supported measures for deconcentration of economic power in Germany and for fair treatment of foreign interests; the trusteeship plan provided for adequate Military Government control over the German trustees.

4. Our hope was that western Germany could be made a self-respecting and productive participant in a strong western Europe; under the measures to prevent a renewal of German aggression, this was the best course to pursue to keep communism out of Germany and any tendency on its part to look toward the East.

I mentioned to M. Bonnet that Mr. Schuman would undoubtedly be seeing the Secretary in Paris shortly and I was sure that the Secretary would be glad to go over the problem with the French Foreign Minister.

Robert A. Lovett

The Under Secretary of the Army (Draper) to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 133: File-—Ruhr Authority, Vol. I: Telegram

[Document 327]

The Under Secretary of the Army (Draper) to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

secret
priority [Washington,] 17 November 1948.

Warx 92764. Personal to Clay from Draper. USMA pass to Hannaman and at request State Dept pass to Ambassador Douglas. From SAOUS.

1. Reference to MA London’s 742271 and FMPC 1008,2 have now had opportunity to discuss Ruhr Authority problem with Saltzman and Nitze. While the following does not cover all the points involved, this may help to clarify position here. We are agreed: A. Ruhr Authority becomes operative just before new German Government is established.

B. Regardless of responsibilities or authority given to either Ruhr Authority or OEEC in agreement under discussion, it is understood that final authority with respect to allocation between indigenous use and export of coal, coke and steel (subject only to international agreement such as the Moscow sliding scale3 ) rests in the Bizonal (or Trizonal) authorities and ultimately under the JEIA Agreement in the US Military Governor.

This is on the understanding that the occupation authorities (US Military Governor under the JEIA Agreement) have the right to set aside the authority findings to the extent that it is considered necessary on financial grounds.

This understanding is derived from the agreed minute on Article 6B of Annex C of the London Agreement4 which refers to the Bizonal Fusion Agreement and any Trizonal Fusion Agreement which may be concluded. Ambassador Douglas instructions specifically mention this understanding and authorize him to state it to the other governments if he considers it necessary.

C. That present language of draft annex covering OEEC relation: undesirably complicated. Effort being made to redraft in simplified form to submit to Berlin and London for consideration.

D. Para 1 of Hannaman’s 74227 being discussed further here but believe this can probably be largely resolved by further discussions in London.

2. There remains the question of appointment of the US representative by either Military Government or by the Government itself here.
We are still discussing this problem with State and will give you comments.

3. State requests that copy of this message be passed to Douglas. State concurs in this message.

[ Draper ]

1 November 12, p. 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315].

2 November 15, p. 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 321].

3 On April 19, 1947, during the Fourth Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers, held at Moscow, Secretary of State Marshall, British Foreign Secretary Bevin, and French Foreign Minister Bidault agreed on a sliding scale of coal exports from the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany. For the texts of the exchange of communications between Secretary Marshall and Foreign Minister Bidault constituting this “Moscow Sliding Scale Agreement”, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 486–488. Following discussions in Berlin in September 1947, the Moscow Sliding Scale Agreement was revised somewhat and extended to the end of 1948; see telegram 3244, October 1, 1947, from Berlin, ibid., p. 1096, and annotations thereto. In his message CC–6580, November 3, 1948, from Berlin, not printed, General Clay advised that French authorities in Germany had asked for an extension of the Moscow Sliding Scale Agreement. General Clay observed that lapse of the agreement would cause tine whole problem to fall into the new perspective of the prospective International Ruhr Authority and might involve an increased scale of German coal exports (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 133, File—Ruhr Authority, vol. i ). Telegram Warx–92841, November 18, to General Clay, not printed, authorized agreement to a one-year extension in the Moscow Sliding Scale Agreement (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 133, File—Ruhr Authority, vol. i ).

4 Annex C to the Report on the London Conference on Germany, June 1. p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], is the same as document TRI/16 (Final), May 26, p. 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190]. The “Agreed Minutes” under reference are set forth in document TRI/23 (Final), May 26, p. 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193].

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1748: Telegram

[Document 328]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Acting Secretary of State

secret London, November 17, 1948—11 p. m.

4909. Ruhrto 8. 1. Fourth plenary1 completed division of draft agreements (essentially using US draft2 as basis) into those requiring plenary discussion and those which could be handled by drafting sub-committee. Subjects requiring plenary discussion include (1) preamble, (2) definition control period, (3) definition of steel, (4) designation German representative and German vote, (5) accession German Government, (6) beginning of operations, (7) form of organization, (8) languages, (9) allocation functions, (10) trade practices, (11) protection foreign interests, (12) implementation, (13) collection of information, (14) default, (15) control of management, (16) accession other governments, (17) entry into force, (18) duration, (19) amendment and termination.

2. A. Re (1) French desire maintain Annex C3 language though accepting change to cover access by non-European countries. British seemed to agree with French USDel expressed view US redraft preferable, but did not press strongly. Matter referred to drafting committee.

B. Re (2) French and British preferred something along lines Annex C, 5 (D) but recognized difficulty in words “exercise supreme authority” in circumstances when exercise of certain functions delegated to German authorities even though residual power remained in occupation authorities. French suggested defining in terms of period when supreme authority “vested in” occupation powers. USDel felt US draft was ambiguous when applied to Article 8 Annex C, which is most potent clause to combat French demand for further management control. Accordingly USDel agreed to study French suggestion in light whole agreement. USDel did not raise question of US proposal that occupation powers should decide end of control period as provided US draft as time seemed inauspicious for raising question of how occupation powers acted, i.e., majority, unanimity or JEIA formula. USDel believes that this case where exactitude definition virtually impossible and somewhat ambiguous phrase as suggested by French and possible substitution of “ultimate” for “supreme” will probably be final result.

C. Re (3) discussion postponed until steel experts meet Friday p. m.

D. (4) and (5) passed over since US had not submitted draft on (4) following paragraph (D) ToRuhr 44 and (5) seemed to be linked.

E. Re (6) agreement in principle that organization of IAR should start without too much delay after effective date agreement. No conclusion re start of substantive functions, French pressing for definite time, e.g., 1 February, British suggesting two weeks after German referendum approving constitution for provisional German government, which they calculated would mean assuming functions about two weeks before coming into effect provisional government. US maintained position of immediately prior to provisional government. USDel has no intention to give on this issue.

F. Further discussions Wednesday re (8) French will oppose use German as language, but believe formula can be found via working language plus official translation route. Re (9) French and probably Benelux will press for this function re Aachen coal. Re (13) Benelux and French will press for right to examine witnesses and inspect outside Ruhr principally in connection with interests in Aachen coal. This may turn out to be useful point on which to concede, USDel having reserved position re interpretation of US draft in this matter. Re (15) anticipate French will introduce paper on this matter following Alphand statement.5 Re (18) French prefer strongly no mention of duration as now in present US draft. Not clear whether substantive matters really involved other points.

G. Public release of documents which is agreed here urged by Benelux and French in view difficulties of keeping secret upon submission to Parliaments for approval. USDel inclined to agree should be released after end this meeting, but that any explanatory statement should be cleared by all. Goal is completion meeting before end November.

H. Oppenheimer arrived 16 November from Berlin.

I. Informal meeting arranged morning 17 November, Alphand, Stevens and Jackson, which should clarify issues.

Sent Department 4909; repeated Berlin 594.

Holmes

1 The Fourth Plenary Meeting of the London Conference on the Ruhr was held on the afternoon of November 16. A copy of the U.S. Delegation minutes of the meeting (document USDel/Min/L/R/4, November 16) was transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to despatch 2310, November 23, from London, neither printed. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2348)

2 Document RC/3, November 12, p. 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 317].

3 Annex C of the Report of the London Conference on Germany, June 1, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], is the same as document TRI/16 (Final), May 26, p. 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190].

4 Department telegram 4310, November 15, p. 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324].

5 For the text of the Alphand statement made at the opening meeting of the Conference, see telegram 4830, Ruhrto 2, November 11, p. 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1848: Telegram

[Document 329]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State

secret London, November 18, 1948—10 a. m.

4910. Ruhrto 10. At fifth plenary session1 several points previously reserved for discussion at plenary session were taken up and then referred to drafting committee for preparation drafts, including: 1. Organization of secretariat. French insisted executive secretary should not be German, but did not object if he was selected from non-signatory Allied power. US and UK agreed. In view understanding that council would be composed of representatives available for full time duties if necessary, agreed that size and importance of secretariat could be reduced and French draft2 too detailed.

2. Chairmanship follows US draft3 except post to be rotated every 6 months.

3. Organization of Council follows US draft except selection of alternates to be required instead of permissive.

4. Headquarters as in US draft.

5. Authority to determine own procedures as in US draft.

6. French objected to German as official language. Agreed French, German, English to be used in conducting business, French and English to be official language.

7. US language on allocations function generally agreed. French and probably British accepted US language that allocations be for minimum quantities to be made available rather than a fixed quantity to be mandatory export. Belgium may have second thoughts. French proposed authority be given power specify quality and type of coal, coke and steel within allocations. All agreed.

8. US language on non-discrimination and trade practices adopted with two minor changes. Benelux proposed transport receive specific reference in opening sentence. British proposed distinction between governmental and private action be clarified.

Meeting ended with all delegates pleased at progress made.

Plenary will be held all day tomorrow to complete discussion of all but critical outstanding points and target set for Monday for preparation of preliminary combined draft.4 French propose to elaborate position on international control management at Monday or Tuesday session.

Sent Department 4910, repeated Berlin 595.

Douglas

1 A copy of the U.S. Delegation minutes of this meeting (Min/L/R/5), held at the Foreign Office, November 17, 3:15 p. m., was transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 2319, November 24, from London, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2448).

2 Document RC/4, November 12, not printed.

3 Document RC/3, November 12, p. 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 317].

4 The London Conference on the Ruhr held its 6th and 7th Plenary meetings on November 18 concluding the discussion of the various outstanding points of the draft agreements on the Ruhr already introduced by the U.S., U.K., and French Delegations. It was left to the Drafting Committee to prepare a consolidated draft agreement indicating the points of disagreement among the Delegations. The draft prepared by the Drafting Committee, document RC/6, November 22, not printed, was considered by the Conference at its 8th Meeting, November 23. The U.S. Delegation transmitted no reports to the Department of State on the 6th, 7th, and 8th Meetings of the Conference. The U.S. Delegation minutes of these meetings were transmitted to Department as enclosures to despatches 2332, 2333, and 2356, November 26, and 30, from London, respectively, none printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2648 and 11–3048). A copy of document RC/6 was transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 2359, November 30, from London, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–3048).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1848: Telegram

[Document 330]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Berlin, November 18, 1948—6 p. m.

862. Clay’s reaction to that portion of ToRuhr 4 sent London as 4310,1 relating to US membership on Ruhr authority was expressed by him in a personal message to Department Army, which is quoted below: “Regardless of recollection of Reber, Martin and Wisner, it was clearly understood that US representative on Ruhr authority would be responsible to Military Governor as long as latter is responsible for US expenditures in Germany. Murphy, Oppenheimer and I are all clear on this point. However, that is not important.

“For three and a half years, we have insisted that sound administration in Germany required a single US head in Germany to carry out US policy. Differences between departments are solved in Washington and not in Germany and the American organization in Germany is a single team responsible to a single head. Any variation from this is disastrous particularly as under fusion agreement, only US Military Government can exercise the final voice in financial and economic matters. Any weakening or division of his authority is therefore a weakening of the US position obtained in the fusion agreement at great cost. I must protest vigorously against such action in the Ruhr authority.

“At London an attempt was made to write certain OEEC and ECA responsibilities in the measure which reduced Military Government authority which were finally disapproved at Army insistence. This attempt is being renewed.

“With particular reference to State 1841.2 While I have not considered proposed action a personal reflection hitherto, I certainly so consider 1841 which implies an inability on my part to represent broad interests of US. If such is the case, I certainly do not belong here. I know of no instance in which Military Government has acted contrary to orders of its government. I have heard much of this broad interests theory which resolves itself into our refusal to place into effect certain measures desired by junior officials of State Department which were never approved by higher authority and sent to me as instructions. I repeat policy has to be resolved in Washington but it should be executed in Germany by one agency. Certainly State with its representation in Military Government secures full information to guide its policy.

“In my own case, I shall in all probability not be here when Ruhr authority is operating. Therefore, I can say in all earnestness that for three and a half years, effort after effort has been made to destroy the effectiveness of a single US administrative agency in Germany by adding additional agencies. It is obvious that this would be inefficient. It is of course desired by the European powers who recognize the weakness of division of authority. Why we even consider such proposals is completely incomprehensible to me and I am convinced it will prove so to the Congress appropriating the funds.

“I think this is a basic issue which the Department of the Army should do its utmost to obtain a sound solution. We learned the principle of undivided authority in actual war; it is even more essential in cold war.

“I may point out also that the press will most certainly interpret this action as reduction in authority of Military Government to meet French views and to clip wings of US representative responsible for German economy. In view of present improvement in German economy which I must emphasize has been achieved without physical ECA aid, this is difficult to understand.”

Sent London for Douglas Eyes Only 862, repeated Department [personal for Saltzman and Hickerson] 2767, Paris personal for Bohlen 940.

Murphy

1 November 15, p. 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324].

2 Same as telegram 4310, ToRuhr 4, to London, p. 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1848: Telegram

[Document 331]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

secret
us urgent
niact Washington, November 18, 1948—7 p. m.

Telmar 175. For Carter. Martel 143, Nov 17; Deptel 4441, Nov 17.1 Prior 1947 French advocated separate international regime for Ruhr detached from Germany. On eve Moscow CFM French had receded from demand for separation and insisted ownership Ruhr industries vest in powers active in war against Germany. At Moscow French proposed international regime with ownership and management rights.2 US opposed special Ruhr regime but approved post-occupation supervision by international body of distribution Ruhr resources in interest equal access European countries, including Germany. US opposed international ownership or management on ground not desirable to “interfere with German responsibility for the management and operation of Germany’s resources . . . . Germany must have responsibility not only for the production but the marketing of the products of her own industries.” US desired “European solution in a Europe which included Germany.”3

Later in 1947 French modified position on Ruhr in various talks with US Reps, no longer insisting on international ownership but stressing desire effective control over management and allocation coal and steel. In talks with SecState at New York, 8 Oct 1947, Bidault noted French abandonment earlier demands for territorial separation, special political regime and international ownership and operation Ruhr industries. He stated as minimal demands retention by occupation authorities adequate control German management, and permanent international authority with adequate powers to insure (1) equitable division Ruhr coal, coke and steel between Germany and European countries; (2) German use such resources only for peaceful purposes; (3) early establishment Ruhr authority prior end occupation. SecState expressed willingness clarify relation Control Board to German management and stated agreement in principle that Ruhr should not in future be under exclusive control any German Govt but should be operated for benefit both Europe and Germany and be integrated general European economy.4 SecState reiterated these views in Chicago speech of 18 Nov 1947.5

On 28 Nov 1947 SecState at London reminded Bidault re CFM that question international regime for Ruhr was certain to imply Sov participation in such regime.6 Ruhr issue not dealt with by CFM at London session due early termination.

At London six-power talks on Germany French Del proposed early establishment international authority Ruhr coal and steel control over management and allocation key products between internal use and export (27 Feb 1948).7 Such regime held essential to security and compatible German-European cooperation. US Del expressed fear excessive control make Germany susceptible to Communist danger and pointed out establishment intl system control would invite Sov participation. He opposed intl control management and was reluctant establish intl auth during occupation period. He wished intl auth, if and when established, to have as sole objectives insure Ruhr resources never used for aggressive purposes and enable German economy as integral part Europe contribute Eur recovery. Should be non-punitive and embody principle capable extension to adjacent areas similar character. In general UK agreed US views except for advocacy socialization Ruhr industry. US wished ultimate decision this issue rest with democratic German Govt.

As talks progressed US Del made following concessions to Fr: (1) Ruhr auth to be established in near future before end and prior establishment German provisional Govt; (2) occupation authorities would maintain “adequate control” over management; (3) Ruhr auth to have direct power of allocation (earlier US position was that auth should only supervise German allocations).

Fr press at close first stage London talks hailed results as victory Fr position, noting specifically tentative agreement to establish Ruhr auth (Paris 1210 to Dept, Mar 7, 19488 ).

During second stage London talks Fr Del indicated general Fr acceptance tentative draft (TRI/7 Final) subject reservations re security guarantees. Fr Del stressed this aspect at all times and repeated attempts expand function Ruhr auth may be attributed fear German rearmament. Fr also urged inclusion safeguards foreign property and association Ruhr auth OEEC.

US Del proposed certain clarifications, chief aims of which were (1) preamble drafted so as elicit German cooperation; (2) German essential needs protected against abuse power Ruhr auth; (3) exclusion discriminatory practices; (4) protection US financial responsibilities re western Germany. Last point, in US view, meant during existence JEIA or successor Ruhr auth would only have advisory role re allocations. US also considered protection foreign interests should not be treated apart such interests elsewhere in Germany and opposed direct association Ruhr auth with OEEC. Central difficulty at final stage was necessity reconcile US requirement adequate protection US financial contribution German economy and freedom western Germany negotiate appropriate bilateral agreement with ERP administrator with general desire effectiveness international Ruhr auth not be substantially nullified for indefinite period (London 2020, May 10; rpt. Paris 2119 ).

Final Ruhr agreement (Report: Annexes C and D10 ) represents compromise conflicting views re above points. On question of ownership no agreement was possible. US–UK maintained position against intl ownership desired by Fr. Matter left not agreed with respective positions stated.

Fr National Assembly in approving London agreements reaffirmed (after Fr Govt had assured Nat Assembly ownership not settled) Fr desire internationalization Ruhr mines and basic industries and intent seek in application of Ruhr Agreement effective Fr participation in control German industrial potential and extension control by intl auth over administration Ruhr enterprises (Paris 3190 to Dept, June 1711 ). However US–UK has repeatedly made it plain to Fr Govt that they did not believe likely their views could be changed on this issue.

Fr note to US (June 1912 ) urged question of ownership be settled quickly to harmonize conflicting views and maintained Fr preference for intl ownership of plants and basic industries and intl control of their administration. US reply13 brief and did not deal with question. Fr will undoubtedly continue efforts secure these objectives despite apparent relinquishment in intl discussions since late 1947.

Fr as anticipated renewed demands re ownership and management at opening London Ruhr talks (London 4830 to Dept, Nov 11; rpt Paris 86614 ). Alphand also declared US–UK bizonal law No. 75 published Nov 1015 unacceptable to Fr, since Mil Govs had decided freely elected German Govt to determine final settlement of ownership coal and steel industries. This question not on agenda London talks but Fr position unaltered. Fr hoped to reopen question management at London, emphasizing Fr position that management, although not to be vested intl auth, be controlled by it through adequate powers supervise implementation production and re-equipment programs. Fr in note to US Govt protested Law No. 75 as fait accompli and argued this action beyond competence US and UK Mil Govs and proper subject for decision at governmental level only.

Essence Fr argument is that only method insure Ruhr resources not be used renew German war potential or hegemony over Eur is remove these resources from German control. This is major assumption which: must be challenged. Fr distrust and fear of independent Germans responsibility in this respect closely related to parallel situation being created by German economic recovery and imminent establishment German provisional Govt with substantial powers.

US position (similar to UK) re Fr objections to promulgation Law No. 75 is that Fr authorities have been consulted numerous occasions since Aug 23, that Fr and Benelux comments on projected law received and taken into consideration, and that early action was necessary to clarify ownership issue in interest increased German production and western Eur recovery. Fr kept fully informed at all stages. US fulfilled obligation consult Fr but this does not mean US obliged to agree. Ruhr question involves honest difference of opinion in which US position made clear previously. US attempted persuade Brit modify preamble language to statement of policy rather than Mil Gov decision re ultimate determination of ownership, but Brit insisted retention original wording.

US position re Fr arguments on ownership and management essentially as follows.

Intl ownership held impracticable and unnecessary in relation to desired objectives. It would entail complex juridical problem of extraterritorial rights for which no precedent exists. Operation of intl ownership regime limited to the Ruhr would be intolerable to democratic German Govt and undermine both its economic viability and political prestige. It would disrupt rather than facilitate orderly use German resources and give rise insuperable difficulties enforcement in post-occupation period. Germans would greatly resent deprivation Ruhr resources and issue would be exploited by Communists, nationalists and other extreme elements. Labor reaction likely to foment difficulties and cripple Ruhr production. German Govt friction with intl ownership regime would nullify endeavors achieve German cooperation recovery program and broad Eur interests. Believe security and equitable access objectives attainable through limited intl control and security arrangements as envisaged London Agreements.

Direct intl administration Ruhr resources and industries likewise, believed impracticable and undesirable. Direct control would undermine legitimate sphere authority German Govt, would be punitive in nature, premised on untrustworthiness any German regime, and would raise practical administrative difficulties similar intl ownership. Same objections apply in somewhat less degree to type of intl control over management now evidently envisaged by Fr. Existing and continued controls under occupation statute over management will effectively preclude excessive concentrations economic power, diversion Ruhr resources for purposes of aggression, or independent action by owners or managers in conflict with powers to be reserved to occupation auth under occupation statute. Discussion adequacy controls over management after end “control period” is subject for London talks. Alphand has indicated he will raise and US prepared discuss problem there. Uncertainty ownership question has long been burning issue with German democratic forces represented by trade unions and responsible political parties. US and UK feel German dem forces entitled to resolve problem under constitutional Govt.

US views re means satisfy legitimate Fr desires concerning Ruhr emphasize that Ruhr issue must be viewed in perspective total western German and Eur policy (Dept 4400 to Paris, Nov 1316 ). Only real security for Fr lies in developing constructive program political and economic organization western Eur in which Germany must share and make important contribution Ruhr because nature key resources must be vital factor in such program. Both US and Fr interested in increased Ruhr production. Fr shares in such increase and US Govt obligated to US people to reduce financial burden they are carrying in Germany. Development dem German Govt cannot be jeopardized by short-sighted and self-defeating restraints upon its normal and legitimate prerogatives re vital sector German economy. US contemplates ample safeguards security western Eur including Fr through other measures. Provision for security re Germany to be assured through application London Agreements (in particular Annex L17 ), occupation statute,18 and US support in Atlantic security system.19 A Ruhr auth along lines London Agreement will itself be substantial security safeguard. Fr should if possible be brought to realize extreme gravity any break in western democratic front in face common peril due to Sov and Communist threat. Fr should understand that firm US purpose to carry through comprehensive Eur program to successful conclusion is far better safeguard Fr security than US concession to Fr fears re German recovery and progressive resumption normal functions self-governing nation. Such concessions would, in US view, not only fail achieve ends desired by Fr but put in serious jeopardy entire program for Eur recovery and security as envisaged by Fr themselves.

Lovett

1 In telegram Martel 143, not printed, the Secretary’s Special Assistant, Marshall Carter, requested from the Department a complete briefing on the Ruhr problem in advance of the Secretary’s meeting with Schuman and McNeil on the afternoon of November 19 (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1748). Telegram 4441, November 17, to Paris, not printed, stated that a telegraphic summary of the development of the Ruhr problem was being prepared and would be sent shortly (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1748).

2 Regarding Foreign Minister Bidault’s statement on the Ruhr, made at the 25th Meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers, Fourth Session, Moscow, April 10, 1947, see telegram 1297, Delsec 1414, April 10, 1947, from Moscow, Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 323.

3 The quotations are from Secretary of State Marshall’s statement on the Ruhr, made at the 25th Meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers at Moscow, April 10. For the text of the statement, see Germany 1947–1949, pp. 329–330 or Department of State Bulletin, April 20, 1947, pp. 694–695. The Secretary’s statement is summarized in the telegram cited in the previous footnote.

4 See Secretary of State Marshall’s memorandum of this conversation on October 8, 1947 with Foreign Minister Bidault, Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 682.

5 For the text of the address under reference here, see Department of State Bulletin, November 30, 1947, p. 1024.

6 See the Secretary of State’s memorandum of his conversation with Foreign Minister Bidault on November 28, 1947, during the course of the Fifth Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers, held in London, Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 737.

7 At the Fourth Meeting of the London Conference on Germany (First Part), February 27, 1948, the French Delegation circulated a proposal regarding the Ruhr; for the text, see telegram 772, Delsec 1589, February 27, from London, p. 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]. For a report on the discussion of the proposal, a report summarized in this paragraph, see telegram 774, Delsec 1587, February 28, from London, p. 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66].

8 The telegram under reference here is not printed. For the text of the tentatively agreed paper on the Ruhr, see document TRI/7 (Final), March 5, p. 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90].

9 Not printed.

10 Annexes C and D of the Report of the London Conference on Germany, June 1, 1948 (p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]) are the same as documents TRI/16 (Final), May 26, and TRI/23 (Final), May 26, pp. 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190] and 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193].

11 Not printed. Regarding Ambassador Bonnet’s note of June 19 informing the Secretary of State of the National Assembly’s reservations to the London Conference recommendations, see the editorial note, p. 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228].

12 See the preceding footnote.

13 See the editorial note, p. 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228].

14  Ante, p. 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313].

15 See the editorial note, p. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309].

16  Ante, p. 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318].

17 Same as the Conference document entitled “Report on Security”, May 26, p. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194].

18 For additional documentation regarding the preparation of an occupation statute for Western Germany, see pp. 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373] ff.

19 For documentation on the negotiations leading to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, see volume iii .

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State, at Paris 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1948: Telegram

[Document 332]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State, at Paris

top secret   urgent
niact London, November 19, 1948—1 p. m.

896. Personal for Secretary from Douglas.

1. I had no knowledge of decision contained in preamble to Trusteeship Agreement that question of ownership Ruhr Industries should be determined by future German Government until it was announced publicly. I feel that the implications of this decision are far-reaching and are closely related to the problem of peace and security in Europe, and therefore wish to submit my personal views on the matter to you.

2. It seems to me that it was an issue to be decided by the governments concerned and not by the Military Governors since it is not an occupational matter. Furthermore, a basic decision respecting the future ownership of the Ruhr Industries concerns not only the Two Powers exercising joint control of the area but also of France and the other Western European nations co-operating with US in re-establishing peace in Europe.

3. Apart from above jurisdictional aspect, decision (urged by Brit) politically was of doubtful validity since it may weight a determination in favor of nationalization of Ruhr Industries by a future German Government, and through such concentration of the greatest economic power in Europe may constitute a serious threat to future peace.

4. Decision also precludes International Ownership of which there are many varieties not only governmental in character but also of private nature. While I stated during London Conference US Govt position of opposition to International Public Ownership of Ruhr Industries, I believe it is worthwhile exploring certain types of International Ownership so that Nationals (not Governments) of Benelux, France, UK, US, and Germany might acquire holdings in Ruhr Industries.

5. I am doubtful whether question of private International Ownership has been studied as carefully as it deserves. Though the French are apparently thinking along line of Public International Ownership, it seems to me that they might be agreeable to some other form which gives them jointly with other Allied interests some voice in the management of the Ruhr, and at the same time would not adversely affect their security needs.

6. I feel that we are on the hook and should, if we can do so, devise some means of getting off it. While I think we should avoid action which might constitute a public repudiation of decision of Military Governors, I believe a device might be found which would lead US out of this impasse and enable the governments concerned to reconsider the matter and implicitly to modify the decision of the Military Governors. In this connection one must, of course, take into account statements already made in British Parliament with respect to the issue.

7. Jackson will be able to elaborate further on views expressed above.

Douglas

The Deputy Administrator of the Economic Cooperation Administration (Bruce) to the Economic Cooperation Administration Mission in the United Kingdom London Embassy Files: File—850 Marshall Plan: Telegram

[Document 333]

The Deputy Administrator of the Economic Cooperation Administration (Bruce) to the Economic Cooperation Administration Mission in the United Kingdom

secret [Washington,] November 19, 1948—4 p. m.

ECATO 414. To Finletter for Saul Nelson. Reference Repto 1572 November 15.1

1. Subject: ECA and Ruhr International Authority.

2. Reference your recommendation as to position of ECA in regard to power of Ruhr Authority. It is view of ECA Washington which has been fully discussed with and agreed by Harriman that we should neither go down the line in support of State Department position or maintain an attitude of strict neutrality. Believe that ECA should not take initiative in discussions this matter but should give mild support to State Department expression of views. While you may express agreement with State Department views, our position should essentially be a passive one in these negotiations.

3. State Department and Department of the Army now working on revision of draft annex on relationship of Ruhr Authority to OEEC which may be acceptable to Clay. Suggest taking no position until that has been presented.

Bruce

1 Not printed; in it Saul Nelson reported on the differences of view between State Department officers and OMGUS representatives on the U.S. Delegation to the London Conference on the Ruhr regarding the relationship to be established between the proposed International Authority for the Ruhr and O.E.E.C. State Department officers maintained that Bizonal economic aid programs would have to be coordinated with the proposed I.A.R. before being submitted to the O.E.E.C. According to Nelson, the E.C.A. could adopt one of two viewpoints regarding the difference of view: either E.C.A. could maintain a neutrality in the argument or it could support the State Department position fully. (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 130, File—Incoming telegrams Ruhr Conf.)

Minutes of a Meeting of Foreign Ministers, Quai d’Orsay, Paris, November 19, 1948, 4 p. m. CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 123: File—Mtg of ForMins

[Document 334]

Minutes of a Meeting of Foreign Ministers, Quai d’Orsay, Paris, November 19, 1948, 4 p. m. 1

top secret [Paris,] November 19, 1948.

Present: United States—Secretary Marshall

Ambassador Caffery

Mr. Bohlen

Mr. Jackson

France—Mr. Schuman

Mr. Couve de Murville

Mr. Alphand

Mr. Chauvel

Great Britain—Mr. McNeil (representing Mr. Bevin)

Ambassador Harvey

Mr. Nicholls

Sir I. Kirkpatrick

Mr. Schuman opened the discussion by saying that he wished to make it clear that the French have been kept fully informed regarding the trusteeship arrangements for the coal and steel industries which were announced in Germany on November 10th.2

He recognized that there had been discussion with the French. The particular aspect of the trusteeship laws which the French were concerned about was the paragraph in the preamble which states “Whereas the Military Government has decided that the question of the eventual ownership of the coal and iron and steel industries should be left to the determination of a representative, freely elected German Government.” The French could not accept that an important matter affecting all belligerents could be decided by two powers and he referred to the fact that after the last war comparable decisions had been made in the peace treaty negotiated by all the Allies. He recalled that the French Assembly in approving the London Agreements had reiterated the French view that there should be international ownership of these basic industries. The decision so stated by Military Government was in the French opinion an extremely dangerous decision, particularly since it related to a Central German Government. Never in the past had any German Government had such power and it was now proposed to bestow this important gift on a wholly unknown Government.

The French agreed on the necessity of reviving and promoting German production for the general benefit of European recovery. The French Government did not take a negative attitude. However, it felt that it was extremely unwise to take dangerous steps at the present time and to jeopardize the future. Precautions were necessary and we could not now take action which might result in Germany’s having a privileged position. These were the general problems which concerned the French.

There were two specific points: 1. The French felt that in the post-occupation period there should be a supervision of the management and direction of the Ruhr coal and steel industries. This was not a proposal for international management but for a power of supervision over management. Likewise, the French were anxious to be associated with the present system of controls over the coal and steel industries.

2. The French were concerned about the possibility that the suspension of reparations dismantling was to be applied to war industries, i.e., those which were to be prohibited or limited. The French had agreed to the examination by the Humphrey Committee but were concerned about the revival of war industries in Germany.3

Mr. Schuman said that he would supply an aide-mémoire containing the French points.4

Mr. McNeil first stated that in general the British Government understood the position of the French Government and was anxious to do anything that it could to help the French. In particular, he appreciated the moderation with which Mr. Schuman had expressed his views. There were five particular points which he wished to speak on.

1. Mr. Schuman had drawn the distinction between action by the Military Governors and the peace treaty procedure which had followed after the last war. Mr. McNeil expressed as his own view that it would be within the competence of any peace treaty to annul, revise or confirm the decisions made by the Military Governors. He pointed out that it was considered necessary to make the decision at the present time for reasons of German production and internal conditions. It would often be necessary for the Military Governors to take immediate action. It was his view, however, that any such decisions by the Military Governors could not be binding upon those who were preparing a peace treaty. If Mr. Schuman wanted to affirm the French view that the peace treaty would be a superior document, he felt that the British Government would not object. This did not mean that the British Government would necessarily agree to a change in the present status in the peace treaty.

2. With respect to the reservations made by the French after the London Conference last spring, he recognized that the reservations had been made but it was the British view that there had not been any agreement with respect to any such reservations and the British Government felt strongly that they had not acted in bad faith. The British felt that they were not bound by the reservations which the French had made. Perhaps the action in relation to the trusteeship had been clumsy, but it was not bad faith.

3. He referred to the principle agreed at London that the German Government should have a federal structure. He did not understand Mr. Schuman’s statement that the preamble to the trusteeship law was in conflict with the theory of the federal structure of a German state. He recalled that the London Agreements provided procedures to be followed in case the Germans who were drawing a constitution departed from the principles agreed in London and if this was what Mr. Schuman meant, the British would be glad to discuss the matter.5

4. With respect to supervision of management, it was his memory that this subject was included in the London Agreement and that the British were prepared to discuss this matter with the French and the U.S. There was another allied subject in the London Agreements, that of military security. He suggested that that matter might also be discussed.6

5. With respect to Mr. Schuman’s point on prohibited and limited industries, he could not make any offhand comment but would be anxious to see Mr. Schuman’s memorandum.

The Secretary first pointed out that this whole problem was one which involved many complications and that frankness in discussing it was essential. He understood the fear of the revival of the German war potential and the present complications in the position of the French Government.

With respect to the trusteeship matter, what was done in Frankfurt might have been somewhat clumsy but he wished to make clear that General Clay had represented the United States Government and had acted on the instructions of the United States Government.

Referring to the complications of the whole Ruhr problem, the Secretary enumerated the following: 1. The internal French political reaction to any matter involving the Ruhr.

2. The different points of view of the Governments involved—for example, the British Government policy favoring the nationalization of industries While the United States did not.

3. The German economy was recovering rapidly. Growth of German economic power posed a problem to neighboring countries quite outside the matter of war potential.

4. With respect to the dismantling of war plants, it was his impression that all direct war plants had been dismantled. But he pointed out that a number of plants could be used either for war purposes or for civilian purposes. As an example he mentioned plants for making nitrates. At the present time nitrate plants were being dismantled in Germany. At the same time the United States was buying nitrates to send into Germany.

5. With regard to the reparations removal program, the Secretary called attention to the fact that Mr. Hoffman, the ECA Administrator, had certain responsibilities imposed on him by the Economic Cooperation Act in this field. The matter was not directly in the hands neither of General Clay nor of the Secretary although of course their views would have some effect.

6. He then mentioned the fact that the United States was appropriating large sums of money for the support of Germany and that the recovery of the German economy was a matter of particular concern to us while we were paying the bills.

The Secretary then read the first page and a half of Department’s Telmar 175 of November 187 (leaving out certain sentences). He expressed the view that this telegram was an adequate resume of the U.S. position with respect to the Ruhr industries up to the time of the London Conference. He referred to the fact that Ambassador Caffery had written a letter to Mr. Schuman outlining the events of the summer and early fall.

Referring to the specific points made by the French, the Secretary stated unequivocally that the United States Government would not knowingly be involved in any procedure which would re-establish German power to a dangerous degree. The question of the proper steps to be taken with relation to Germany, however, involved matters of judgment. The views of those who were neighbors of Germany and who had suffered invasion would be different from those who were further away. The Secretary stressed the point that the United States always tried to recognize these differences and to take them into account.

The Secretary referred to a suggestion regarding the French joining the coal and steel control groups in Germany. He felt that the United States could agree to the French becoming parties to those groups without waiting for full trizonal fusion. The Secretary had not quite understood what Mr. McNeil suggested with regard to the Security Board but he assured Mr. Schuman that the United States would cooperate in whatever Mr. McNeil had suggested. The Secretary referred to the immediate political problems which were embarrassing to the French Government and stated that we would do whatever we could to assist the French Government.

Mr. Schuman expressed his pleasure at the spirit of frankness and friendliness which had prevailed ill the discussion. He felt that the basic points of view of the three countries were not far apart and that the studies which were in process on several points should continue. With respect to Mr. McNeil’s statement that a peace treaty was superior to and could supersede any decision of the Military Governors, Mr. Schuman agreed and he felt that it would be extremely helpful if the three Governments could issue a statement of that sort to be drafted later.

With regard to Mr. McNeil’s references to possible bad faith, he wished to assure Mr. McNeil that he had not intended to make any such inferences. He agreed that at London there had been no agreement to hold the question of ownership open, merely a recognition that there were divergent points of view. At that time the French had said that the matter of ownership should be settled by the peace treaty. With regard to the point relating to the federal form of German Government, Mr. Schuman had meant to say that if a German Government nationalized the coal and steel industries, they would have an economic power which no German Government in the past had ever had. If, although he considered it unlikely, the German Government were to establish some degree of private ownership in these industries, the Central Government would undoubtedly retain substantial powers over these industries. In either case the strength of the Central Government would be so increased by economic power that it would have a much stronger position than had been anticipated as against the Land or other subsidiary Governments.

With regard to the supervision and management, he recalled that that was being discussed in London. He was very grateful for Mr. Marshall’s proposal regarding the coal and steel control groups.

It was clear that there was no general agreement on all the points which he had made. He would deliver a memorandum on the point relating to prohibited industries but he was anxious to see if the U.S. and British could agree on a communiqué which stated that the action of the Military Governors with respect to ownership did not prejudice a different solution in the peace treaty.

Mr. McNeil expressed the view that he could not join in such a communiqué. The British Government had its own internal political problems and it would be extremely embarrassing to his own party, particularly in relation to its Left Wing, if such a statement were made, coming after the recent statement he had made in the House of Commons. If, however, Mr. Schuman were to make before the French Assembly a strong statement as to his views with respect to the superiority of the peace treaty, he believed that no objection would come from the British Government which would carry the inference that the British Government did not controvert the French position. Mr. McNeil said that he could not agree to the immediate French participation in the coal and steel control groups without further discussions but would agree to some relationship between the London Conference and the discussions of the Security Board.

Mr. Schuman said that he would not wish to embarrass the British Government although he pointed out that the distance between Right and Left in France was considerably wider than in Great Britain. He only hoped that British silence in such a statement would be interpreted as acquiescence. He agreed that some relationship might be established between the London Conference and the Security Board talks which had started in Frankfurt and suggested that the French would be willing to transfer these talks to London.

Mr. McNeil said that he had not meant that they be transferred to London but suggested that the London Conference suggested [suggest?] that the Military Governors expedite their work on the Security Board.8

Mr. Schuman agreed.

It Was Generally Agreed that a brief noncommittal communiqué would be issued, a copy of which is attached.9

[ Wayne Jackson ]

1  These minutes were prepared by Wayne Jackson, who had been called to Paris from London to advise the Secretary of State on the Ruhr question.

This meeting had been convened at the suggestion of Foreign Minister Schuman. At a brief meeting at the Quai d’Orsay on the afternoon of November 16 with Secretary of State Marshall and Minister of State McNeil and their advisers, Foreign Minister Schuman explained that he would like soon to have a discussion with Marshall and McNeil concerning Germany and in particular the problem of the Ruhr. It was agreed to have the discussion on November 19, by which time the Secretary would have had an opportunity to review documents on the problem.

According to telegram 2785, November 20, from Berlin, not printed, General Clay and Ambassador Murphy visited Paris on November 19 at the request of the Secretary of State. The Secretary, Clay, and Murphy, together with Counselor Bohlen, Ambassador Caffery, and Ambassador Philip Jeseup, reviewed the Ruhr question, the Berlin currency situation, French attitudes towards the future German constitution, and possible conflicts of views among the allies on the subject of German economic recovery (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2048). No detailed record of this discussion, which presumably preceded the meeting recorded here, has been found.

2 Regarding Military Government Law No. 75 of November 10, see the editorial note, p. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309].

3 For documentation regarding the reparations and dismantling questions, see pp. 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417] ff. On the question of prohibited and limited industries, see pp. 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403] ff.

4 The French Foreign Ministry aide-mémoire, dated November 19, is not printed.

5 For additional documentation regarding the work of the West German Parliamentary Council and the preparation of a draft constitution, see pp. 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 252] ff.

6 The reference here is to the Military Security Board; for documentation regarding the discussions in Berlin relative to the establishment of this Board, see pp. 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399] ff.

7  Ante, p. 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]. The first two paragraphs of the telegram comprised the first page and a half of the source text.

8 For the British view of the decision reached at this meeting with respect to the Military Security Board, see Strang’s November 26 communication to Douglas, p. 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399].

9  The attached communiqué, as translated from the French original, read as follows: “Mr. Schuman, Mr. Marshall and Mr. McNeil, representing Mr. Bevin, met this afternoon at 4:00 p. m. at the Quai d’Orsay to discuss certain problems concerning Germany and in particular the Ruhr.

“Mr. Schuman explained the views of the French Government which will be set forth in detail in a memorandum to be communicated shortly to the United States and British Governments. Mr. Marshall and Mr. McNeil agreed that a study of the different problems raised by the French Government would be urgently undertaken.”

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 133: File—Ruhr Authority, Vol. I

[Document 335]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman)1

secret Berlin, November 20, 1948.

Dear Charlie: I was delighted with the Department’s excellent circular telegram of November 192 regarding international ownership of the Ruhr coal, iron and steel industries. I showed it to General Clay who telegraphed his approbation to the Department of the Army.

The Department’s position seems eminently sound. I appreciate that there may be various forms and degrees of “international ownership”. The French suggestions regarding international ownership which we have seen in the past have always carried with them the implications of governmental ownership plus extensive international control over management. Whatever arguments may be advanced against this on the score that it would inevitably create a most obnoxious type of international cartel with all the unfavorable aspects of stifling competition, there is no doubt in our minds here that it would eventually stimulate a wave of German nationalism comparable to what we saw in the 30’s. As the Soviet Union and satellites would be excluded from this international control apparently it could be safely assumed that they would contribute what they could to the opposition.

We fear that the French insistence on international ownership and control of management for the Ruhr coal, iron and steel industries is of a piece with a distorted approach to the question of security. We have seen this manifestation in every field—governmental, financial and industrial—with the French tendency to inject security provisions into every feature whether it be a municipal election, the manufacture of aspirin or shoes, state boundaries, education and religion, traffic on the Rhine, banking and trades unions, etc. It seems obvious to us that until the French are given the satisfaction of an adequate general security guarantee it will not be possible to work out with them a constructive policy vis-à-vis Germany because we will be beset at every step of the way by their fears and apprehensions of a powerful German neighbor who will again be prepared and determined to destroy France. It is our conviction that German recovery is impossible if every feature of German life is to be loaded with the burden of security restrictions. If that policy is to be pursued, then we should abandon the notion of a self-sustaining, peace-loving, democratic Germany. I have the impression that the crossroads of our policy has been reached. The US and UK stand for a courageous policy of German reconstruction with the proviso of general security guarantees whereas the French are loath to see large-scale German reconstruction and insist on minute security provisions attached to almost every feature of German life. It is difficult to imagine with such conflicting points of view a smoothly operating trizonal management for Western Germany.

I am glad, however, that there was opportunity at Paris to suggest to the Secretary that in his discussion with M. Schuman he offer to the French participation in the Coal and Steel groups at Essen and Duesseldorf.3 While this upset the British for a moment, they rallied nicely. French participation in these groups may not make life easier production-wise but is politically desirable.

I thought the Secretary’s statement of November 24 on the Ruhr first-class.4 It should do much to calm apprehensions regarding the characteristics of the trusteeship plan and Law No. 75, about which there has been so much misunderstanding.

All the best to you.

Yours ever,

Robert Murphy

1  This letter was not received by Assistant Secretary Saltzman until December 10, and it appears evident from the text that the letter actually was sent to Washington sometime in late November.

Assistant Secretary Saltzman subsequently circulated this letter to Under Secretary Lovett, George Kennan, John D. Hickerson, and Paul Nitze.

2 The circular telegram under reference, which was addressed to the Embassies in Brussels, The Hague, London, and Moscow as well as the Mission in Berlin, consisted of a paraphrase of the final three paragraphs of telegram 175, November 18, to Paris, p. 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331].

3 Ambassador Murphy together with General Clay conferred with Secretary Marshall and his advisers in Paris on November 19; see footnote 1 to the minutes of the Meeting of the Foreign Ministers, November 19, p. 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334].

4  Post, p. 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2148: Telegram

[Document 336]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State

secret London, November 21, 1948—3 p. m.

4940. Ruhrto 11. For State and ECA.

1. Informal discussions held today with British, French and Belgian delegations regarding relationship IAR to OEEC. Problems were presented without any indication position of USDel with respect to whether views of IAR should be incorporated in programs before presentation OEEC or presented informally to OEEC after programs submitted by German authorities. Necessity of avoiding interference with programming functions OEEC was stressed.

2. Other delegations obviously had not given detailed thought to problem and unprepared to give final answers. British after initial discussion leaned to position authority’s views should be reflected in preparation OEEC programs before submission OEEC, subject during control period to authority military governors. France, Belgium gave no immediate reaction but requested time for consideration. In view absence Alphand, French view probably not available until Monday earliest.

All agreed importance of problem and need for clarification to avoid later difficulties.

Sent Department 4940, repeated Berlin 600.

Douglas

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 133: File—Ruhr Authority, Vol. I: Telegram

[Document 337]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army 1

secret
priority Berlin, 22 November 1948.

CC 6839. From CINCEUR Berlin Germany personal from Clay to Dept of Army Wash DC for CSCAD. I have just seen Paris 5969 to State which contains translation of French Aide-Mémoire on the Ruhr and other German problems.2 In large measure although in more restrained language this Aide-Mémoire confirms Koenig’s position in recent conference previously reported to you at which Koenig stated that French might not accept western German Government because they do not like the present climate.3

The French Aide-Mémoire shows that the Ruhr problem alone is not the disturbing factor but rather German economic recovery as a whole.

While the French Government has officially stated German recovery to be necessary to European recovery, many of its actions within Germany have been to retard such recovery.

As you know, it is my personal view that international ownership of Ruhr could lead to the necessity for forced operation of Ruhr industries. However, I am of the view that international ownership would be less disruptive than foreign control of management which would make it impossible for the responsibility of ownership to be exercised in a normal way.

I think there is some merit in French contention that Government ownership of Ruhr industries would provide too great a centralization of power in Germany. However, I doubt very much if socialization will result as, at least for the present, non-Socialist parties in Germany are in a slight majority. If in fact our established policy to allow the German people to resolve their future economic pattern is to be followed, it would be preferable for any form of national ownership to be at the federal level as it is certainly most undesirable to permit a single state within the Federal Government to have ownership of the industries which control and dominate German economic life.

I think that the French Government’s comments having to do with the prevention of establishment of dangerous and excessive economic concentration in the Ruhr and return of management of Nazi owners are fully prevented in the law establishing the trusteeship arrangement. The whole purpose of the law is to effect a reorganization which will prevent excessive and dangerous economic concentration and which will eliminate the Nazi influence in ownership.

However, I am even more concerned with the French comment that the participation of the representatives of Berlin at Bonn is jeopardizing the conditions for the political reconstruction of Western Germany. We have advised the French that if quadripartite Government exists in Berlin at the time the constitution is approved, it will of course be necessary to disapprove Berlin participation in Western German Government. On the other hand, if Berlin has in fact become a split city, it must be supported by Western Germany and certainly careful consideration must be given under the conditions which exist at the time the constitution is approved to the inclusion of Berlin in Western German Government. It has been made clear here that the French do not really want a united Germany with Berlin as the capital. On the other hand, our policy calls for a united Germany. Certainly, any action on our part which would indicate that we did not want a united Germany would reduce greatly our influence in Western Germany.

The French also point out that there are too many manifestations of a tendency to make Germany again the strongest power in Europe and the center of the economy of the continent. Unquestionably, this results from the recent remarkable upturn in the German economy which has made its recovery real and no longer academic. More than forty million people living in Western Germany having to import at least half of their food requirements can exist only with a substantial industry having a surplus available for export. A self-sustaining Germany is impossible without substantial industry. Obviously, any such industry constitutes a war potential but security must be obtained by rigidly enforced disarmament agreements rather than by suppression of industry which can only result in a deficit economy. A deficit economy would either be borne for many years by the United States or would in itself become a greater war hazard than a self-sustaining economy.

I have considerable sympathy with the French position on reparations and on our continued inability to conclude an agreement for the period of occupation on prohibited and restricted industries. As you know, I have supported the level of industry agreed by the Bizonal area largely because I considered that the limitation of 10,700,000 tons of steel is a commitment made to the French at London. It is true that this limitation was designed to meet Germany’s internal needs and does not allow for any export of steel except in finished products. If the export of steel from Germany is essential to European recovery then in fact this limitation is too rigid as export within the limitation could result only in lengthening the period of financial support by the United States. Nevertheless, our level of industry was calculated with this limitation in mind and purposely no provision was made for steel export.

I was interested to find in Paris that I was charged largely with the effort to raise the steel capacity and to retain additional plants in Germany. While this is not true, I have of course in all my conferences with the French supported the position of our Government that upward changes would have to be made if required in the interest of European recovery. Obviously, we here can enter into no agreements on prohibited and restricted industries until Mr. Hoffman has made his decisions as to what is to be left in Germany and the requisite negotiations for this purpose have been undertaken with the French and British Governments.3

I note that the French Government proposes a joint re-examination at Governmental level of general policy in Germany. This is, of course, not a question on which I should comment. I must point out, however, that there is an increasing conflict in American policy and French policy which leads to almost daily disagreements in our operations in Germany. It is our purpose to re-establish a self-sustaining Germany at the earliest possible date in the belief that such a Germany is essential to a sound European economy and also to obviate the continued need for financial support from the United States. While our efforts to this end have been remarkably successful since currency reform, we are still a long way from a self-sustaining Germany and the United States will be asked for at least two more years and probably longer to support a large annual deficit in Germany’s foreign trade. Our efforts to reduce this period to the minimum are in direct conflict with the French efforts to retard German recovery as much as possible. If we accept the French view, to considerable degree we are increasing our own financial liability in Germany perhaps to the extent that our investment to date would be wasted in its effectiveness to obtain a self-sustaining responsible German Government. On the other hand, as German economy recovers, we will be subject to increasing attack from French politicians reflecting the real and imaginary fears of the French people and of the French Government. I cannot help but feel that this conflict of policy is at a critical stage. With each compromise our efforts at German recovery will be retarded. Without compromise, we will be faced with an intensive French opposition which will result perhaps in developing a real anti-American sentiment in France.

Certainly, there is no easy solution to this problem. I am convinced that German recovery is essential to European recovery and to any real stability in Europe which could make for peace. Nevertheless, if this recovery can only be obtained by the loss of French support, then stability would probably not result either. However, it does seem clear to me that it would be difficult indeed to justify the continued financial support of Germany by the United States if such support is not directed to developing self-sufficiency and responsible government which will eliminate the need of financial support at the earliest possible date.

Perhaps, a security pact will do much to allay French fears. However, the French fears are not entirely directed at physical aggression but also come from the competition which will result from a recovered German economy.

I am attempting only to point up the problem as certainly as recommendations for its solution are beyond my competence. It does seem that it is a problem which must be resolved soon.

[ Clay ]

1 In his account of the circumstances and considerations related to the sending of this message, Clay, Decision in Germany, p. 417, states that he received no reply from Washington.

2 The French Foreign Ministry aide-mémoire of November 19 is not printed, but see the minutes of a Meeting of Foreign Ministers, November 19, p. 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334]. The telegram under reference is not printed.

3 See telegram 266, November 17, from Frankfurt, for an account of the meeting of the three Military Governors for Western Germany on November 16, p. 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496].

3 The Administrator of the Economic Cooperation Administration was responsible for a review of those industrial plants in Western Germany scheduled for dismantling and removal as reparations. For documentation on this topic, see pp. 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417] ff.

Memorandum by Michael J. McDermott, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State, of the Secretary of State’s Press and Radio News Conference, November 24, 1948 News Division Files: Secretary’s Press Conferences

[Document 338]

Memorandum by Michael J. McDermott, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State, of the Secretary of State’s Press and Radio News Conference, November 24, 1948 1

[Extract]

[Washington, November 24, 1948.]

No. 46

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Germany (the Ruhr)

The Secretary said that he had a statement to make on the Ruhr and would read the draft of it. (See Press Release No. 9452 ) (Off the record) Secretary Marshall said that he would add that one had a very difficult press to deal with in France because it was representing different interests and in the hurly burly of aspirations for government control or otherwise it had quite different motives at times from the larger ones now being discussed. He continued that this was not unusual in a political campaign but was rather exaggerated in France, at least toward him. He said that he was not only accused in the press time after time of forcing Dr. Schuman to take this or that line of unpopular action but he said that they finally spread a story that he had actually interrupted Dr. Schuman’s shaving. The Secretary remarked that he thought they had gone a great distance in the months about his force but this remark was rather a triumph. Secretary Marshall said that he had never seen Dr. Schuman except at his request either at the Embassy or the Quai D’Orsay. He said that he had found Dr. Schuman a very splendid person to negotiate with but if one read the paper it was a different scenario. (End off record.)

The original draft of the statement made by the Secretary apparently was prepared toy Counselor Charles E. Bohlen while he and the Secretary were still in Paris. The final version issued to the press incorporated additions and revisions suggested by General Clay and Ambassador Murphy in telegram 2789, November 22, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2248) and by Ambassador Caffery in telegram 6010, November 23, from Paris, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2348).

A correspondent inquired if in his memorandum [statement?], the Secretary had said that a Security Commission in the Ruhr had already been set up. Secretary Marshall answered that it had been, or at least that it was in the process of being set up. Asked if when he told Dr. Schuman that he would be willing to consider further measures for security and definite specific measures were discussed, the Secretary answered in the negative. He said (off the record) that he might add that it was suggested, for Dr. Schuman’s information, that he might propose having the governors report to the London Conference right away just exactly what they had set up so that it could be considered for further examination. (End off record.)

When a correspondent inquired if there were any discussion of a renewal of Mr. Byrnes’ offer of a forty-year pact,3 the Secretary answered in the negative. Asked if that offer were still open, he said that it was, that it could be carried out in the terms in which it was given, not as amended by the Soviet Government. A correspondent inquired if that were dependent upon the incorporation of Russia into it, and the Secretary said it was.

A correspondent asked what the status of the Ruhr discussions was. He inquired if the Secretary’s statement was the last word on the subject or if there were still the hope that discussions between the United States, France and Britain would emerge. Secretary Marshall remarked that the correspondent should read the statement he had made, that he thought he made it clear. Asked if this constituted rejection of the French protest, the Secretary stated that the procedure agreed on in Paris was that we were going ahead with it, that it was the details and motives that had been discussed. A correspondent asked if that were arrived at by the United States, Britain and France, and the Secretary answered it was arrived at in the London conference.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

M. J. McDermott

1 The Secretary of State had returned to Washington from Paris on November 24.

2 For the text of the statement read by the Secretary of State, see Germany 1947–1949, p. 330 or Department of State Bulletin, December 5, 1948, p. 703.

3 The reference here is to draft U.S. treaty on the disarmament and demilitarization of Germany, which was circulated by Secretary of State James F. Byrnes at the Second (Paris) Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers on April 30, 1946; for the text, see Foreign Relations, 1946, vol, ii, p. 190.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.0019 Control (Germany)/11–2848: Telegram

[Document 339]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent London, November 28, 1948—3 p. m.

5032. Ruhrto 18. 1. Following French formal statement 11 November (Ruhrto 21 ) re supervision over management Ruhr coal, coke and steel industries, and elaboration on 12 November reported Ruhrto 3,2 French have circulated a formal proposal and given USDel an additional elaborating statement. Matter has been discussing informally with French and British. Following is summary of French proposal and French explanation:

2. During control period, French participation in coal and steel control groups satisfies French desires re supervision over management. After control period IAR should inherit certain powers including: (a) To prevent reconstitution of excessive concentrations in coal and steel industries, there should be submitted to IAR for approval any proposed changes in the structure of the industries or the charters of trade organizations. This applies to any changes from structure existing at end of control period;

(b) To prevent return to positions of policy creation in coal and steel industries of persons who furthered aggressive designs of Nazis or their dummies, nominations to principal directing positions in enterprises and trade organizations should be submitted to authority for approval. French concede this should apply only to persons who have been found by competent tribunal to have furthered Nazi designs and not be arbitrary. Not clear how this would apply in case of dummies;

(c) To assure that policies of management (gestion) are consistent with aims of non-aggression and European recovery, programs of production, equipment and investment of coal and steel industries should be submitted to authority for approval. This point breaks into two parts. Re coal, desire is to ensure that there will be adequate investment and development and consequently production of coking coal and metallurgical coke to satisfy needs both of Germany and those dependent upon German coke. Re steel, aim is one of security and is to ensure that steel production and capacity does not exceed amount necessary for internal civilian needs of Germany, i.e. to enforce a ceiling. Frequent denials of commercial objective re steel.

3. On steel production French are motivated by, among other things, fears that rumors current in Germany that steel production level will be raised to 14 million tons are founded on US–UK intentions; fear which Benelux seem to share that reparations program will be halted thus leaving Germany with steel capacity greater than needed for German internal civilian needs, thus making increase of German steel production more difficult to limit; fear that present preoccupation re Soviet causes neglect of dangers of German resurgence, recuperative powers of Germany being now evidenced by extraordinary progress made in coal and particularly steel industries in Bizone. While French undoubtedly desire to establish French steel industry in predominant position on Continent, this desire is related to security objectives as well as commercial. Internal French political situation forces taking a strong line re Ruhr, particularly in view of violent reaction against preamble trusteeship agreement, French intend to submit to Assembly any agreement drafted here.

4. Benelux delegates, although much more quiet than French, obviously share security apprehensions strongly and have the added feeling that it is now extremely difficult for them to get their point of view seriously considered by occupation authorities.

5. British are sympathetic to French objectives re preventing excessive concentrations in private hands (apparently not considering nationalization as excessive concentration) and preventing return of Nazi supporters. No evidence in these talks that in coal and steel export field British are worrying about future competition and they seem to support French desire for adequate coke production and limitation of steel production on security grounds. View has been expressed by British that expansion of Ruhr production may be dangerous strategically as Germany east of Rhine not defensible. British also clearly feel that considerable satisfaction should be given to French mainly, for political reasons and to try to head off the coming into power of an extreme French Government with all the difficulties that would raise re ERP, Brussels pact, German Government etc. British have proposed to us informally giving to IAR certain powers in the fields mentioned by French. Essentially British proposal is that IAR should have power by majority Allied vote to require German Government to make changes in structure of industries if IAR finds excessive concentrations in private hands, to require removal of Nazi supporters from key posts and at request of Military Security Board to require submission to IAR for its approval, production and equipment programs and to order such modifications of these programs as Military Security Board may require,3 British have asked our reaction to this proposal.

6. US line expressed to date has been that objectives re excessive concentrations, Nazis, adequate coal production and preventing rebirth of German military potential are shared but question exists as to means for securing these objectives. London agreements must be considered as a whole as stated in report covering annexes. Each segment had a special purpose and any attempt to spread the functions envisaged under one segment e.g. Security Board over other separate portions IAR could only result in confusion and prejudicing the effectiveness of the whole. Economic measures for assuring security are to be found in annexes relating to limited and prohibited industries and Military Security Board. Effort to add on to IAR production control functions would result in its overlapping Security Board to detriment of both. Point was made that effective functioning of IAR will be, certainly during post-control period, dependent upon at least some degree of willing cooperation from Germans. Every inclusion of a measure of punitive character further precludes the chance of IAR ever being acceptable to the Germans. US is not trying to benefit Germans but to find the type of organization which, by minimizing German resentment, can have hope of successful operation. Point also made that effect of measures of too punitive a nature would be to drive Germans towards east or encourage revival Nazis.

7. USDel is convinced that purely negative approach or rejection all parts of French desires would have most unfortunate effect. Even if agreement could be reached here, doubted whether French Assembly would approve. References to Security Board and future agreements re limited and prohibited industries are weakened by fact that neither functions of Security Board nor agreement on prohibitions and limits has been reached and by French and Benelux belief that US under ECA act will insist on leaving large steel capacity in Germany. British proposal outlined above (which already incorporates results of informal discussions with USDel) seems to warrant serious consideration and to meet some of the objectives of French and Benelux. Principal difficulty is that it is restrictive and negative in character and is probably opposed to longer run US objective of furthering a closer integration of west Germany into west Europe. Accordingly USDel would propose taking the following line and pushing it fairly hard:

8a. US approved London agreements which had among their objectives the imposition of security controls in both military and economic fields on Germany to assure that German war potential was not rebuilt. US intentions along this line have long been matter of record and have been often expressed by US, most recently by Secretary State in November 24 press statement.4 Particular importance of Ruhr recognized and US position formally stated by Secretary State in Moscow spring 1947. London agreements re Ruhr were reaffirmation of that position. Method of assuring against rebirth German aggression one upon which opinions may differ. US believes that general pattern developed in all parts of London agreement is consistent and will be effective. US willing to consider with greatest sympathy specific proposals for extension of IAR beyond Annex C concept provided such proposals have acceptable purpose and do not interfere with or duplicate the functions assigned to other bodies by London agreement. Initial French proposals seem too generalized and too sweeping to meet this criterion, although security and access objectives French have stated are objectives with which US is in sympathy. Preliminary outline of functions of Security Board is in process of completion and US proposes that both IAR and Security Board be considered together for purpose of deciding how each can best be assigned functions which will meet the legitimate security objectives of the Allied powers.

8b. US does not believe, however, that ultimate solution of German problem nor of European security can be found outside of the concept of a closer degree of doing [sic] European action and much closer cooperation than has existed to date. The US support of the concept of closer European integration is evidenced by massive support of ERP and declared backing of Brussels pact. Important to follow up this objective at every available opportunity. IAR could be converted into a major step towards this aim. Preamble to Annex C contains this concept. During immediate future, therefore, establishment of any German Government and during early efforts of a provisional government to establish itself domestically, it may be difficult to take practical steps to further the objective of integrating west Germany, or all Germany if it is not split, into the west European community. This objective, however, should be stated at once and the hope held out to the peoples of all countries concerned that there is not being reestablished a pattern of extreme national rivalry such as developed after the first war. Accordingly, US proposes that this larger concept be written into IAR agreement. Not only should it be stated as one of the objectives of IAR, but the agreement itself should make provision for method of expanding the functions of IAR to include areas other than Ruhr, including the related areas of Saar, Lorraine, Luxembourg, Belgium and Netherlands. While necessary restrictions will be maintained in Germany that adequate access to Ruhr resources will be assured and that they will not again be used for exclusive German military or economic purposes, these restrictions might be loosened if and when Germany evidences its willingness to cooperate in a joint effort to use the great industrial resources of the areas mentioned above for the benefit of all Europe. A body which concerned itself with the coal and steel resources of this greater area could play an important role in assuring access to those resources by all Europe, could coordinate and endorse programs for investment and development and help prevent distortions in trade with the objective of providing the necessary production of coal and steel on the most economical terms without regard for national frontiers or nationality of consumers or producers.

8c. Accordingly the signatory governments should specifically undertake that they will work out the terms under which the IAR would be extended to cover this larger geographical area and the functions which it should perform with respect to this larger area. The development of the details of this proposal requires extended study and careful thought. It is doubtful that such details could be incorporated in the agreement presently being negotiated, but as a minimum the signatory governments should now bind themselves to work out such details and to define the means for attaining the long-range aim which alone can assure peace and prosperity in Europe.

9. Expect US statement re French proposals must be made Wednesday, 1 December. Urgent comments requested.

Sent Department 5032; repeated Paris 944; Berlin 609.

Douglas

1 Telegram 4830, p. 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313].

2 Telegram 4853, p. 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 316].

3 For additional documentation regarding the Military Security Board, see pp. 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399] ff.

4 See footnote 2 to McDermott’s memorandum of the Secretary’s press conference of November 24, p. 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2148: Telegram

[Document 340]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

secret
us urgent
niact Washington, November 29, 1948—6 p. m.

4565. Personal for Amb. On behalf Secy you are requested urgently to make following communication to Schuman in response his aide-mémoire Nov 20 (re Embtel 59691 ):

“The Sec of State has carefully studied the aide-mémoire which Mr. Schuman sent him on current German problems following the meeting held on Fri, Nov 19.2

Several of the pertinent questions were covered in the conversation which Mr. McNeil and the Sec had with Mr. Schuman on that date. Mr. Schuman will also have seen the statement which the Sec made at his press conference on Nov 24.3 The Sec has now been informed that the Brit Govt agrees with his proposal that a French representative should participate in the control group established for coal and steel without awaiting the final fusion agreement. The Sec trusts this cooperation may prove effective and fruitful.

As Mr. Schuman mentioned in the conversation held on Nov 19, the basic points of view of the three western countries regarding Germany are not far apart. It is our firm, common intention that Germany in the future shall not be able again to start an aggressive war. Given this identity of purpose, it is impossible to believe that complete agreement cannot be reached on the course of action we shall pursue.

The US Govt understands the anxieties of the Fr Govt concerning any future misuse of German economic power. The trusteeship plan, as has been fully explained, was designed to prevent excessive concentrations of economic power and the return of Nazis to positions of ownership and control. At the same time it sought to promote increased production of the Ruhr properties as required for the benefit of western Europe as a whole.

It is our desire that Germany’s recovery shall be designed to further the constructive interests of Europe and to make more effective the financial contribution which the US is at present called upon to assume in assisting European economic recovery. It continues to be US policy that the vital elements of security shall be protected to ensure that the economic power of the Ruhr industries shall not again be used by any Ger Govt for a revival of military power or as an economic weapon for the furtherance of exclusive Ger policies. These principles were a guiding factor in the agreements resulting from the talks on Germany held in London last spring, including the agreement for the establishment of an international authority for the Ruhr.

The establishment of long-term international controls for Germany remains an open issue for development by the interested Allied powers in connection with the determination of a definitive Ger settlement. It is also our view that the security of Germany’s neighbors will depend on a strong economic and defensive organization for western Europe. This makes it all the more necessary that we should continue to develop a constructive policy respecting Germany in which guarantees will play their appropriate role. These are matters which my Govt is always prepared to discuss and which it is confident can be resolved.”

Marshall

1 Neither printed.

2 For the minutes of the meeting of November 19, see p. 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334].

3 See footnote 2 to McDermott’s memorandum of the Secretary’s press conference of November 24, p. 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2948: Telegram

[Document 341]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, November 29, 1948—7 p. m.

4460. ToRuhr 15. Agreement now reached with Army and ECA that annex to Agreement on IAR–OEEC relationship would be too formal and rigid a method of dealing with procedural problem. Instead following, which would allow for future adjustment as may be necessitated by changes OEEC programming procedures or other developments proposed for your consideration: “With respect to Article VI, Paragraph 1–C,1 the following understanding has been reached on the procedure which will be followed to ensure that the Authority’s determinations with respect to the export of coal, coke and steel from the Ruhr are consistent with the programs of the OEEC. It is understood that this procedure will be subject to such changes as experience indicates may be necessary.

1. When economic programs for submission to the OEEC are being prepared by the responsible authorities in Western Germany, proposals included in such programs with respect to the export of Ruhr coal, coke and steel and the amounts to be retained in Germany shall be submitted to the Authority. The Authority shall review such proposals and make tentative findings with respect to the export of Ruhr coal, coke and steel for the period covered by the program.

2. During the Control Period the Authority’s finding shall be incorporated by the responsible authorities in Western Germany in the overall program submitted to the OEEC to the extent that such findings are consistent with the terms of any existing agreement among the Occupying Powers governing the export of coal or coke from Germany and with any agreements relative to the provision of financial assistance to Germany which are now or may come in effect between any two or more of the Occupying Powers. The determination of whether the findings of the Authority are consistent with such agreements will be made by the Occupation Authorities in Germany who will, therefore, have final authority with respect to the Western. German program submitted to the OEEC.

3. As the review of the program proceeds in the OEEC the representatives of Western Germany may consider and agree to such changes in the coal, coke and steel sections of the program as appear justified. The program as finally adopted by the OEEC shall be transmitted to the Authority by the Western German authorities. The Authority shall take such action as may be necessary to ensure that its findings are consistent with such programs.”

Request (a) your comments on foregoing; (b) your comments on type of understanding, if any, e.g. agreed minute.

Identical telegram being sent by Army to Clay.2

Please pass to Hannaman.

Marshall

1 The reference here is to the U.S. draft agreement on international authority for the Ruhr, document RC/3, November 12, p. 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 317].

2  The message was sent to General Clay as WX 80332, November 29. In his message FMPC 1093, November 30, to the Under Secretary of the Army, General Clay replied as follows: “Reurad WX 80332. I have no further comment as I have already expressed my views that the procedure is cumbersome and will always place US representative exercising US dominant voice in conflict with Ruhr authority. Appeals to govt and friction are inevitable. It is a lessening of our position.

“It is interesting to note that this proposal which does make the task of US representative in Germany more difficult was first suggested by US members of delegation and was only then picked up by British and French.

“I think State Dept will find that when its representative takes over in Germany, his task will be made more difficult.” (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 130, File—Incoming telegrams Ruhr Conf)

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–3048: Telegram

[Document 342]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret   us urgent
niact London, November 30, 1948—7 p. m.

5053. Ruhrto 21. 1. Alphand returned to London today after weekend conferences Paris, particularly with Schuman on Assembly Ruhr debate,1 with a materially stiffened position. At meeting heads of delegations, he clearly admitted French objective was to extend Ruhr authority beyond concept of annex C and have it control steel production. (French pressure for this aim has been growing since beginning talk.) When possibility was informally broached of writing into Ruhr agreement idea of expansion of territory and change of function at future date, he reacted very strongly asserting that any such proposal would cause breakdown present meeting, that Ruhr authority was designed to control an area which twice had been mainspring of German aggression and that in light of present conditions and particularly uncertainty of continuation of reparations program any attempt now to change nature of Ruhr authority from that of an instrument to control Germany would be flatly rejected by French Government.

2. As stated Ruhrto 18,2 British feel it important in view French political situation to make effort to meet French desires as far as practicable. British support US line that security matters are to be handled through security board. British present intention is to offer proposals along lines discussed paragraph 5 Ruhrto 18 at Wednesday’s meeting. They have doubt, however, as to whether this will satisfy French delegation or would induce French Assembly approval of the agreement in view present French sensitivity on all matters related to Ruhr.

3. USDel inclined, as stated paragraph 7 Ruhrto 18, to favor providing some additional powers for Ruhr authority regarding excessive concentrations, Nazis and some supervision over steel production and development programs, all to be exercised only at instigation of security board. Such an offer, however, may well be quite insufficient to obtain French approval of an agreement. On other hand we are definitely of opinion that we should not accept French proposal for Ruhr authority with powers, so extensive that they could be used to suppress German production to the detriment of the common good of Europe. In view foregoing we may eventually be forced into position of having to take one of two alternatives. The first is to tell French flatly that unless they can agree to a Ruhr authority to accomplish purposes of annex, and without powers which could be used to curtail production, we will agree to no Ruhr authority. The other alternative would be to recess these meetings until work has been completed on security board and other tasks under London agreement relating to Ruhr and decisions on dismantling, so that after recess we could take position that security matters had already been dealt with.

4. We are not sanguine first alternative would induce French to adopt more reasonable attitude, for while this matter of the Ruhr is not intrinsically as important as other German questions such as Berlin, it has in fact acquired great significance for French. Furthermore, too categorical rejection of French demands would furnish Soviet excellent opportunity to exploit division between western allies. Difficulty with second alternative is that French would undoubtedly use resumed Ruhr talks as final effort to obtain security objectives which they had not been able to have agreed in security board talks. There is merit in having final security talks take place in relation to security board rather than in relation to Ruhr authority.

5. USDel will endeavor to keep matter fluid until instructions received. On balance we feel that proposal along lines discussed first sentence paragraph 3 above is best move, insisting that security matters be dealt with at Security Board talks.

Sent Department Niact 5053; repeated Berlin US urgent 617; Paris Niact 953.

Douglas

1 On November 18 the Foreign Affairs Committee of the French National Assembly adopted a resolution protesting against U.S.–U.K. Military Government Law No. 75 on the reorganization of the coal, iron and steel industries of Western Germany; for the text of the resolution, see Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, p. 645. After Foreign Minister Schuman appeared before the Foreign Affairs Committee in closed session, the National Assembly held a debate on the Ruhr question on November 30.

2 London telegram 5032, November 28, p. 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–248: Telegram

[Document 343]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, December 2, 1948—10 p. m.

5081. Ruhrto 22. At fourteenth [thirteenth] plenary meeting December 11 Alphand urged in moderate statement2 adoption French proposals for transfer to IAR at end control period certain controls over structure, key personnel and management as described paragraph 2 Ruhrto 18.3 UK suggested counterproposals as described paragraph 5 Ruhrto 18. Benelux delegates separately in varying degrees supported French proposals. USDel reserved position pending study French and UK proposals, noting that in view US proposals went beyond terms of reference Annex C.

Only new point made by Alphand was that without control by Ruhr industries European cooperation very difficult.

Stevens (UK) expressing sympathy with the general French outline offered counterproposals as follows: 1. IAR be authorized to obtain such information as deemed necessary on industrial organization and on the basis of this information to decide if cartels or combines exist and if so determined that IAR could require that appropriate German public authorities take whatever measures the IAR considers necessary to terminate such concentration.

2. UK feels undesirable that all managerial appointments be cleared through the IAR but should be kept informed and have the power to require the removal of such persons if furthered Nazi aggression.

3. UK feels that objectives of IAR and maximization of German production within agreed limits would be frustrated if IAR were given wide powers of interference with day to day operation of Ruhr industries, and French suggestion goes far beyond what UK considers control of management. IAR should have full information on production and development and exercise control if necessary for security reasons but only for security reasons. Therefore, Military Security Board, or its successor should determine when operations of Ruhr industries constitute a security threat. Stevens proposed that IAR when and to extent requested by Military Security Board could require the Germans to submit to IAR any Ruhr investment, production or development programs and IAR should then have right to order any modification required by Military Security Board.

Alphand indicated interest in UK counterproposals although felt didn’t go far enough towards meeting French proposals. In reply to statement US representative that. French proposal went beyond scope Annex C, he argued that French had always considered security problem of Ruhr required special treatment by a specialized agency in addition to general security controls exercised by Military Security Board. French proposal was in principle expansion of concept in article 10 (b) of Annex C and was method by which IAR would cooperate with the Military Security Board in security matters. Further discussion postponed until USDel receives instructions.

Sent Department 5081; repeated Berlin 621.

Douglas

1 A copy of the U.S. minutes of the 13th Meeting of the London Conference on the Ruhr was transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to despatch 2402, December 6, from London, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–648).

2 A copy of the French statement, which had been previously circulated to the Conference as document RC/8, was transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 2359, November 30, from London, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–3048).

3 London telegram 5032, November 28, p. 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–248: Telegram

[Document 344]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

confidential London, December 2, 1948——10 p. m.

5082. Ruhrto 24. At fifteenth [fourteenth] plenary December 21 agreement reached on area of Ruhr substantially as urged USDel including OMGUS. Decided adopt area delineated on British map (enclosure nine despatch 2293, November 192 ) plus area within Kreise Rees, Luedinghausen and Beckum covered by concessions now being worked. British undertook to obtain exact description this territory to he used in agreement. British and US firmly opposed including Kreise in entirety on political disadvantages which would ensue from unduly extended Ruhr area taking in non-coal areas.

Sent Department, repeated Berlin for information 622.

Douglas

1 A copy of the U.S. Delegation minutes of the 14th Meeting of the London Conference on the Ruhr, December 2, was transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to despatch 2418, December 8, from London, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–848).

2 The despatch under reference is not printed.

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Under Secretary of the Army (Draper) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–448: Telegram

[Document 345]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Under Secretary of the Army (Draper)1

top secret
urgent Berlin, 3 December 1948.

CC–6958. From CINCEUR Berlin Germany personal from Clay to Dept of Army personal for Draper. Am seriously disturbed with information in London 5053 to State Department.2 The London Agreement on Ruhr was published in Germany and accepted at least tacitly. An extension of further powers to authority now would be disastrous politically in Germany and would lead in my opinion to loss of production in the Ruhr. Communist propaganda would make the most of it.

I realize that the French reaction if the authority is not extended may be equally damaging to our objectives in Europe.

If, in fact, Ruhr authority can not now be developed along lines agreed in London, I would suggest indefinite postponement.

I believe this might be acceptable now to the French since they have been invited to join control groups for steel and coal which will continue during occupation period. Benelux countries will not like it but could possibly be consoled by liaison representation with control groups.

If French insist on immediate agreement, then we should stand on terms agreed at London. However, we could point out our readiness to forego establishment of authority now in view of existing political tensions relying on the control groups. We could also point out that terms of London Agreement would still stand and that the establishment of the authority could be undertaken as soon as the atmosphere clears and in any case prior to conclusion of peace treaty.

This seems to me sensible solution if we wish to avoid possibly damaging results to our objectives in either France or in Germany.

[ Clay ]

1  Under Secretary Draper transmitted the source text to Under Secretary of State Lovett on December 4. The text of this message was also transmitted to the Department of State in Ambassador Murphy’s telegram 2870, December 3, from Berlin, not printed. Ambassador Murphy added the following personal comment: “There is, I believe, validity in the suggestion that, haying now invited the French to participate in the coal and steel groups in the Ruhr, if we are to add an association in those groups for Benelux, it would be desirable to defer further consideration of Ruhr authority paper if that consideration entails going far afield from outline agreed in Annex C. I would appreciate benefit of Department’s comment.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–348)

2 Dated November 30, p. 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 342].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–348: Telegram

[Document 346]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret
us urgent Washington, December 3, 1948—2 p. m.

4514. ToRuhr 16. Subject definition steel (Ruhrto 14 and OMGUS CC 68331 ). 1. Dept feels US should stick to strict technical definition of steel as comprehending all steel including crude, semi-finished and finished but excluding all iron including pig iron, cast iron and ferroalloys. This is clear and defensible definition and accords with para 12–e your instructions2 developed after considerable discussion. OMGUS was informed this position in Warx 91587, Oct 27.3

2. Since all other delegates wish inclusion pig iron as well as crude and semi-finished steel, you should propose as compromise definition as per your instructions. Shld be made clear that inclusion any given items involves no commitment re volume exports such items from Germany. You shld draw attention to point already made by UK (Ruhrto 14 para 11) that amounts of steel available for export under present limitation will not be substantial.

3. For ur info Army proposed additional statement be made that exports will necessarily be in form of fabricated steel products in view US financial interest in size of German deficit. Dept informed Army it feels it is not necessary make this additional point in view acceptance by all concerned of MilGov veto during Control Period and that to raise it might be needlessly irritating and might give impression we were trying at this to lay foundation for an eventual increase in permitted level of steel production.

4. Re para 4 Ruhrto 14. Protection during Control Period against dangers excessive exports any products within purview IAR amply provided through JEIA veto. After Control Period we must rely on combined US, UK and German votes in IAR. Excessive exports coal or coke, for example, could be as damaging to future German economy as excessive exports ingots. This, however, is risk we undertook in entering into London Agreement and don’t feel it can be used to justify exclusion of particular types steel from definition.

5. Re scrap you should remind delegates existence US–UK agreement which provides for MilGovs to determine scrap exports from Bizonia4 and US view that status this agreement similar to Moscow sliding scale.5 Would therefore be no function for IAR to perform this field since, unlike coal, qualitative differences scrap not of great significance.

6. At this stage Dept does not regard UK compromise as acceptable. Main effect as compared to Washington definition is to allow allocation pig iron and ferro-alloys, but to interpose additional step in process. Countries desiring allocation these products could use their votes to decide such allocation necessary to prevent frustrating objectives of agreement. Dept recognizes possibility, however, that as negotiations proceed US may wish to reconsider position in context settlement other outstanding issues.

Lovett

1 Neither printed.

2 The reference here is to instruction 459, November 10, to London, p. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309].

3  Ante, p. 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305].

4 Reference is to the U.S.–U.K. Agreement of September 30, 1948 for the Allocation of Iron and Steel Scrap from Germany.

5 Regarding the Moscow Sliding Scale Agreement of April 1947, see footnote 3 to Department of the Army message Warx 92764, November 17, to Berlin, p. 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327].

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–348: Telegram

[Document 347]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

restricted
us urgent Paris, December 3, 1948—4 p. m.

6145. Assembly last night passed 377 against 181 (Communists) following govt resolution on Ruhr: “National Assembly approves govt’s action in making immediate protest against actions envisaged by Law No. 75 of Commanders-in-Chief Anglo-American bizone. Takes note of fact govt has obtained immediate participation France in organization for temporary control Ruhr but, noting preamble of two Commanders-in-Chief neither withdrawn nor rectified, and convinced proposals envisaged this preamble contrary to placing coal and steel of Ruhr at disposal of Europe, only means of reconciling demands European security with necessity permitting German economy gradually recover its equilibrium, National Assembly invites govt inform British and American govts French people unanimously reject policy of which preamble ordinance 75 is expression.”1

Communist resolution called for appointment parliamentary committee investigate immediately situation German especially Ruhr, defeated 411 to 181. This resolution had voting priority since called for investigation committee.

Gaullists introduced resolution expressing regret govt allowed Allies on advice simple experts and by decision simple subordinates, embark on course so dangerous for future of world, without bringing attention these govts with necessary energy and clarity warning and protest of French people. This resolution not voted on as such but request for priority over govt resolution rejected 314 to 62 (Communists abstaining).

Before final adoption govt resolution, first two paragraphs approved by show of hands, Gaullists abstaining and Communists voting against. This procedure requested by Gaullists since these paragraphs “approved” govt action in regard Law 75.

Second part of resolution inviting govt inform British and American govts French people unanimously reject preamble Law 75, passed by 413 (including Gaullists) against 181.

Sent Department 6145, repeated London 1410 Berlin 772.

Caffery

1 The original French text of the resolution quoted here in informal translation was transmitted to the Department of State under cover of a brief note of the French Embassy in Washington dated December 4, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–448).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–348: Telegram

[Document 348]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

confidential
us urgent Washington, December 3, 1948—6 p. m.

4528. ToRuhr 17. Fr. Emb has communicated to Dept for its info Fr proposals re Ruhr control presented at London.1 Accompanying memo states in substance as follows: Fr Govt insists this proposal constitutes a minimum and that if agreement cannot be reached on corresponding terms, a fundamental divergence will result bet policy of Allies re Germany which will en-danger the constructive cooperation in this field which Fr Govt desires to see developed.

Impression has been obtained from Dec 1 discussions in London that Brit, Dutch, Belgian and Luxembourg Dels were disposed to recognize essential points Fr position. Fr Govt considers it highly important that favorable instructions this matter be sent USDel London. It stresses following considerations: 1. A general supervision of management by IAR appears indispensable in order that this authority can fulfill function confided to it in allocation coal, coke and steel, as well as re security.

2. Powers for this authority insisted upon by Fr Govt have aim of developing both as re quantity and character production coal and coke necessary to contribute effectively to rapid Eur construction and to guarantee that steel production does not exceed agreed limits.

3. Fr proposal neither hinders nor retards in any way realization of Allied agreed objectives concerning German recovery.

4. Fr attitude on Germany is in no way negative. Only economic restrictions France wishes to see imposed on Germany are limitations and prohibitions on war industries and an effective control of Ruhr enterprises. Fr Govt wishes German settlement to result in democratic and decentralized Germany which can be integrated Eur economy. It is convinced that its proposal presented at London is an indispensable condition for success Eur collaboration and unification to which it will devote all its efforts. End Summary.

Informing Fr Emb we are transmitting summary you with appropriate instructions (to follow) and no other reply will be made here.

Lovett

1 The original French-language aide-mémoire from the French Embassy, dated December 2, and the accompanying “Text of the proposal presented at London by the French Delegation”, are filed separately under 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–248. The French proposal, circulated to the London Conference on the Ruhr as document RC/8, not printed, was discussed by the Conference at its 13th Meeting; see telegram 5081, Ruhrto 22, December 2, from London, p. 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2448: Telegram

[Document 349]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

confidential Washington, December 4, 1948—noon.

4648. (Urtel No. 6026, Nov 241 ) Dept believes falsity charges re US financial interest in Ruhr clearly demonstrable by reference Treas Dept “Census of American-Owned Assets in Foreign Countries,” 1947. Essential facts as follows.

Sole US interest in Ruhr coal is in a Stinnes concern, in which US owners have substantial holdings. This company owns approximately 55 per cent of certain coal mines which account for about 5 per cent total Ruhr coal output. US share probably does not exceed two and one Half per cent value total Ruhr coal industry. No direct US holdings in steel. Value US held bonds of coal and steel enterprises not in excess 4 per cent value net fixed assets (pre-war). Most other industrial holdings Ruhr are in small machinery concerns of little consequence.

Agitation Fr press surprising view Fr policy in Fr zone and Saar permit Fr financial interest acquire through management companies substantial holdings in Ger enterprises, such as great Roechling steel combine. As is well known, investment moratorium in US and UK zones has precluded post war acquisitions in Ger by US interests.

Disinterestedness US efforts with respect Ger recovery as integral part ERP should be apparent to Fr which has itself received in excess, of $2,300,000,000 in direct grants and loans since war and is currently recipient annual ERP aid of $990,000,000. This exceeds by over 50 per cent ERP aid to bizone and Fr zone combined, ($631,000,000).

Dept believes it important these facts be brought home clearly and forcefully to Fr public.

Lovett

1 Not printed; it reported that the belief that private American nationals possessed vast financial interests in the Ruhr and were the mainspring of American policy aimed at the rapid rehabilitation of the region was already widespread in France and received considerable impetus, principally by word of mouth, in non-Communist circles. The difficulty of convincing the French of the wisdom of American policy in the Ruhr was increased by French doubts about its disinterestedness, (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2448)

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–448: Telegram

[Document 350]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, December 4, 1948—8 p. m.

5106. Ruhrto 30. After UK statement in plenary on French proposals (Ruhrto 221 ) Stevens stated privately to heads US, French and Netherlands delegations strong UK position that any provision re excessive concentrations of economic power in Ruhr must not be such as, to enable IAR to find that public ownership per se is an excessive concentration. (Compare use of “in private hands” Paragraph 5 Ruhrto 182 ) French representative expressed great fear concentration in hands unknown German Government. Netherlands representative felt strongly that possibility public ownership reinforced need for supervision management. US representative said could not accept any provision which implied public ownership could not be excessive concentration. All agreed nationalization in hands of aggressive nationalistic German Government would be dangerous and UK trying to draft words including concept of danger to security. All discussion by USDel stated without prejudice to US position on French proposals.

Brief talk also with British and French re defining “those found to have furthered Nazi aggression” within meaning French proposals. Agreed difficult in view (a) differing de-Nazification procedures three zones (b) problem of imposing added disabilities on top of sentences given in de-Nazification proceedings (c) problem of persons not found Nazis but who furthered Nazi aggressions. General consensus that this problem will have to be faced by military governors under trusteeship laws in control period and any IAR procedure should be determined at end control period in light of procedures worked out by military governors.

Sent Department; repeated Berlin 628.

Douglas

1 London telegram 5081, December 2, p. 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343].

2 London telegram 5032, p. 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–448: Telegram

[Document 351]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, December 4, 1948—6 p. m.

4539. ToRuhr 18. For Douglas. ToRuhr 17.1

1. In presenting French note to Lovett, Bonnet stated French have now give up Ruhr ownership issue but frankly seek minimum management powers and controls adequate for their essential security and that U.K. and Benelux prepared to meet essentials of their position.

2. In view of this and lull during period of dismantling talks we suggest now is time to take initiative. Realistic appraisal of French proposals in detail should indicate whether any practical substance remains valid in addition to whole range of other agreed and projected security measures, or alternatively any reasonable and workable control techniques can be developed which find British and Benelux support. Since Ruhr authority is prerequisite to provisional government we do not wish recess in Ruhr talks.

3. It appears to us that stated objectives of French proposal have some merit and that it should be possible for you to develop with U.K. and perhaps Benelux countries solutions which would satisfy French as to those objectives and be workable in the long run.

4. We still believe solution for these objectives can be found without specific clauses in Ruhr agreement and that additional powers should be conferred on IAR only in the event no other alternative possible.

5. What are your views?

Repeat to USPolAd, Berlin 1909 Pass to Clay.

Repeat to Paris 4650.

Lovett

1 Department telegram 4528, December 3, p. 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348].

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–548: Telegram

[Document 352]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret Berlin, December 5, 1948—4 p. m.

908. Clay has requested that I repeat for your information his CC–6977, December 5 to Draper: “Reurad W–80662,1 if French insist on Ruhr paper to effect western German govt then it seems to follow they are insisting on full adherence to London agreement and logically would have to accept Ruhr authority under terms of London agreement.

“However, if this is French stand, I would suggest the following alternative which while not committing us at this time to further controls, leaves the question at least part way open, Alternative proposal follows:

“During the control period (continuance of military govt) security is assured by military govt acting through the military security board and the coal and steel control groups. Prior to the relinquishment of military govt responsibilities which include the coal and steel control groups, the military security board will study and recommend to their govts the control responsibilities now exercised by the steel and coal control groups which should be transferred to the Ruhr authority. End of alternative.

“This brings security board in picture, recognizes the possibility of additional controls being given to Ruhr authority while at same time avoiding commitments on ownership and management. Coal and steel groups particularly are charged with prevention of ownership and management to former Nazis and to prevention of cartelization of industries. Actually, they have no other control over ownership and their supervision of management is policy-wise at top level. If this alternative could be adopted, it might save situation for all.”

Sent London personal for Douglas 908, repeated Dept [personal for Saltzman and Hickerson 2876], Paris personal for Caffery 1000.

Murphy

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–548: Telegram

[Document 353]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent London, December 5, 1948—6 p. m.

5111. Ruhrto 31. A. Analysis of factors involved in current Ruhr talks and particularly French proposals re supervision of management during post-control period suggests following points: (1) Strong French reaction against statement in preamble trusteeship laws re allowing German Government to decide on ownership of coal and steel industries is indicative of extent to which French see Ruhr as symbol of German military power. In these circumstances an objective approach by French to any problem involving nature of Ruhr is not to be expected.

(2) Any French Government must take a strong line on Ruhr and insist that, in view of prospect that Germans will determine future ownership, there must at least be long-term controls of Ruhr, particularly re steel production.

(3) French believe Germans, if free to choose, will nationalize steel and coal. Such action, as Schumann stressed, would in their view so strengthen central German Government that principle of decentralized power would be largely lost. Reports from Bonn re centralized nature of constitution Germans are drafting, emphasize this concern and strengthen French desire to impose controls over operation and development Ruhr industries.

(4) Failure on part of any French Government to obtain adequate satisfaction on supervision of Ruhr developments in post-control period may be expected to lead to violent attacks on that government from Communists and Gaullists alike and might well hasten fall of any moderate government. (Mildness of recent debates in French Assembly explained by them as resulting from restraint during Berlin tension and waiting for outcome of Ruhr talks.) Even if assumed Gaullists would eventually come to power anyway, and though basic and unpublicized causes would probably relate to disorganization of French economy, rise of De Gaulle on crest of wave of national feeling that legitimate French fears re Ruhr and Germany have been denied satisfaction, would probably mean a French policy which would seriously split three Western Powers, impair if not frustrate our policy towards Germany, and give Communists free gift of very popular issue in France, out of which to make subsequent capital. Furthermore, any serious split would probably prejudice development of ERP, effective action re North Atlantic Pact, and threaten our position in Germany from the rear.

(5) Forthcoming talks with Humphrey Committee re dismantling program1 are not expected to calm French fears re revival German economic power. Coming at same time as Ruhr talks and involving same French personnel, they will undoubtedly influence latter considerably.

(6) French pass over their own impotence in dealing with own internal fiscal affairs and, irrespective of the justification, undoubtedly believe US has pushed German recovery faster than French, statements of US policy to the contrary notwithstanding.

(7) French fear, and probably correctly, that Germany can produce steel more efficiently and cheaply than France. Consequently, specter of competition of a revived German steel industry haunts those who want, under Monnet Plan, to build large French steel industry with dominant position on continent. These fears are expressed in terms of security risk involved in existence of large steel capacity in Germany but undoubtedly are based largely on economic considerations.

We are fully aware of the many factors in present European complex and US relationship to them which, viewed logically and calmly, refute the validity of these French preoccupations. These factors have been explained many times to French in past. But we can not, I believe, expect a wholly objective French assessment of the problem.

B. Benelux countries share many of these French views as Ruhr seems to them not only a center of German war potential but particularly in case of Belgium, a source of dangerous future competition. Their reactions are sufficiently like French for them to support French position.

C. British have not publicly displayed evidence of fear of competition and do not seem so worried about security implications. They are obviously aware, however, of political factors, particularly in France and are seeking to give French maximum satisfaction without paying unreasonable price.

D. At plenary 3rd December, USDel suggested informally for consideration following line of thought: steel production in Germany involves special economic and security problems. Economic recovery of Germany to self-supporting basis is necessary for European welfare; her long-continued insolvency would either require perpetual outside support, which cannot be expected, or would raise most serious political dangers to Western Europe. Recovery of Germany requires steel production and European recovery requires steel. By producing steel, Germany can thus contribute both to own and to European recovery by exports. Level of steel requirements of Germany and Europe cannot be reliably forecast over a protracted period in the future. In recovered and expanding economies, need for steel increases greatly as shown in US experience. Further, steel requirements will be affected by armament programs under Brussels Pact as US cannot export steel for recovery program and large amounts besides. But steel produced in Germany presents a security problem as it could be used for non-peaceful purposes. As a method of meeting security problem and to insure that no steel in excess of peaceful needs remains in Germany, principle could be agreed that IAR shall allocate for export all steel produced in Germany in excess of peaceful needs. Use of steel that remains there would be subject to supervision of Military Security Board and its successor which would insure that it is not used for non-peaceful purposes or in violation of agreements on limited arid prohibited industries. Mention was made of fact that present Bizonal level of 10.7 million was computed to allow for only domestic needs of all Germany under quadripartite occupation so that, while that limit applied, no substantial amount of steel exports could be expected. Under this approach, definition of steel is of lessened importance.

E. First reaction to this suggestion from French was to ask whether it postulated continued ceiling on steel production. USDel answered no implications one way or other re ceiling, which should be discussed elsewhere, e.g., in connection with limited and prohibited industries. Further French remarks clearly silhouetted fear of effects on programmed French steel expansion if Germany produced and was required to export substantial quantities of steel. British reaction not clear but implication was that British contemplate continued ceiling, and remark was made that suggestion did not meet security risk inherent in large steel producing potential in Germany. USDel will report any further reactions. Enough has been said to disclose clearly that French and Benelux would like to use IAR to suppress German steel industry, not only as a security measure, but also as a device, far more effective than tariffs, to protect their own steel industries.

F. My present tentative thought is that failure to give French some satisfaction on something approximating their proposals without at the same time making IAR more punitive and less acceptable to Germans would not be in best US interests. I believe that IAR, however laudable, is an experiment in international affairs. It can be an instrument for good or evil depending on the way it operates. In endowing an unprecedented agency like IAR with any powers affecting production, development or investment, utmost care should be taken to prevent their being used to suppress steel production and technological development in Germany if that is the most efficient and economical place to produce it for benefit of Europe.

G. We are considering certain suggestions which we hope later to be able to submit for your opinion and advice.

Sent Department as 5111; repeated Paris as 977; Berlin as 629.

Douglas

1 For documentation on the tripartite conversations in London in December on reparations, see pp. 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417] ff.

Editorial Note [Document 354]

Editorial Note

Between December 6 and 14, 1948, United States, British, and French Delegations held a series of talks on reparations and dismantlement problems at the British Foreign Office in London. The United States was represented by Ambassador Douglas, members of the Industrial Advisory Committee of the Economic Cooperation Administration (the Humphrey Committee), Assistant Secretary of State Saltzman, Special Assistant Reinstein, E.C.A. Administrator Hoffman, and others. The United Kingdom Delegation was headed by Roger Stevens and the French Delegation was headed by Hervé Alphand. For documentation on these talks, see pages 841–851 [Pgs. 841–851 include portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–748: Telegram

[Document 355]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, December 7, 1948—4 p. m.

4558. ToRuhr 19. Subject procedure casting Ger vote.

1. Matter considered further after initial discussion with Reinstein. No conflict apparent between Ruhrto 17 and Ruhrto 20.1 In former UK reported have agreed that where JEIA procedure applicable to subject before IAR, JEIA voting procedure will govern casting Ger vote. Ruhrto 20 reports UK reservation re definition matters falling within JEIA formula. Understand Clay also prefers leave latter point be dealt with as cases arise. Dept agrees no need press for definition now or for decision how Ger vote be cast on matters not clearly within JEIA purview.

2. Recognize validity argument Germany should accede to statute before casting vote (para 5, Ruhrto 17). Yoti may however have noted negative view reportedly taken by Ger officials to Ruhr authority on grounds its being set up without Ger consultation and this reaction of course would be intensified by acceptance proposed Fr restrictive measures. If Brit and Fr consider Germany accession likely to be, obtained, we have no objection effort being made but would like point out need may arise at some later stage for seeking Ger views since otherwise Ruhr statute would be more in nature imposed instrument than peace treaty concerning which Ger comments would at least be heard.

3. Repeat Ruhrto 17 to Berlin.

4. Berlin: request Gen Clay’s views on foregoing for Lond and Dept.

Lovett

1 Neither telegram 5027, Ruhrto 17, November 27 nor telegram 5045, Ruhrto 20, November 30, from London is printed.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom London Embassy Files: 800 Germany: Telegram

[Document 356]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Berlin, December 8, 1948—8 p. m.

916. For Douglas from Oppenheimer. Have reported fully to General Clay, Murphy and Wilkinson development of Ruhr talks, in particular discussed at length obstacle to conclusion of agreement caused by French insistence upon some assurance that during post-control period authority should have control over, management coal, iron and steel industries. I showed to General Clay the basis French proposal, British counter-proposal and outlined your tentative thoughts on the subject.

During these discussions which covered wide field of US policy towards France and Germany and which were most satisfactory we also explored alternative course that if French unwilling abide by scope powers defined in annex C we should not make further concession whatsoever to meet French public opinion, but postpone talks indefinitely. This alternative appears least desirable because of repercussions on establishment German Government. It is also to be expected that French will not consent to occupation statute unless they obtain satisfaction concerning Ruhr agreement.

In an attempt to overcome deadlock General Clay has submitted to army a proposal that during control period security desired by French is assured by Military Government through Military Security Board and coal and steel control groups and that prior to relinquishment of Military Government responsibilities including termination of functions of coal and steel control groups the Military Security Board will study and recommend to their Governments the control responsibilities which should [be] transferred from coal, iron and steel groups to IAR. This suggested solution would (1) emphasize security aspect by charging Military Security Board with task of working out extension of powers of the authority, (2) recognize in principle the desirability of exploring possibility of additional controls to be given to IAR and (3) avoid commitment on ownership and management over which boards as constituted have no controls except policy-wise at top level. General Clay made it very clear that he had no further suggestions to make and that final decision must rest with Government.

Felt personally that in substance General Clay’s thinking as reflected in his last proposal is not far apart from Brit or your proposal and I submit following course for your consideration: (1) Brit proposal is accepted as basis for discussion which would make it easier to reach agreement than if we submitted third proposal;

(2) Brit proposal is not incorporated into agreement but into an agreement signed by French, Brit and US supplementary to the agreement;

(3) Instead of defining new rights to be exercised by authority in field of deconcentration, denazification and management, the occupying powers merely decide that (a) After termination of functions of coal, iron and steel groups IAR shall be given sufficient powers to prevent: (1) Restoration of a pattern of ownership in coal and iron and steel industries which would constitute excessive concentration of economic power,

(2) The return to position of ownership and control of those persons who have been found or may be found, to have furthered the aggressive designs of National Socialist Party,

(3) Implementation of any production, equipment or investment programs relating to coal and iron and steel industries of Ruhr provided such programs involve in the view of Military Security Board a threat to security. (It should be understood that the programs to be worked out by Germans do not require approval of authority as proposed by British.)

(b) The occupying powers concerned will implement above principles which shall form basis for more detailed agreement amending the agreement on IAR and shall take effect immediately prior to relinquishment of responsibilities by Military Governors.

Discussions here also brought out full awareness of danger that the authority might abuse its power to do commercial spying in Germany and to further economic interests of the Allied Powers and their nationals represented on the Council of IAR to detriment of Germany. This danger will necessarily increase if the rights of authority are extended in accordance with paragraph three above. A general statement in the agreement that the authority may not take any steps for purpose of protecting non-German commercial interests or preventing technological improvement or increased efficiency of production of Germany seems desirable but will not prove effective.

Have shown foregoing to Clay, Murphy and Wilkinson.

With your consent I intend now to return to Frankfurt and to terminate my official duty status as of December 9. However I shall visit you after my return to London on or about December 15.

Murphy

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–948: Telegram

[Document 357]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent London, December 9, 1948—2 a. m.

5170. Ruhrto 34. For Lovett from Douglas.

A. After discussions in USDel and with Saltzman and Reinstein,1 in light of considerations previously expressed and of further informal talks with Alphand, it seems to us that conclusion of a Ruhr agreement at this time possible only if some positive definition included of functions for IAR tending in direction of French proposals. I submit following hesitatingly as my view of provisions which we might consider accepting and to which French might assent. They would define the area within which we could negotiate. They do not appear materially to prejudice our position though I recognize they have objectionable features. We cannot give any assurance that French will accept this compromise, particularly in light of reparations and plant retention discussions. In fact Alphand told me privately this evening, after discussion with Humphrey committee, that plant retention discussions made it imperative that we concede French position on Ruhr.

B. Re prevention of reconstitution of excessive concentrations of economic power: I propose we be prepared to give IAR power after control period: (1) To obtain information re changes in structure or charters of Ruhr coal, coke and steel industries and of trade and marketing organizations of these industries;

(2) To veto any major changes in structure or charters of such industries or organizations which IAR determine would result in excessive concentration of economic power provided that such veto shall be exercized only when authorized by twelve affirmative votes in IAR;

(3) Such power shall be exercised only in the case of changes which would materially affect structure of industry or organizations as they exist at end of control period; and

(4) This power would not require changes to be submitted to IAR for approval but would only authorize a negative veto of action or proposed action.

(Comment: So long as US is member of IAR, this proposal would insure that IAR could not prevent action which Germans wished to take and which we approved. It would meet British fears on nationalization as IAR could not stop it if Germans want it and British approve. This is consistent with our past stated policy. I remain somewhat apprehensive at the prospect of an unknown German Government being able to nationalize these industries and wielding the great power represented by ownership backed by sovereign rights.)

C. Re return of Nazi supporters: I propose we be prepared to give IAR power after control period: (1) To receive reports as to what persons are holding important positions in direction or have important ownership interests in Ruhr coal, coke and steel industries;

(2) To direct German Government or other appropriate German governmental authorities to cause removal from such positions of persons who have at that time, been found by a competent tribunal to have furthered the aggressive desires of the Nazi Party;

(3) Determination of what procedure is necessary to identify persons affected by this provision will be made by signatory governments in light of experience of Military Governors during control period, particularly under trusteeship laws, and will be made prior to any exercise of these powers by IAR; and

(4) If another generally applicable procedure is established in Germany for the post-control period to prevent return to power of those who furthered Nazi aggression, that procedure shall apply in Ruhr and IAR functions in this field lapse.

D. Re supervision over coal and coke production and development: I propose we be prepared to give IAR power after control period: (1) To obtain information re plans for production, investment development in these industries;

(2) To make recommendations to governments, including the German Government, as to means for maintaining or increasing coal and coke production or increasing the efficiency of such production; and

(3) Upon request, to give comments on proposals or projects for development, expansion or increasing the efficiency of production particularly when investment of non-German capital is involved.

(Comment: French preoccupation is with steel and interest coal and coke is less important. In view of power to allocate for export by qualities, IAR could by maintaining prior ratio of exports to German consumption, cause any willful slow down on production to bear more heavily on German use than on exports since exports now constitute only about 25 percent of production. If necessary, we might concede a provision that when IAR finds by votes all allied signatories that there has been willful curtailment by German authorities of production of coal and coke in Ruhr, IAR is authorized to maintain export allocations at quantities exported prior to such curtailment.)

E. Re supervision over management steel: I propose we be prepared to give IAR after control period following functions: (1) To obtain information re plans for production, investment and development in Ruhr steel industry;

(2) In any case in which IAR finds by unanimous vote of all allied signatories, that any such plan would, if carried out, appear to constitute or threaten a violation of limitations or prohibitions imposed on Germany in the interest of security by international agreements then in force and to which the occupying powers are parties, to refer the plan and its finding to Military Security Board or its successor which is charged with the enforcement of limitations and prohibitions on industry, together with IAR’s recommendations as to action which should be taken;

(3) In any case in which the Military Security Board or its successor confirms finding of IAR, to take such action, if any, as Military Security Board or its successor may specify in the premises if the Military Security Board determines not to take action itself;

(4) To perform such other functions with respect to Ruhr steel industries as Military Security Board or its successor may request;

(5) It should be made unequivocally clear that IAR shall not, under this provision, exercise any functions for purpose of protecting commercial interests of any other country nor to prevent technological development or improved efficiency;

(6) IAR could also be given authority to make, upon request, recommendations re the most beneficial projects for investment in the Ruhr steel industry, particularly when investment of outside capital is involved.

F. I would initially try out alternative suggested by General Clay in Berlin’s 908 (repeated to Department as 2876 and Paris as 10002 ) but would suggest substituting stand by governments instead of by Military Security Board. I believe Clay’s suggestion would also be a useful addition to any provisions along lines of paragraphs B, C, and D and E above included in IAR agreement so as to allow review of any such provisions when we have fuller information as to development re Germany.

G. The Teal dilemma in this situation is how to avoid taking action which would have depressing effect on German production and prevent German cooperation, while at the same time preventing so strong a French reaction as to upset French political situation and prejudice [apparent omission] or going along with the many other important German decisions in which three power cooperation is essential.

H. I would appreciate your most urgent comments on these proposals and indication of extent to which I may negotiate on this or any other basis. These proposals have been developed after consideration of Department’s 4539 (repeated Berlin as 1909 and Paris as 46503 ). It does not seem practicable to develop ideas only with UK and Benelux in view of close relations these delegations with French. Other delegations are most anxious to proceed, and stalling is becoming increasingly difficult. We are being pressed hard to make some comment on French proposals on which all other delegations spoke a week ago.

Sent Department, repeated Berlin 636, Paris 1010.

Douglas

1  Saltzman and Reinstein were in London for the tripartite talks on reparations; see the editorial note, p. 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354].

2 December 5, p. 547 [Pg. 547 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353].

3 December 4, p. 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1048: Telegram

[Document 358]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, December 10, 1948—10 a. m.

4594. ToRuhr 22. For Douglas. We have given very careful consideration to proposals contained in Ruhrto 341 which might form basis for subsequent discussions. In meanwhile, however, you are authorized make proposal along following lines, bearing in mind our desire to separate Fr preoccupations re security which we are desirous of meeting from the competitive aspects of their proposal, which we cannot support.

Useful starting point is Clay formula in Berlin’s 9082 modified as you suggest by substituting Govts for Mil Security Bd thus enabling Benelux participate in recommendations. We are also prepared to state we agree in principle now as to necessity establishing in post-control period measures designed provide against excessive concentration economic power and against return important Nazi supporters. Exercise necessary powers these fields by IAR would now not be precluded and suggestions in Ruhrto 34 might usefully be considered if necessary this stage to specify greater detail our agreement in principle as type arrangements we might favorably consider in future. (Formula of Art 10–b Annex C3 also might be useful in this point.)

We also feel Germans themselves will be equally interested providing against excessive economic concentration and return Nazis and could usefully participate in future formulation detailed program this respect. This is particularly important if such measures are to be included within scope IAR since we must insure Ger cooperation with this body. On other hand in field security alone Allies are entitled impose own restrictions.

As to proposals re control investment and production in coal and steel, you shd propose initially amended Clay formula that Govts would determine which of current functions coal and steel control groups shd be retained in post-control period. You shd try avoid further commitments this field now but if impractical you may explore along lines of paras D and E Ruhrto 34. This together your assurances re level steel production prior to peace settlement however shd be helpful.

We also sending tel in re prohibited and restricted industries which shd assist in this connection.4

You may also indicate Brit and Fr privately we are now exploring possibility three powers agree endeavor jointly formulate agreement which could adapt principles Byrnes Disarmament Treaty5 to new conditions in Germany and absence of quadripartite measures this respect. We cannot commit ourselves to such agreement at this time until we have had further opportunity explore matter with Congressional leaders but our willingness consider such procedure may be helpful discussions with Brit and Fr.6

Lovett

1  Supra.

2 Same as telegram 2876, December 5, from Berlin, p. 547 [Pg. 547 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353].

3 The reference here is to document TRI/16 (Final), May 26, p. 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190], which was included as Annex C to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, June 1, 1948, p. 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 200].

4 The reference here is presumably to telegram 1946, December 10, to Berlin, repeated to London as 4620, not printed.

5 See footnote 3 to the memorandum of the Secretary of State’s press conference of November 24, p. 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 338].

6 This telegram was repeated to Paris as 4719 and to Berlin as 1934.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1048: Telegram

[Document 359]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Embassy in France

secret
us urgent London, December 10, 1948—4 p. m.

1019. 1. In regard to Deptel 4591, December 9,1 after French Assembly debate it was suggested to Alphand that the position which he was taking here in London in regard to extending the functions of the Ruhr authority over other areas in western Europe was inconsistent with the basic view expressed in the Assembly. Specifically, it was suggested to Alphand that either the French put forward a proposal which would clothe the Ruhr authority with jurisdiction over other areas, or alternatively, that the French propose that the present governments participating in the present conference on the Ruhr issue a separate declaration expressing their intention of extending the authority of the Ruhr agency over other areas at some time in the future.

2. The second alternative referred to above was put forward only after Alphand had rejected the first alternative.

3. As to the second alternative, Alphand’s reaction was that it would be very difficult for the French government to join now in such a declaration.

4. In spite of what has so far transpired in London on this question, if Caffery agrees, I hope, in accordance with Deptel 4591, he will take the matter up with Schuman and urge that Alphand be instructed to bring the policy which he is expressing in London into accord with the policy which was expressed in the debates in the French Assembly by proposing that the functions of the Ruhr authority be extended to other areas in western Europe. If Schuman gives a negative response, I would then hope, if Caffery sees no objection, he urge Schuman to instruct Alphand to propose the second alternative referred to in paragraph one above.2

Sent Paris 1019 personal for Ambassador Caffery repeated Berlin 639 and Department [5192 for Lovett].

Douglas

1 Not printed; it asked if Ambassador Caffery, should the occasion present itself, usefully point out to Schuman and other French Foreign Ministry officials the apparent contradiction between the Foreign Minister’s excellent sentiments expressed in the National Assembly debate on the Ruhr and Alphand’s position at the London Conference on the Ruhr (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–748).

2 In his telegram 5294, December 18, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas reported that he talked with Ambassador Caffery on the telephone concerning the extension of the functions of the Ruhr Authority over other areas of Western Europe. It was the view of both Ambassadors that it would be better not to press the issue and instead to include language about cooperation and integration in the Ruhr Conference communiqué. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1848)

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1148: Telegram

[Document 360]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, December 11, 1948—11 p. m.

5209. Ruhrto 37. 1. At meeting of Ruhr Delegations 11 December,1 Ambassador Douglas presented first US comments on French proposals.2 Agreed there would be no disclosure his remarks to press.

2. Ambassador’s statement summarized as follows: Sympathetic consideration had been given French proposals which had raised the perplexing problem of trying to segregate security from economic problems. Wish to make following points: a. US did not now propose change in existing limit of 10.7 million on Bizone steel production as distinguished from retained capacity. Any change should be made at peace settlement or by prior agreement between governments of peace settlement long delayed.

b. US believed Military Governors should proceed to reach prompt agreement prohibited and limited industries.

c. Principles regarding Military Security Board and its purposes had been largely agreed and it should provide a useful mechanism for assuring security.

d. Regarding IAR, it had to be related to other instrumentalities. During control period security fears should be covered by Military Security Board, coal and steel control groups.

e. US suggested that during control period governments study what powers of coal and steel control groups should be transferred to IAR. In principle US agrees necessary to make adequate provision against revival of excessive concentrations of economic power and return of Nazis to key posts. US suggests the example of Article X (B) of Annex C be followed so as to provide that protection these points, if not vested in some other body, be assigned to IAR trusteeship laws provide for decentralization and state policy regarding Nazis [apparent omission]. Definition of specific powers which should survive control period should not be attempted now but should await further experience under trusteeship laws, e.g. experience on how to identify Nazi supporters who should be kept from key posts. Regarding supervision over production and investment, US suggests that governments study this matter and before end of Military Government responsibilities should decide what powers now in existence should be transferred either to successor Military Security Board or IAR.3

3. Alphand speaking for France then made following points: a. US statement of no intent to modify limit on steel production how implied that it might be modified later. French Government view was that limitation should be permanent.

b. French view expressed that proposal of Humphrey Committee would allow retention of capacity to produce up to 13 million. (Douglas pointed out that with 10.7 million production limit, retained capacity was about 13 which with capacity in French zone totalled 13.3 million. Humphrey Committee recommendations were for increase of retained capacity of 200,000 but that irrespective of capacity, US did not now contemplate raising level of permitted production over 10.7) Alphand continued that with existence of capacity over permitted production, Germans will wish to increase production which reenforces need for supervision over management.

c. Regarding limited and prohibited industries, there were some differences between Military Governors.

d. Regarding Military Security Board, Military Governors were near agreement and he suggested that Military Security Board and IAR agreements should be announced together. He pointed out that although Military Security Board continues during control period only, Annex L of London agreements4 provides for continuance of functions.

e. Regarding specific US proposals, French agreed that during control period security problems covered by Military Government, Military Security Board and coal and steel control groups.

f. Regarding post-control period, Alphand implied acceptability of US proposals regarding deconcentration and Nazis. Disappointed, however, regarding proposal on supervision of investment and production in steel and coal, pointing out that US proposal did not imply that any powers of coal and steel control groups should be retained and that if there were no agreement in principle now, there might well never be.

4. Douglas in very generalized way expressed views about desirability of some sort of appeal procedure along lines previously expressed in Ruhrto 36.5 Further with regard to US proposals on supervision of management, suggested that IAR agreement could contain statement that the powers which the governments upon consideration found necessary to maintain over investment and production would be assigned either to IAR or to successor of Military Security Board.

5. Netherlands Delegate6 remarked that IAR should have some function in relation to plans for investment and development of Ruhr industries as IAR would be qualified to analyze and understand significance of investment programs in planning state.

6. Douglas stated US did not reject possibility that IAR should have such powers but that the need for powers and their definition should be studied in the light of experience coal and steel groups.

7. Alphand expressed concern over postponement of all decisions regarding supervision of management. If no agreement in principle now, nothing is done to meet French proposals on this point. French believe that IAR should have powers in Nazi and deconcentration fields. Wanted to know whether US could now agree that for the benefit of Europe and security some powers over production and investment would have to be retained after end of control boards. Douglas stated US would consider this proposal sympathetically and hoped to give answer Tuesday afternoon.

8. Netherlands Delegate asked whether, if Nazi and deconcentration powers were given to some body other than IAR, would Benelux be representated on those bodies. This was an important matter to Benelux. Douglas answered difficult to foresee what instrumentalities would be necessary regarding Germany, important not to have overlapping and conflicting jurisdictions. Would ask instructions on answer to question of Benelux representation posed by Netherlands Delegate. Netherlands Delegate also made point that if IAR is to have any functions in management field, it should start exercising them before end of control period so that it could get some practice.

9. Stevens expressed UK view, characterized US proposals as real effort to meet French point. Agreed good deal to be said for not being too precise but recognized that the less the precision the less the French viewpoint was met. Restating previous British proposals, said UK believed IAR was right body to have powers regarding Nazis and deconcentrations after control period. French proposals were too limiting, e.g. French proposals that all appointments to key posts be subject to approval IAR. British felt IAR should at most have power to disapprove when appointments were pending or made. Regarding production and investment, British recognized value of US proposal that economic aspects of coal and steel group work should be studied to see whether IAR should inherit some of them. Regarding security aspects, referred to successor to Military Security Board as having principal functions. Recognized IAR would be in Ruhr and know a good deal about what was going on and, therefore, might be useful agent to act for Military Security Board on the latter’s request. This had been British proposal. Also felt that IAR could obtain information and refer it to Military Security Board. Called attention that Military Security Board paper makes provision for liaison with IAR.

10. Douglas again referred to necessity of avoiding overlapping and conflicting powers among agencies. Such condition would defeat purposes and agreed objectives. Then asked whether something along lines suggested by US could lead to resolution of problem. In answer to this question, Alphand asked further whether US could agree now to statement that in principle certain specified powers should survive coal and steel control groups, pointing out that he would refer US suggestions to French Government when he was in Paris over week end but thought that it would be difficult and that he would come back with firmer instructions.

11. Netherlands Delegate asked whether Benelux would participate in setting up the successor of the Military Security Board.

12. After meeting, Douglas spoke privately to Stevens and Alphand along lines suggested Telecon December 10,7 stating that US had not discarded the idea of an arrangement to adapt the principles of the Byrnes treaty proposal to present conditions. This would not be through a treaty but might be through the evolution of the Military Security Board.

In answer to the last point, British stated that they were thinking along same lines. Alphand stated this was helpful and raised question as to whether something along this line could be stated in communiqué. Alphand pointed out that matter of presentation in France was of utmost importance and hoped that communiqué could rehearse the various steps relating to security, including if possible reference to evolution of Byrnes treaty idea. He also suggested that communiqué should contain generalized statement along lines of recognizing the necessity of incorporating Germany into European community and general willingness including France to play full part in this endeavor.

13. Douglas felt that approach he took was tactically best for present. On Tuesday afternoon it may be desirable to be able to offer French some agreement in principle that certain powers relating to production and investment will survive control period since French answer to US proposals is expected to ask more than Douglas suggested on this point.

Further meeting on matters such as German vote, OEEC, et cetera, scheduled Tuesday morning. Also USDel suggested further proposal on appeal procedure might he forthcoming then.

14. Please instruct on (1) answer to Netherlands questions mentioned in Paragraphs 8 and 11 above8 (2) whether any reference to adaptation of Byrnes treaty proposals can be made in communiqué and in particular whether such mention could include reference to Byrnes proposals on length of time of demilitarization measures. Also it would be appreciated if further Department’s comments on appeal and OEEC procedure could arrive London by Tuesday a. m.9

Douglas

1 This was the 16th Meeting of the London Conference on the Ruhr. The U.S. Delegation Minutes of this meeting were transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to despatch 2491, December 20, from London, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–2048). This was one of the few meetings of the Conference at which Ambassador Douglas was present Assistant Secretary of State Saltzman was also present with the U.S. Delegation.

2 The French proposals under reference are those reported upon in telegram 5032, Ruhrto 18, November 28, from London, p. 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339].

3 In telegram 5227, Ruhrto 41, December 14, [from London, not printed, the U.S. Delegation transmitted the text of a proposed article for inclusion in the Ruhr agreement covering the question of excessive concentration and Nazis dealt with in this paragraph (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1448). Telegram 4653, ToRuhr 33, December 14, to London, not printed, replied that the text was acceptable to the Department. It was observed that the inclusion of such provisions in the Ruhr agreement would certainly reduce chances for voluntary German accession. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1448)

4 The reference here is to the document entitled “Report on Security”, May 26, p. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], included as Annex L to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, June 1, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

5 In telegram 5187, Ruhrto 36, December 10, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas expressed the belief that it was most important to provide some appeal procedure by which, if it appeared necessary, there could be a review of the actions of the IAR. Douglas had informally put forward his proposal to other delegates to the Conference. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1048)

6 Netherlands First Secretary Luns.

7 The reference here is a trans-Atlantic telecommunications conference of December 10 between Ambassador Douglas, Assistant Secretary Saltzman, Wayne Jackson and others in London and Reber, Nitze, Beam, Margolies and others in Washington. A record of the conference is included in CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 124, File—Telecons.

8 Telegram 4635, ToRuhr 29, December 13, to London, not printed, stated that the Department definitely intended associating the Benelux governments with the evolution of demilitarization measures in Germany (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1348).

9 Telegram 4634, ToRuhr 28, December 13, to London, not printed, stated that the Department was unable to agree with Ambassador Douglas’ proposal and preferred to have the appeal proposal dropped (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1348).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1148: Telegram

[Document 361]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret
us urgent
niact London, December 13, 1948—6 p. m.

4632. ToRuhr 27. Re para 14, Ruhrto 37.1 As in past, we wish meet Fr security preoccupations insofar we can at present but feel they are trying force us adopt formal commitments re a set of circumstances which cannot be exactly foreseen. Annex L London decisions under “Inspection and Enforcement” provides that there shall be established a system of inspection to ensure maintenance agreed provisions Ger disarmament and demilitarization. We envisage that these measures would be a projection into post-control period of functions Mil Sec Board which are being successfully evolved. We also envisage that these measures would in all probability closely parallel those contemplated under Byrnes proposal, which however in itself was drafted to deal with an exact set of conditions, namely, a unified Ger to be kept disarmed by four-power agreement. You are at liberty so inform Fr and Brit.

Specific mention should be made Byrnes proposal in any communiqué only if it is clearly understood that our plans bear reference to adaptation certain of measures contemplated under that proposal as distinct from any commitment on our part at this time to enter into a three-power treaty applicable to a part of Ger. We certainly desire to see these arrangements developed, likewise with increasing Benelux participation. It must be clear to Fr that we have an equal interest with them in developing steps to prevent preparations for aggression by or within Ger before any such preparations constitute threat.

Communiqué might list progressive steps looking toward demilitarization and disarmament Ger in post-occupation period which include development Mil Sec Boards inspection system, etc. Objectives and mechanism Byrnes proposal will serve as pattern for determination by Mil Sec Board of disarmament and demilitarization measures and prior end occupation, agreement will be reached on continuation disarmament measures and agency to implement them after occupation period. Mention should not be made length of time demilitarization measures.

Lovett

1 London telegram 5209, December 11, p. 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 360].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1548: Telegram

[Document 362]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, December 15, 1948—4 p. m.

5252. Ruhrto 43. A. At meeting December 141 Alphand stated he had reported to Schuman and could express latter’s views but not necessarily those of Cabinet. Schuman had expressed appreciation of sympathy for French position expressed by other delegates. Believed solution could be found. Ruhr authority an important element of security problem but not only one. Must be considered with others, and is difficult to consider it alone. Other related matters include: (1) Military Security Board, on which Military Governors have reached virtual agreement.

(2) Prohibited and limited industries on which progress has been made but there are some disagreements, particularly re synthetic oil and rubber. Important matter and agreement should be reached soonest. If Military Governors cannot agree matters should be referred promptly to governments. Military Security Board and IAR will carry out decisions when reached.

(3) Glad there will be removals of excess over prohibitions and limitations.

(4) Great importance attached to statement that change in 10.7 level not presently contemplated. Understands change can only be made by agreement all three governments.

(5) Disappointed re discussions with Humphrey Committee and hope in negotiations with State will reach agreement near French view.

B. With respect IAR, French think necessary to give it power to prevent excessive concentrations, prohibit Nazis holding important positions and supervise management, investment and production. Proposals by Douglas (Ruhrto 37,2 paragraph 2) were far from French proposals. Would be particularly hard for French to accept vague language re third point.

Necessary IAR have sufficient powers to carry out aims of preamble IAR agreement. Must have at least agreement in principle, though methods left to later agreement. If US will agree to defining in principle in agreement powers to be retained, French will be willing to postpone to later date decisions on ways and means. Schuman thinks this and Annex L sanctions are all needed in Germany and that he can get by with this in Assembly. Thinks prohibitions, limitations and sanctions should be kept to minimum necessary to security, and that when these assured, French willing to cooperate with Germany in European recovery and will enter into necessary agreements. Do not want misery in Central Europe. With security and reeducation of Germans, French willing to cooperate with and accept Germany as member European community, and will make public statement to this effect.

In answer to question by Douglas as to exactly what French want with respect to third point, Alphand said that future study is not enough, that they want present agreement that some powers of control over management, et cetera will survive and will be exercised by IAR or successor to Military Security Board. Then read French proposals for inclusion in agreement. See Ruhrto 42.3 In answer to UK question as to whether any powers over those exercised by coal and steel groups would be proposed, Alphand said that powers of coal group were ones they want retained, though perhaps not all of them. He did not know what powers of steel group were. Wanted sufficient powers to carry out all aims expressed in preamble.

Alphand, in referring US suggestion re appeal, wanted further details. Douglas said that he could not give any detailed suggestions, that he had merely stated last week that idea had not been abandoned. He fully appreciated French fears of any procedure that would paralyze IAR.

C. Douglas referred to Benelux question at last meeting about participating in working out successor to Military Security Board. Said that US view (toRuhr 294 ) they should participate in planning for successor but could not say now whether would participate in organization.

Agreed to consider French proposals and discuss at meeting December 15, a. m.

D. Meeting then discussed communiqué. Plan to try to agree on broad outlines and refer to a drafting committee. Both Douglas and Alphand prefer comprehensive communiqué, stressing value of communiqué in presentation of agreement to public and legislative bodies. British expressed preference for Short one, not commenting in detail on provisions of agreement.

As part of discussion re general framework of communiqué, Douglas stated US favored, through. Military Security Board or its successor adapting and putting into effect ideas contained in old Byrnes proposals on disarmament and demilitarization. He made clear that he was not suggesting a treaty but thought appropriate language in the communiqué could forecast evolution and adaption of Byrnes proposals to the present situation. Alphand emphasized that French acceptance of something less than their original proposals would depend to large extent on indication of willingness to provide adequate assurances demilitarization and disarmament. US suggestions re Byrnes proposals helpful.

E. Alphand expressed hope that Military Governors could reach promptest agreement on limited and prohibited industries and coordinate this announcement with that on the Ruhr agreement. This would make Ruhr agreement more acceptable he thought to French public. Suggested three governments urge Military Governors to proceed urgently. Stevens UK suggested that even if agreement on limited and prohibited industries not yet complete, reference could be made in Ruhr communiqué to expected agreement.

Alphand expressed preference for issuance unilateral statement by his government to effect that once adequate security controls established it feels Germany must be free to become associated in great enterprise of European recovery and gradually to become fully integrated into Europe. Douglas suggested either multilateral statement or perhaps inclusion in IAR agreement itself. Will be discussed further next meeting.

F. If Department agrees, it might be useful to follow suggestion in E and urge Military Governors to reach greatest practicable agreement re limited and prohibited industries so progress could be announced in relation to publicity re Ruhr agreement.

Sent Department 5252; repeated Berlin 661; Paris 1036.

Douglas

1 This was the 17th Meeting of the London Conference on Germany. Only part of the meeting is reported upon in the telegram printed here. Other portions of the meeting were reported upon in telegram 5245, Ruhrto 42, December 15 and in telegram 5266, Ruhrto 47, December 16, both from London, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1548 and 12–1648). A copy of the U.S. Delegation Minutes of this meeting was transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to despatch 2502, December 21, from London, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–2148). Much of this meeting was devoted to a consideration of the remaining unagreed portions of the Third Draft Ruhr Agreement, circulated to the conference as document RC/16, December 7, 1948. Copies of RC/16 were carried to Washington toy Daniel Margolies. Additionally, a copy of RC/16 was transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to despatch 2452, December 13, from London, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1348).

2 London telegram 5209, December 11, p. 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 360].

3 Not printed; it reported on several French proposals for additional provisions in the draft Ruhr agreement; see telegram 5277, Ruhrto 50, December 17, from London, p. 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365].

4 Not printed, but see footnote 7 to telegram 5209, Ruhrto 37, December 11, from London, p. 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 360].

The Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 711.51/12–1648: Telegram

[Document 363]

The Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

top secret Paris, December 16, 1948—6 p. m.

RepSec 2. Eyes Only for the Secretary and Lovett from Harriman. Since my return I have become increasingly concerned over the need for accelerating the coordination of our policies, and objectives negotiations with Western European governments, particularly, the French. There are seven or eight different subjects being currently discussed or negotiated by different groups in London, Paris, Washington, Germany and elsewhere. These include a series of subjects regarding Germany (control of Ruhr, reparations, prohibited or limited industries, occupation statute, fusion agreement and German Government) and, concurrently, ECA aid including use of counterparts, rearmament of Western Union and North Atlantic Pact.

In the case of France, this process of separate and partially uncoordinated negotiations produces particularly unfortunate results in that it permits very sensitive issues such as reparations and control and ownership of Ruhr industries to be debated and presented to the French public outside of the framework of the over-all economic, political and military measures which, in fact, more basically affect French security. In spite of the fact that we are taking and are proposing to take so many extraordinary actions favorable to France’s economic well-being and security, these are all overshadowed by unrealistic fears engendered by our alleged objectives in Germany considered apart from these over-all concepts.

Our policies and negotiations should be concerted in such a way that an over-all program can be presented to the French Government and people. Any French government will find it difficult to agree upon a reasonable solution of German problems except in the setting of the whole. Although I recognize that there must be separate negotiations on these intricate matters, yet as issues develop, we should, I believe, find some method of bringing them together to present them to the appropriate French ministers in a concerted approach. We must find a way to make it possible for the French Government in turn to present to the French people the extremely favorable over-all nature of our cooperation with their aims and aspirations.

Failure to solve this problem will tend to cause increasing difficulties in our relations with France and the French people and to prevent the growth of a true understanding here of our objectives.

While I was in Washington, I discussed the need for concerted action on our part and I appreciate that you and others concerned have been dealing with the problem. However, since my return I feel an even greater sense of urgency as a result of what has transpired hi Paris, London and Germany; hence this message.

I have confidence in our basic policies. We have seen favorable progress in Europe during the past eighteen months resulting therefrom. We can dissipate the full value of our actions if we do not find a way to concert and bring into focus the various components that make up our policies in the political, economic and security fields.

I suggest you show this message to Forrestal and Hoffman and consider whether it might be of interest to the President.

I have discussed this message with Ambassador Caffery who agrees with the line of reasoning contained therein.

Harriman

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1648: Telegram

[Document 364]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, December 16, 1948—7 p. m.

4679. Following received by Army from Clay Dec 12: “We do not believe German acceptance of Ruhr Authority likely or possible at this time. There is no German Government with any authority from the people. Moreover, to require such acceptance from the German Government to be formed in the spring might result either in refusal, which would prevent its recognition, or acceptance by that new government might destroy it. We believe that the Ruhr Authority must be imposed except and unless incorporated in a peace treaty, and even that treaty may be imposed. However, we believe that until Military Government has passed right to vote to new German Government under an imposed Ruhr Authority, the German votes should be cast by occupying powers, and where financial and economic considerations pertaining to the Trizonal area are involved, vote would be cast under the terms of the Fusion Agreement.”

Dept regards language numbered Para 2, ToRuhr 26,1 as consistent with Clay view that Ruhr Authority will have to be imposed. It was because of recognition of view expressed by Clay that para includes “by accession or otherwise”.

Present formulation understood to represent concession to views other delegations that Germany should not be given right to cast its own vote until it has either voluntarily or involuntarily assumed the responsibility of carrying out IAR decisions.

Berlin pls pass to Clay.

Lovett

1  Telegram 4624, ToRuhr 26, December 10, to London, not printed. Paragraph 2 of that telegram read as follows: “That it now be agreed that the Occupying Powers will not decide that the German Government should cast (the German votes until the German Govt has assumed a positive commitment by accession or otherwise.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1048)

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1748: Telegram

[Document 365]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent
niact London, December 17, 1948—midnight.

5277. Ruhrto 50. 1. Following is status of progress on French proposals (see Ruhrto 421 ). Draft now being discussed on first proposal reads as follows:2

[“] (A) At end of control period, or at such earlier time as agreed by occupying powers, such of powers at present vested in occupation authorities as are necessary to ensure

(I) That subsequent modifications in structure of Ruhr coal, coke and steel industries and trade and marketing organizations of such industries do not establish excessive concentration economic power,

(II) That persons who are found to have furthered aggressive designs National Socialist Party do not hold important positions in direction or management, or substantial interests in ownership, Ruhr coal, coke or steel industries or trade and marketing organizations of such industries and

(III) That adequate information such subjects is made available, will be transferred to authority unless MSB, its successor or some other body created by international agreement is charged with ensuring achievement these objectives with respect these and other industries in Germany. If other body so charged, authority shall cooperate with that body.

(B) (As soon as practicable) (not later than twelve months after the coming into force of the present agreement) and in any event before end control period, signatory governments will consult and determine, in light experience of occupation authorities

(I) Which of powers at present vested in the occupation authorities should be continued as provided Paragraph (A),

(II) Whether such powers will be transferred to authority, MSB, its successor or some other body created by international agreement,

(III) Manner in which such powers will be exercised, and,

(IV) In event powers being so transferred to another body, manner in which authority will cooperate with such other body.”

2. (A) Reference Paragraph (A) (I) in above draft, British having difficulties due to extraordinary Cabinet sensitiveness to any language which might concede concentration. Principal British discussion is with French who fear nationalization by Germans would constitute a security threat. We believe that any compromise which British and French reach on this matter will probably be satisfactory to US.

(B) Reference Paragraph (A) (II), USDel will attempt to change language as instructed first sentence ToRuhr 33.3

(C) Parenthesis at beginning of Paragraph (B) quoted above are British and French alternatives respectively, French desiring that decisions regarding transfer of powers should be made within 12 months. British wish to avoid definite commitment, with which we agree since we believe that decision should not be made until shortly before end control period and during next 12 months little practical experience will have been gained.

(D) In general USDel believes principles in article quoted above are substantially same as those in US draft quoted Ruhrto 41 and commented on ToRuhr 33.

3. Present draft of second French proposal (revision of Paragraph 4 Ruhrto 42) reads as follows: “(A) At end of control period, or at such earlier time as agreed by occupying powers, such of powers over direction and management of Ruhr coal, coke and steel industries at present vested in occupation authorities as are necessary to ensure

(I) That general policies followed (in production, development and investment) in those industries are in conformity with purposes stated in preamble present agreement,

(II) That programs for such production, development, and investment may be disapproved to extent they would not, if carried out, be in conformity with purposes stated in preamble present agreement, and

(III) That adequate information concerning such policies and programs be made available, will be transferred to authority, unless transferred to MSB, its successor, or some other body created by international agreement.

(B) (As soon as practicable) (not later than 12 months after coming into force present agreement) and in any event before end control period, signatory governments will consult and determine, in light of experience of occupation authorities,

(I) Which of powers at present vested in occupation authorities should be continued as provided Paragraph (A),

(II) Whether such powers will be exercised by authority, by MSB, its successor or some other body created by international agreement,

(III) Manner in which such powers will be exercised if transferred to authority, and

(IV) The relationship between authority and MSB or its successor, or with any other body to which powers mentioned in Paragraph (A) may be transferred.”

4. (A) Parenthesis in first sentence Paragraph (B) quoted above, same as in Paragraph (B) quoted in Paragraph 1 of this message.

(B) While USDel recognizes that relating powers to preamble presents vaguer criteria than proposed Section E Ruhrto 34,4 it is assumed that after control period some powers to prevent use of Ruhr industries for purposes of aggression will be vested in some body, that since principal purpose of IAR is to ensure access to Ruhr resources, we would not oppose the maintenance of such powers as are necessary to ensure that policies followed in these industries do not deny access. Other two purposes stated in preamble have positive advantages and would permit discussions which will be held later pursuant to article quoted above, to consider positive developments of IAR rather than merely concentrate restrictive and security aspects. It is for this reason that we see some advantage in using preamble as terms of reference of future meaning under article quoted above. If, however, Department believes we should restrict powers to security field alone, as suggested in Wilds-Jackson phone call,5 please instruct most urgently.6

5. All discussions of USDel have been on basis of acquiring confirmation from government. Furthermore, we have made point, as have French, that governments may not wish to approve IAR agreement until it can be studied together with arrangements for MSB, occupation statute, German constitution, et cetera. Incidentally, British have advised they can not approve prior to middle February due to long Parliamentary recess. Although Parliamentary ratification not required, practice requires holding agreement before Parliament for three weeks before formal execution.

6. At plenary 16 December7 other delegates agreed in principle to US proposal on review and appeal as contained in Douglas telegram to Reber 15 December,8 subject to some drafting changes and substantive change to provide that Germany would have to have at least two supporters in appealing action regarding security functions of IAR.

Repeated Paris 1046, Berlin 671.

Douglas

1 Telegram 5245, Ruhrto 42, December 15, from London, not printed, transmitted the texts of two proposed articles to the draft Ruhr agreement submitted by Alphand at the 17th Meeting of the London Conference On the Ruhr, December 14 (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–4548).

2 The French proposals reported upon in this telegram were considered at the 18th Meeting of the London Conference on the Ruhr, on the morning of December 15. A copy of the U.S. Delegation Minutes of the 18th Meeting was transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to despatch 6, January 3, 1949, from London, neither printed. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–349)

3 Regarding the message under reference here, see footnote 3 to telegram 5209, Ruhrto 37, December 11, from London, p. 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 360].

4 London telegram 5170, December 9, p. 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357].

5 A record of tine trans-Atlantic telephone conversation Tinder reference, held at 6 p. m. on December 15, is included in the CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 126, File—Six Power Conference to Establish Ruhr Authority, Misc. Materials.

6 Comments and instructions on the French proposals discussed in this telegram were forthcoming in telegrams 4694, ToRuhr 35, and 4698, ToRuhr 39, both sent to London on December 17, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1748). Telegram 5292. Ruhrto 52, December 17, from London, not printed, reported that after long discussions at the 22nd Meeting of the London Conference on the Ruhr on December 17, revised versions of the French proposals were agreed upon. These revised versions were substantially the same as those subsequently included as articles 18 and section (a) of article 19 of the Draft Agreement Establishing an International Authority for the Ruhr, December 28, 1948; see the editorial note, p. 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369].

7 The reference here is to the 20th Meeting of the London Conference on the Ruhr, held on the morning of December 16. A copy of the U.S. Delegation Minutes of the 20th Meeting was transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to despatch 13, January 4, 1949, from London, neither printed. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–449)

8 Not printed.

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[Document 366]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army 1

[Extracts]

secret [Berlin,] December 18, 1948.

CC–7108. To Dept of Army for CSCAD from CINCEUR signed Clay. The 6th meeting of the French, US, and UK Military Governors took place in Frankfurt on 16 Dec 1948. It was a long 9 hour meeting interrupted in the middle by a conference with representatives from the Parliamentary Assembly concerning which I will advise you by separate cable.2 The formal agenda was as follows:

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5. French Participation in Coal and Steel Control Groups.

Gen Koenig acknowledged Robertson’s and my letter authorizing French participation in the Coal Control Group.3 He raised several points, in particular inquiring why the French member should not participate in the Chairmanship and why the reconstituted Control Group should not answer to the three Military Governors instead of to the Bipartite Board. I informed him that the Ruhr is part of the Bizonal Area and therefore under the control of the Bipartite Board, and that until Trizonal fusion, final decisions affecting the Bizonal Area must be made by the US and UK Military Governors. Should the French member of the Coal Control Group disagree with his colleagues, he would always have the privilege of requesting his Military Governor to raise the matter with Gen Robertson and myself. Such action would have a suspensory effect until Gen Koenig could discuss the matter with us.

Gen Koenig requested French participation in the negotiations on organization of Steel Control Group. Robertson and I agreed.

Gen Koenig stated that his government wanted to lodge a protest concerning those provisions of Military Government Law 75 on the reorganization of the Ruhr properties4 whereby corporations 50% owned by UN nationals were not exempt from reorganization. I informed him we had discussed this point previously with him and that my government by express action had deleted the Stinnes combination which is 100% American owned from the list of those properties not subject to this law. He thereupon stated that his government might take up this matter with the US and UK Governments.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

[ Clay ]

1 For another portion of this message, dealing with the discussion of the draft occupation statute, see p. 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390].

2 General Clay’s message is not printed; regarding the meeting of the Military Governors with the Parliamentary Council Delegation, see pp. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391] and 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393].

3 In a letter of December 8, 1948, to General Koenig, not printed, General Clay and General Robertson confirmed that arrangements had been made for the entrance of representatives of the French Military Government into the Combined Coal Control Group. The letter explained that the French representative would become a member of the Board of the Coal Control Group with full voting rights. Pending the full fusion of the French Zone with the Bizone, however, the chairmanship of the Board would continue to alternate between the U.S. and U.K. members.

4 Regarding Law No. 75 under reference here, see the editorial note, p. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1848: Telegram

[Document 367]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent London, December 18, 1948—9 p. m.

5298. Ruhrto 54. At plenary morning1 December 18 following action: 1. OEEC relationship: Long discussion clarified following points: (a) US draft2 on relationship of IAR allocations and OEEC programs is wholly separate conference paper which will be described as US paper to which other delegations agreed.

(b) Arrangements between occupation authorities concerned and IAR re procedures need not be written, but worked out as practical matter, including any changes from US paper referred to in (a) above.

(c) In view of above clarifications and after considerable discussion, USDel agreed to language quoted paragraph 3, Ruhrto 49, as authorized ToRuhr 40.3

2. Re pig iron as authorized ToRuhr 36,4 USDel agreed exceptional inclusion pig iron for allocation only when authorized by twelve affirmative votes. France and Netherlands said they would have to obtain instructions to approve. USDel believes they probably will.

3. During long discussion, French and Benelux delegates expressed extreme reluctance to provide that representative of German Government should have right to attend all meetings of Council and right to speak. Principal argument was that if Germans had such right, there would be no incentive for them to accede. Finally, USDel obtained reluctant acceptance of following language for Article IV (seven draft): “(a) When German Government is established, it may appoint a delegate to authority with right to attend meetings of Council. At such time as German Government becomes entitled to cast votes allocated to Germany, as provided Article IX (C), it may appoint representative on Council and alternate.

“(b) The occupation authorities concerned shall be represented at Council by one of their nationals jointly designated by them, until such time as votes allocated to Germany are cast by German representative.”

And following language for Article IX(C): “The votes allocated to Germany shall be cast as unit by representative of occupation authorities concerned is appointed as provided in Article IV, until occupying powers concerned determine that German Government, by accession or by other means, has assumed the responsibilities placed upon Germany by present agreement. Thereafter such votes shall be cast by German representative.”

4. French and British raised questions as to how joint representative of Military Governors would be chosen and how decision would be made on casting German vote. Re first, it was left that designation of representative would have to be agreed between occupation authorities concerned. Re second, USDel stated US position that instructions to representative of occupation authorities concerned would be determined by established procedures relating subject matter of those instructions. When instructions involved a subject as to which it had been established that occupation authorities concerned should act by unanimous or majority agreement, that procedure would apply to issuing instructions. Where subject matter was within the scope of a special procedure, instructions would be determined in accordance with that special procedure. It was clearly understood by all delegates that US position was that fusion agreement would apply to giving of instructions on matter falling within scope of fusion agreement. This was made doubly clear by USDel statement that there should be a minute applicable to this Article similar to minute in Annex D5 applicable to Article IV Annex C. British made statement that in their view instructions should be given to representative of occupation authorities concerned by Bipartite Board and, after trizonal fusion, by Tripartite Board and further that present proceedings did not prevent British from discussing this matter on intergovernmental basis. USDel took note of British statement. There was some discussion of whether reference to trizonal fusion agreement should be made in note reserving rights under fusion agreement. French stated they believed anomalous to reserve rights under agreement not in existence and said this matter should come up in connection with trizonal fusion agreement. (French tentatively asked whether their participation JEIA and control groups made them an occupying power concerned. British and USDels indicated that would happen only when trizonal fusion agreement was in force.) In view of understanding of Ambassador Douglas as to position General Clay took last spring of preferring to handle in Germany and in absence of instructions in answer Ruhrto 206 USDel did not press this matter further.

5. Further effort was made to obtain agreement other delegates to required yearly review by governments of work of authority. Alphand consulting Paris.

Sent Department; repeated Paris 1056, Berlin 681.

Douglas

1 No U.S. Delegation record of this Conference meeting has been found; it appears to be an unnumbered meeting.

2 The reference here is to document RC/18, infra.

3 Neither of the telegrams under reference here is printed. Under reference here is the language that ultimately appeared in Article 14, paragraph (a), subparagraph (iii) in the Draft Agreement on the Ruhr of December 28, 1948.

4 Not printed.

5 Document TRI/23 (Final), May 26, p. 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], an agreed minute of the London Conference on Germany, was included as Annex D of the Report of the Conference, June 1, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

6 Dated November 30, not printed.

Proposal by the United States Delegation to the London Conference on the Ruhr 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–2748

[Document 368]

Proposal by the United States Delegation to the London Conference on the Ruhr 1

secret [London, undated.]

RC/18

Relationship of Allocations and O.E.E.C. Programmes

With respect to the relations between the functions of the Authority under Article 14 and the preparation of proposed programmes or plans for submission to O.E.E.C., it is agreed that the following principles will be applicable: 1. When proposed programmes or plans for submission to the O.E.E.C. are being prepared by the responsible authorities in Germany, proposals included in such programmes or plans with respect to the export of Ruhr coal, coke and steel and the amounts to be retained in Germany will be submitted to the Authority. The Authority will review such proposals and make tentative findings with respect to the export of Ruhr coal, coke and steel for the period covered by the programme or plan.

2. During the Control Period, or until such earlier time as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers concerned, the Authority’s findings will be incorporated by the responsible authorities in Germany in the proposed programme or plan submitted to the O.E.E.C. to the extent consistent with the terms of any existing agreement among the Occupying Powers governing the export of coal or coke from Germany and with any agreements relative to the provision of financial assistance to Germany which are now or may come in effect between any two or more of the Occupying Powers. The determination of whether the findings of the Authority are consistent with such agreements will be made by the Occupation Authorities concerned.

3. After the Control Period, or after such earlier time as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers concerned, the Authority’s findings will be incorporated by the responsible authorities in Germany in the proposed programme or plan submitted to the O.E.E.C.

4. As the review of the proposed programme or plan proceeds in the O.E.E.C., the representatives of Germany may consider and consent to such changes in the coal, coke and steel sections of the programme or plan as may be agreed in O.E.E.C. The programme or plan as finally adopted by the O.E.E.C. shall be transmitted to the Authority. The Authority shall take such action as may be necessary to ensure that its findings are consistent with such programme or plan.

5. Appropriate procedures to ensure the carrying out of the above principles will be agreed from time to time between the Authority, the Occupation Authorities concerned and other responsible authorities in Germany.

1 At a meeting on December 19, the London Conference reached the following agreement regarding this U.S. Delegation proposal (the decision was subsequently circulated to the Conference as document RC/24): “Delegates (at a plenary meeting on 19th December) took note of a United States memorandum on the relationship between the functions of the Authority under Article 14 (c) of the Agreement and the preparation of proposed programmes or plans for submission to O.E.E.C., circulated to the delegations as RC/19, and agreed that this document represented the procedure contemplated by all delegations.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1249)

Regarding this decision, see also telegram 5298, Ruhrto 54, supra.

Editorial Note [Document 369]

Editorial Note

The final plenary meeting of the London Conference on the Ruhr appears to have been held on the afternoon of December 19. At this meeting, for which no U.S. Delegation minutes were prepared, the conferees approved a Draft Agreement (document RC/21 Final, December 19), and Additional Agreed Minutes suggested by the U.S. Delegation (document RC/23, December 19). Neither RC/21 nor RC/23 is printed. Copies of document RC/21 were carried to Washington personally by Ben Brown of the U.S. Delegation. Copies of the Draft Communiqué and added agreed minutes were transmitted to Washington by telegram. Copies of these documents were also later transmitted to the Department as enclosures to despatch 53, January 12, 1949, from London, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–1249). Following the December 19 plenary meeting, members of the various delegations began to depart from London. Meetings, however, continued among the remaining delegation members until December 24 to settle remaining points of difference concerning the Draft Agreement, the Agreed Minutes, and the Communiqué. These meetings included three six-power meetings (on December 20, 21, and 22) and two American-British meetings (on December 22 and 23–24). U.S. Delegation minutes of these meetings are included in CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 126. Following the departure for the United States on December 22 of Ambassador Douglas and Alternate U.S. Representative Jackson, the United States was represented in the continuing conversations by Chargé Julius Holmes and First Secretary William Trimble. During the final negotiations in London, the American representatives and the Department of State maintained close contact in a series of trans-Atlantic telephone conversations. Copies of more than a score of these conversations covering the December 19–24 period are included in CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 126, File—Misc Documents. These telephone conversations were at times supplemented by exchanges of telegrams. The final texts of the Draft Agreement on the Ruhr and the Communiqué were transmitted to the Department in telegrams 5371, Ruhrto 66, and 5371, Ruhrto 67, December 26, 1 p. m. from London, respectively, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–2648). The texts of the Communiqué and Draft Agreement as released to the press on December 28 are printed on the following pages together with the revised text of the Agreed Minutes, which was not made public.

Communiqué of the London Conference on the Ruhr, December 28, 1948 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–2848

[Document 370]

Communiqué of the London Conference on the Ruhr, December 28, 1948 1

London, December 28, 1948

Representatives of Belgium, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom and the United States have met in London to draft a detailed agreement establishing an International Authority for the Ruhr, as provided in the annex to the communiqué issued on June 7th, 1948, at the termination of the London Six-Power talks on Germany. The delegates have completed a draft agreement which has now been submitted to their Governments for approval. The text of the draft agreement is being made public today.

2. The meeting, which was held in a friendly atmosphere throughout, carefully examined all aspects of the problems involved. It was recognised at the outset that a number of organizations are being established and arrangements being worked out with respect to Germany. The Ruhr Authority is one of them and should be viewed in this context. To avoid duplication of effort and overlapping of jurisdiction, each of these has its particular functions. Taken together they are designed to accomplish a threefold objective: to assure the disarmament and demilitarisation of Germany; to further the recovery of the countries of Europe, including a democratic Germany; and to promote that intimate association of their economic life which in the last analysis alone can assure a peaceful and prosperous Europe.

3. Among the arrangements designed to prevent aggression the Military Security Board is one of the most important. The functions of this Board have recently been agreed upon in principle by the three Military Governors. They include provision for cooperation with the Ruhr Authority. The Board will have general responsibility for the maintenance of disarmament and demilitarisation in the interests of security. As regards industrial disarmament, the Board will act in accordance with agreements which are in the course of completion concerning the necessary prohibitions and limitations on German industry. It was recognized that a ceiling of 10.7 million tons on the production of crude steel is now in effect in the Bizonal Area.

4. In 1946, the United States Secretary of State, Mr. Byrnes, put forward certain ideas for assuring the effective disarmament and demilitarisation of Germany. It is anticipated that the objectives and mechanisms envisaged by Mr. Byrnes’ proposal will, to the extent appropriate, form a basis for long-term disarmament and demilitarisation measures to be worked out through and adapted to the Military Security Board or any other organisation established as its successor to perform these functions. These measures will be designed solely to prevent the revival of German aggression.

5. Within this framework it is the purpose of the Six Powers to provide the means by which a peaceful democratic Germany can be brought into the European community to play its part as a fully responsible and independent member. The participation of the Western Zones of Germany in the European Recovery Programme and in the Organisation for European Economic Cooperation already demonstrates the intention of the Western Powers to afford to Germany its place in the economic life of Europe.

6. With these various factors in mind, it has been a main objective of the Six Powers, in establishing the Ruhr Authority, to ensure that the resources of the Ruhr shall in the future be used not for purposes of aggression but solely in the interests of peace, and to provide for a closer coordination of the economic life of the countries of Europe, cooperating in the common good, including a democratic Germany.

7. During the period that the Occupation Authorities are exercising extensive economic functions in Germany, the decisions of the Authority will necessarily be carried out largely by or through the Occupation Authorities. As, however, they relinquish their functions, the Authority will be in more and more direct relationship with the German Government in the exercise of its functions.

8. A principal function of the Ruhr Authority is to make a division of the coal, coke and steel from the Ruhr as between German consumption and export, in order to provide adequate access to supplies of these products by countries cooperating in the common economic good, at the same time taking into account the essential needs of Germany. This division must, of course, be in conformity with existing international agreements. Thus, in the case of coal and coke the sliding scales drawn up in Moscow and Berlin continue in force.

9. The functions of the Ruhr Authority in the above field will be coordinated with the larger and more comprehensive operations of the O.E.E.C. in its work of promoting the economic rehabilitation of the countries participating in the European Recovery Programme.

10. The Authority will have powers to ensure that the German Authorities do not institute, carry out or permit artificial or discriminatory transport, price and trade practices, quotas, tariffs and similar governmental measures or commercial arrangements which would distort the movement of Ruhr coal, coke and steel in international trade, except for measures of protection approved by the Authority.

11. The Authority will furthermore be charged with responsibility for the safeguard and protection of foreign interests in the coal, coke and steel industries of the Ruhr in conformity with international agreements, in so far as these functions are not entrusted to another body for the whole of Germany.

12. Particular attention was paid to the question of giving the Authority powers of supervision over the management and direction of the Ruhr coal, coke and steel industries. The Coal and Steel Control Groups established by the British and American Occupation Authorities now have extensive powers over these industries, including powers over production, investment, development and other matters concerning management and direction. As is known, the French Authorities have been invited to join in the work of these Control Groups. It has been agreed that at the appropriate time such of these powers relating to the supervision of management and direction as the Six Powers consider necessary to achieve their purposes with respect to the security and well-being of Europe will be transferred to the Ruhr Authority or to the Military Security Board or its successor or to some other international body. These would be powers of supervision over production, investment and development and would not be powers of detailed control which would unduly interfere with the normal and regular responsibilities of management. The conditions under which these powers will be transferred, and the manner in which they will be exercised, will be determined as soon as practicable in the light of experience acquired over a period of time under the present Control Groups. It is further understood that any powers transferred to the Authority in this connection under Article 19 for economic as opposed to agreed security purposes will be transferred for the purpose of contributing toward that closer association of the economies of Europe which the Six Powers have set out as one of their objectives in the preamble to the agreement. It was agreed that the powers to be continued should also be adequate to prevent the revival of excessive economic concentration in the coal, coke or steel industries of the Ruhr and to prevent persons who furthered the aggressive designs of the Nazis from acquiring ownership interests or positions of direction and management in those industries. The agenda of the meeting did not include the question of the final ownership of the industries concerned and this question is in no way affected by the discussions or the draft agreement.

13. The Authority will have the right to obtain information necessary to enable it to perform its functions, including adequate rights of inspection and investigation.

14. The Authority will consist of a Council composed of representatives of the member Governments and will have a permanent Secretariat.

15. As soon as a German Government is established, it will have the opportunity of acceding to the Agreement, the vote for Germany being exercised meanwhile by the Occupation Authorities. When a German Government has undertaken the full obligations of its membership, it will enjoy full voting rights except in matters of security and default.

16. The Authority, if its decisions and directives are not properly respected by the German Government, may find the latter in default and make recommendations as to the action to be taken.

17. The Authority will submit an annual report on its work which will normally be followed by a meeting of specially appointed representatives of member governments to review the report and the work of the Authority. Any two or more members, who consider that the policies of the Authority are not consistent with the purposes for which it was created, may call for a special examination or its operations by the member Governments. Germany may not initiate such examinations in matters relating to security.

18. In the past the resources of the Ruhr have been used for the purposes of aggression. The six Governments are determined that, through the security measures referred to above, any recurrence of such a situation shall be prevented. They are equally aware that the political and economic welfare of Europe requires the full and effective use of the industrial production of the Ruhr and the participation of a democratic Germany in the comity of nations, all enjoying a reasonable standard of prosperity. The establishment of the Ruhr Authority is an innovation in the international economic field. It is not being set up to limit free competition by European industries in the markets of the world. It has a constructive function to fulfill in promoting the general economic well-being of Europe and in re-establishing international confidence. If operated wisely, the Ruhr Authority may be regarded as a further contributory step towards a more intimate economic association among the countries of Europe.

1 The source text, Department of State Press Release No. 1027, December 28, 1948, was given to the press for release at noon, December 28. As previously agreed by the participants in the Conference, this Communiqué was simultaneously released in London and Paris.

Draft Agreement for the Establishment of an International Authority for the Ruhr 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–2948

[Document 371]

Draft Agreement for the Establishment of an International Authority for the Ruhr 1

[London, December 28, 1948.]

Whereas international security and general economic recovery require:—

that the resources of the Ruhr shall not in the future be used for the purpose of aggression but shall be used in the interest of peace;

that the access to the coal, coke and steel of the Ruhr, which was previously subject to the exclusive control of Germany, be in the future assured on an equitable basis to the countries co-operating in the common economic good;

Whereas it is desirable for the political and economic well-being of the countries of Europe co-operating in the common economic good, including a democratic Germany, that there be close association of their economic life;

Whereas it is important that trade between the countries mentioned in the preceding paragraph should be facilitated by lowering trade barriers and by any other means;

Now, therefore, in furtherance of the foregoing purposes and in order to establish an international control in the Ruhr in conformity with the agreed statement of principles contained in Annex C to the Report signed in London on the first day of June, 1948, at the conclusion of the Six-Power Talks on Germany, the Governments of Belgium, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America have agreed as follows:—

Part I. The Authority

article 1

There is hereby established an International Authority for the Ruhr, hereinafter referred to as the “Authority”, the composition, powers and functions of which are as set forth herein.

article 2

The members of the Authority shall be the Signatory Governments and Germany.

article 3

The Authority shall consist of a Council composed of representatives of the Signatory Governments and, subject to the provisions of Article 4, of Germany. The Council shall be assisted by a Secretariat, headed by an Executive Secretary. The members shall also appoint alternate representatives.

article 4

(a) When a German Government is established, it may appoint a delegate to the Authority with the right to attend meetings of the Council. At such time as the German Government becomes entitled to cast the votes allocated to Germany, as provided in Article 9(c) it may appoint a representative on the Council and an alternate.

(b) The Occupation Authorities concerned shall be represented at the Council by one of their nationals jointly designated by them, until such time as the votes allocated to Germany are cast by the German representative.

article 5

The Headquarters of the Authority shall be at such place in Land North Rhine–Westphalia as the Council may determine.

article 6

(a) Each member will pay the expenses of its own representation. Costs of travel on business of the Authority shall, however, be borne by the Authority.

(b) The expenses of the Authority shall be defrayed by the members in proportions corresponding to the votes allocated to such members.

(c) Until the Occupying Powers decide otherwise the expenses of the German representation and the share of the expenses of the Authority to be defrayed by Germany shall be met in such manner as may be determined by the Occupation Authorities concerned.

Part II. Internal Organisation and Procedure

article 7

The Council shall hold such regular and special meetings as are necessary to the performance of its functions.

article 8

The chairmanship of the Council shall be held in rotation for periods of six months each, in such order as the Council shall determine, by the representatives of the Signatory Governments. The representative of the Government of the United Kingdom shall take the chair until the Council has determined the order of rotation.

article 9

(a) The voting rights of the several members of the Authority in its Council shall be:—

Votes

Belgium 1

France 3

Germany 3

Luxembourg 1

The Netherlands 1

The United Kingdom 3

The United States 3

(b) Eight favourable votes shall be sufficient for every decision of the Authority, except as provided in Articles 13, 14, 17 and 24.

(c) The votes allocated to Germany shall be cast as a unit by the joint representative of the Occupation Authorities concerned appointed as provided in Article 4, until the Occupying Powers concerned determine that the German Government, by accession or by other means, has assumed the responsibilities placed upon Germany by the present Agreement. Thereafter such votes shall be cast by the German representative.

article 10

(a) The Executive Secretary will be appointed by the Council, will serve as head of the Secretariat, will act under the instructions of the Council and will perform such duties as the Council shall determine. He will be entitled to participate, without right of vote, in all meetings of the Council, shall keep minutes of its meetings and shall maintain a register of its decisions.

(b) The Executive Secretary shall appoint his staff in accordance with staff regulations drawn up as provided in Article 13. In his choice of staff he will be guided by the need for securing the highest standards of integrity, efficiency, independence and technical competence. The Council shall ensure that there is no undue concentration of posts in the hands of persons of any one nationality.

(c) The responsibilities of the Executive Secretary and of the staff shall be exclusively international in character. In the discharge of their duties, they shall not seek or receive instructions from any Government or from any authority other than that constituted by the present Agreement. They shall refrain from any action which might prejudice their position as international officials. Each member of the Authority undertakes to respect the international character of the responsibilities of the Secretariat and will not seek to influence the Executive Secretary or his staff in the discharge of their duties.

article 11

The annual budget shall be prepared by the Executive Secretary for approval by the Council.

article 12

The Authority shall conduct its business in English, French and German, of which English and French shall be the official languages. Authoritative German texts of documents shall be provided as necessary.

article 13

Immediately after the present Agreement comes into force the first meeting of the Authority shall be convened by the Government of the United Kingdom for the purpose of drawing up rules of procedure and operation, choosing an Executive Secretary, organising its Secretariat and establishing staff regulations. Decisions on such matters, and any subsequent modifications of those decisions, shall require twelve affirmative votes. Thereafter the setting up of the organisation shall proceed as rapidly as possible and the Authority shall begin to exercise its functions at times to be established by the Occupying Powers after consultation with the other Signatory Governments, but in any event prior to the establishment of a German Government.

Part III. Functions

article 14

(a) The Authority shall make a division of coal, coke and steel from the Ruhr as between German consumption and export. Such division shall— (i) ensure adequate access to supplies of those products by countries co-operating in the common economic good, taking into account the essential needs of Germany;

(ii) be in accordance with the terms of any agreement among the Occupying Powers with respect to the allocation of coal, coke or steel, which is in force at the time the division is made;

(iii) be consistent with the objectives set forth in the Convention for European Economic Co-operation and with any programme approved, or decision taken, by the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation, which is applicable to the period for which such division is made.

(b) The export allocations of the Authority shall be in terms of minimum amounts of coal, coke and finished or semi-finished steel to be made available from the Ruhr for export. The Authority shall have the power to express these export allocations in terms of various qualities or types of coal, coke and finished or semi-finished steel. Exceptionally, the Authority may make an allocation of pig-iron if at any time it decides by twelve affirmative votes that such an allocation is necessary in order to ensure adequate access to supplies of pig-iron. In making export allocations of finished or semi-finished steel, the Authority shall be bound by, and shall act within, any agreements relating to the level of steel production in Germany which are in force at the time and to which the Occupying Powers concerned are party.

(c) Before the Authority begins to exercise its functions under this Article, it will agree with the Occupation Authorities concerned on a procedure for co-ordinating the decisions of the Authority with the preparation of proposed programmes and plans for submission to the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation. This procedure shall be reviewed at any time at the request of any member, and in any case at the end of the Control Period or at such earlier time as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers.

article 15

The Authority shall have the right to examine transport, price and trade practices, quotas, tariffs, and other governmental measures or commercial arrangements instituted or permitted by the German authorities, which affect the coal, coke or steel of the Ruhr. If the Authority determines that such practices, measures or arrangements are artificial or discriminatory and are of such a nature as— (i) to impede access by other countries to the coal, coke or steel of the Ruhr,

(ii) to distort the movements of Ruhr coal, coke or steel in international trade, or

(iii) otherwise to prejudice the accomplishment of the purposes of the present Agreement,

the Authority shall decide that such practices, measures or arrangements shall be appropriately modified or terminated. In making its determinations under this Article the Authority shall have due regard for the requirements of international peace and security, for Germany’s obligations under the Convention for European Economic Co-operation, and for the need of the German authorities to afford legitimate protection to the commercial and financial position of Germany in international trade.

article 16

(a) During the Control Period, or until such earlier time as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers, the Authority shall bring to the attention of the Occupation Authorities concerned measures which would ensure, and after such period or time the Authority shall itself ensure, in conformity with any international agreements relating to the protection of foreign interests in Germany in force at the time, to which the Signatory Governments are party— (i) the safeguard and protection of foreign interests in coal, coke and steel enterprises in the Ruhr, and

(ii) the protection of such enterprises involving foreign interests from the application of discriminatory measures in any sector of their activity;

provided that when and to the extent that the protection of such foreign interests or enterprises is entrusted to any agency created or designated by any international agreement to which the Signatory Governments are party, the functions of the Authority in this matter shall cease.

(b) At the end of the Control Period, or at such earlier time as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers, the functions of the Authority referred to in paragraph (a) of this Article shall, unless they have previously ceased, be reviewed by the Signatory Governments, taking into account the desirability of transferring these functions to a separate agency or of extending them to the Aachen area.

article 17

(a) During the Control Period, or until such earlier time as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers, the Occupation Authorities concerned will maintain such powers as may be necessary to enforce the disarmament of Germany, including power to control the supply of Ruhr coal, coke and steel to any industry which may be prohibited or limited in the interests of security by agreement among the Occupying Powers or under the terms of any international agreement to which they may become party.

(b) At the end of the Control Period, or at such earlier time as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers the powers referred to in paragraph (a) of this Article shall be transferred to such international body as may be designated for these purposes by the peace settlement or by any international agreement to which the Signatory Governments are party, and the Authority shall co-operate with that international body in such ways as shall be prescribed by the peace settlement or international agreement. If no such international body is established, these powers shall be transferred to the Authority to be exercised by the representatives of the Signatory Governments thereon.

article 18

(a) At the end of the Control Period, or at such earlier time as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers, such of the existing powers of the Occupation Authorities as are necessary to ensure— (i) that there shall not be allowed to develop, or be restored, any pattern of ownership in the Ruhr coal, coke or steel industries, or trade and marketing agreements among such industries, which would constitute excessive concentration of economic power;

(ii) that persons who have been, or may be, found to have furthered the aggressive designs of the National Socialist Party do not hold positions of ownership or control in the Ruhr coal, coke or steel industries or the trade and marketing organisations of such industries; and

(iii) that adequate information is made available for the purposes specified in sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) above,

will be transferred to the Authority or to the Military Security Board or its successor or to some other body created by international agreement and charged with ensuring the achievement of these objectives with respect to these and other industries in Germany. The Authority shall co-operate with any other body to which such powers may be transferred.

(b) In conjunction with the first meeting of the special representatives of the members contemplated in Article 27, if practicable, but in any event before the end of the Control Period, the Signatory Governments will determine, in the light of the experience of the Occupation Authorities— (i) which of the existing powers of Occupation Authorities are to be continued for the purposes provided for in paragraph (a) of this Article;

(ii) whether such powers will be transferred to the Authority, the Military Security Board or its successor, or some other body created by international agreement;

(iii) the manner in which such powers will be exercised if transferred to the Authority; and

(iv) in the event of powers being so transferred to another body, the manner in which the Authority will co-operate with such other body.

article 19

(a) At the end of the Control Period, or at such earlier time as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers, only such of the existing powers of the Occupation Authorities over the direction and management of the Ruhr coal, coke or steel industries as are necessary to ensure— (i) that the general policies and general programmes relating to production, development and investment in those industries are in conformity with the purposes stated in the preamble to the present Agreement; and

(ii) that adequate information concerning such policies and programmes be made available

will be transferred to the Authority or to the Military Security Board or its successor, or to some other body created by international agreement,

(b) In conjunction with the first meeting of the special representatives of the members contemplated in Article 27, if practicable, but in any event before the end of the Control Period, the Signatory Governments will determine, in the light of the experience of the Occupation Authorities— (i) which of the existing powers of the Occupation Authorities are to be continued for the purposes provided in paragraph (a) of this Article;

(ii) which of these powers will be exercised by the Authority, by the Military Security Board or its successor, or by some other body created by international agreement;

(iii) the manner in which powers transferred to the Authority will be exercised; and

(iv) the relationship of the Authority with the Military Security Board or its successor, or with any other body to which the powers mentioned in paragraph (a) of this Article may be transferred.

Part IV. Information and Investigation

article 20

In order that the authority may properly perform its functions and in order that it may determine whether its decisions are being appropriately carried out, the Authority shall have the right— (i) to obtain periodical reports, and such additional reports as it considers necessary, on production, distribution and consumption of Ruhr coal, coke and steel, including such forecasts of production, distribution and consumption as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions under Article 14;

(ii) to obtain such information as it considers necessary concerning supplies of coal, coke and steel available to Germany from sources other than the Ruhr, and concerning exports from Germany of such products from sources other than the Ruhr; and

(iii) to make in the Ruhr any investigations, including the examination of witnesses, which it considers necessary to verify the information obtained under this Article or other Articles of the present Agreement, and to determine the manner in which its decisions are being carried out, provided that similar investigations may also be made in other parts of Germany under a special procedure to be established in accordance with Article 13.

In the exercise of these rights, the Authority may make enquiries of individuals, including public officials, and public or private organisations, enterprises and firms, and may examine records and installations.

Part V. Execution of Functions

article 21

(a) During the Control Period, or until such earlier time or times as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers, the Authority shall transmit its decisions under Articles 14 and 15 and its recommendations under Article 16 to the Occupation Authorities concerned.

(b) After the Control Period, or after such earlier time or times as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers, the Authority shall transmit its decisions under Articles 14 and 15 and its directions under Article 16 to the German Government.

article 22

During the Control Period, or until such earlier time or times as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers, the Occupation Authorities concerned will— (i) ensure that the decisions of the Authority under Article 14 are carried out except in so far as, in the judgement of the Occupation Authorities concerned, they require modification in order to make them consistent either with any agreement between two or more of the Occupying Powers relating to financial assistance to Germany which is in force at the time, or with any agreement among the Occupying Powers with respect to the allocation of coal, coke or steel which is in force at the time;

(ii) ensure that the decisions of the Authority under Article 15 are carried out;

(iii) inform the Authority of measures taken as the result of its recommendations under Article 16;

(iv) take such action as is necessary to enable the Authority to exercise the rights provided for in Article 20; and

(v) ensure the enjoyment of the privileges and immunities provided for in Article 28.

article 23

After the Control Period, or after such earlier time or times as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers, the German Government shall— (i) ensure that the decisions of the Authority under Articles 14 and 15 and the directions of the Authority under Article 16 are carried out and that any powers transferred to the Authority under Articles 17, 18 and 19 can be effectively exercised;

(ii) take such action as is necessary to enable the Authority to exercise the rights provided for in Article 20; and

(iii) ensure the enjoyment of the privileges and immunities provided for in Article 28.

Part VI. Default

article 24

(a) Should the German Government fail to take any action required by Article 23 of the present Agreement, the representatives of the Signatory Governments on the Authority may serve notice in writing upon the German Government, which notice shall afford the German Government an opportunity, within a time determined by such representatives to be reasonable, to appear and present reasons why it should not be declared in default.

(b) If the German Government does not present reasons satisfactory to the representatives of the Signatory Governments, such representatives may declare the German Government in default and in that event shall inform the German Government in writing of their decision. Such representatives shall then make recommendations as to the necessary and appropriate measures to be applied.

(c) Should the representatives of the Signatory Governments decide that the German Government is taking or permitting action which, if permitted to continue, might frustrate the proper exercise of the functions of the Authority, and that it is expedient that such action should be suspended pending further investigation by the Authority and the formulation of a decision or direction, such representatives may serve preliminary notice in writing upon the German Government that such action shall be suspended, with immediate effect for such a period as may seem appropriate, pending further consideration by the Authority.

(d) The German Government may, within fifteen days of the service of the preliminary notice in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (c) of this Article, request that the notice be set aside, and in that event shall be afforded a hearing at such time and place as may be determined by the representatives of the Signatory Governments. If the German Government fails to comply with the preliminary notice after— (i) a hearing has been held and such representatives have notified that Government that their decision has been maintained;

(ii) having failed to appear for a hearing at the time and place established; or

(iii) fifteen days have elapsed and no request that the notice be set aside has been made, such representatives may without further formality declare the German Government in default, and in that event shall inform that Government in writing of their decision. Such representatives shall then make recommendations as to the necessary measures to be applied.

(e) All decisions under this Article shall be reached by a majority of the votes allocated to the representatives of the Signatory Governments.

(f) During the Control Period, the recommendations provided for in paragraphs (b) and (d) of this Article shall be made to the Occupation Authorities.

(g) After the end of the Control Period, the recommendations provided for in paragraphs (h) and (d) of this Article will be made to the Signatory Governments. The measures recommended will be applied in accordance with the relevant provisions of the peace settlement or any international agreement to which the Signatory Governments are party.

Part VII. General Provisions

article 25

The Authority may establish such formal or informal relationship with the United Nations and its subsidiary bodies, and with the Specialised Agencies and with other inter-governmental bodies, as may facilitate the performance of its functions.

article 26

The powers of the Authority will not be exercised for the purpose of protecting the commercial or competitive interests of any country, nor for the purpose of preventing peaceful technological development or increased efficiency.

article 27

(a) One year after entering upon its functions and thereafter at annual intervals the Authority shall make a written report to the members on every aspect of its work. After the receipt by the members of such annual report there shall be held, unless all the Signatory Governments decide otherwise, a meeting of special representatives of the members for the purpose of reviewing the report and the work of the Authority.

(b) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this Article, any two or more members of the Authority which, at any time, believe that the course of action or the policies initiated by the Authority are inconsistent with the purposes of the present Agreement, may give notice in writing to this effect to all other members of the Authority specifying the particulars which they consider to constitute such inconsistency. Upon receipt of such notice, the members shall consult together with respect to the complaint and shall take such action as may be required in the circumstances to accomplish a solution of the matter, including, where appropriate, such arbitration or judicial settlement as may be agreed by such members.

(c) A notice of complaint with respect to a course of action or policies initiated by the Authority for reasons of disarmament, demilitarisation or denazification may only be given when supported by two members of the Authority other than Germany.

(d) Nothing in this Article shall be construed to affect the provisions of Articles 13 or 33 of the present Agreement.

Part VIII. Privileges and Immunities

article 28

(a) The Authority and its assets, income and other property shall enjoy in Germany the same privileges, immunities and facilities as are provided for the United Nations by the General Convention on Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations.

(b) During the Control Period, or until such earlier time as may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers, the representatives of the Signatory Governments and their staffs and members of the staff of the Authority other than German nationals, and the dependents of such persons, shall enjoy in Germany the same privileges and immunities as are enjoyed by the official personnel of the Occupation Authorities. Thereafter all such persons shall enjoy in Germany the same privileges and immunities as are provided for persons of comparable status by the General Convention on Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations.

(c) German nationals on the staff of the Authority shall be immune from legal process in respect of words spoken or written and all acts performed by them in their official capacity.

Part IX. Definitions

article 29

For the purposes of the present Agreement— (i) the expression “Ruhr” means the areas, as presently constituted, in Land North Rhine-Westphalia, listed in the Annex to this Agreement;

(ii) the expression “Signatory Governments” means the Governments named in the last paragraph of the preamble;

(iii) the expression “Occupying Powers” means the Government of France, the Government of the United Kingdom and the Government of the United States;

(iv) the expression “Occupation Authorities” means the Occupying Powers’ representatives in Germany who are exercising responsibility for the Occupation of Germany on behalf of their Governments;

(v) the expressions “Occupying Powers concerned” and “Occupation Authorities concerned” mean those Occupying Powers or Occupation Authorities which share the responsibility for the economic administration of that part of Germany which includes the Ruhr;

(vi) the expression “Control Period” means the period during which supreme authority is vested in the Occupying Powers;

(vii) the expression “German Government” means any federal government, including a provisional federal government, in Germany which is approved by the Occupying Powers;

(viii) the expression “coal” means hard coal, soft coal, “Pechkohle” and lignite in all their forms, and agglomerates of these products;

(ix) the expression “coke” means solid fuels derived from distillation of coal, including semi-coke or other special cokes in whatever form;

(x) the expression “steel” means all hot and cold finished rolled or drawn steel products, including tubes, with or without steel mill extras, all finished steel forgings and finished steel castings, machined or unmachined, in carbon and alloy grades, ingots, semi-finished steel products, ferroalloys and pig-iron of any type;

(xi) the expressions “finished steel” and “semi-finished steel” include all forms of steel mentioned in the preceding definition except ingots, ferro-alloys and pig-iron.

Part X. Final Clauses

article 30

The present Agreement shall come into force as soon as it has been signed on behalf of the Government of Belgium, the Government of France, the Government of Luxembourg, the Government of the Netherlands, the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of the United States of America.

article 31

As soon as a German Government has been established, it may accede to the present Agreement by executing an instrument containing such undertakings with respect to the assumption of the responsibilities of the German Government under the Agreement and such other provisions as may be agreed by the Signatory Governments.

article 32

The present Agreement shall, subject to the provisions of Article 33, continue in force until the coming into effect of a peace settlement for Germany and thereafter as provided in such peace settlement.

article 33

The present Agreement may be amended by the agreement of all the Signatory Governments on the recommendation of the Authority. As long as the special relation of the Occupying Powers towards Germany continues, the present Agreement may be terminated by those Powers subject to prior consultation with the other Signatory Governments. Thereafter it may be terminated by the agreement of all the Signatory Governments.

article 34

The English and French texts of the present Agreement are authentic.

article 35

The original of the present Agreement shall be deposited with the Government of the United Kingdom, which shall transmit certified copies thereof to each of the Governments on behalf of which it is signed, and it shall be registered with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

Done at _______this __________day __________

In witness hereof the undersigned representatives, duly authorised by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement on the dates appearing opposite their signature.

Annex

In Regierungsbezirk Düsseldorf: (1) Landkreis Dinslaken.

(2) Landkreis Dusseldprf–Mettmann.

(3) Landkreis Essen.

(4) Landkreis Geldern.

(5) Landkreis. Krefeld–Urdingen.

(6) Landkreis Moers.

(7) Landkreis Rees.

(8) Stadtkreis Düsseldorf.

(9) Stadtkreis Duisburg–Hamborn.

(10) Stadtkreis Mülheim.

(11) Stadtkreis Neuss.

(12) Stadtkreis Oberhausen.

(13) Stadtkreis Remscheid.

(14) Stadtkreis Solingen.

(15) Stadtkreis Wuppertal.

In Regierungsbezirk Minister: (1) Landkreis Beckum.

(2) Landkreis Lüdinghausen.

(3) Landkreis Recklinghausen.

(4) Stadtkreis Bottrop.

(5) Stadtkreis Gelsenkirchen.

(6) Stadtkreis Gladbeck.

(7) Stadtkreis Recklinghausen.

In Regierungsbezirk Arnsberg: (1) Landkreis Ennepe–Ruhrkreis.

(2) Landkreis Iserlohn.

(3) Landkreis Unna.

(4) Stadtkreis Bochum.

(5) Stadtkreis Castrop–Rauxel.

(6) Stadtkreis Dortmund.

(7) Stadtkreis Hagen.

(8) Stadtkreis Hamm.

(9) Stadtkreis Herne.

(10) Stadtkreis Iserlohn.

(11) Stadtkreis Lünen.

(12) Stadtkreis Wanne–Eickel.

(13) Stadtkreis Wattenscheid.

(14) Stadtkreis Witten.

1 The source text was transmitted to the Department of State as enclosure 1 to despatch 2537, December 29 from London, not printed. The text of this Draft Agreement was contained in Department of State Press Release No. 1028, December 28, 1948 for release at noon, December 28. As previously agreed by the participants in the London Conference on the Ruhr, the text of this Draft Agreement was simultaneously released to the press in London and Paris. Regarding the final steps leading to the release of this Draft, see the editorial note, p. 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369].

Agreed Minutes of the London Conference on the Ruhr Regarding the Draft Agreement for the Establishment of an International Authority for the Ruhr CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 126: File—Misc Materials

[Document 372]

Agreed Minutes of the London Conference on the Ruhr Regarding the Draft Agreement for the Establishment of an International Authority for the Ruhr 1

secret [London, undated.]

1. With respect to Article 13, it is agreed that the Executive Secretary and the other principal officials of the Secretariat, and in particular the staff members who occupy supervisory positions in connection with the verification of information provided for in Article 17 should be nationals of the Signatory Governments, if competent persons of those nationalities are available, and that such positions shall not be filled by German nationals. It is further agreed that the Executive Secretary will not appoint a national of one of the Signatory Governments to a position [other than a minor position],2 on the staff if objection is raised by the representative of that Government.

2. It is agreed that arrangements may be made under Article 13 to provide for the Authority’s necessary liaison with and obtaining on a continuous basis necessary information from the principal German organisations responsible for production, division and distribution of Ruhr coal, coke and steel.

3. In connection with Article 14(c), the conference took note of a United States proposal circulated as Conference Document RC/18,3 and agreed that it represented the procedure contemplated by all the delegations.
It is agreed that the Economic Cooperation Agreements entered into between the United States and the United Kingdom and French Occupied Areas in Germany are not in any way amended by the present Agreement, and that nothing in the present Agreement shall prevent the Bizonal or Trizonal Area, through the appropriate authorities, or the German Government from entering into subsequent bilateral agreements in accordance with the provisions of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1948.

5. It is understood that nothing in the present Agreement shall affect the obligations of the signatories of the Convention for European Economic Cooperation under that Convention.

6. It is agreed that any powers that may be transferred to the Authority under paragraph (a) of Article 18 shall not be used by the Authority to modify any action taken with respect to patterns of ownership or of trade or marketing agreements established by, or with the approval of the Occupation Authorities prior to such transfer, nor shall Article 18 be held to prejudge the final determination of ownership adopted with respect to the coal, coke and steel industries of the Ruhr.

7. It is agreed that there shall be established an adequate and objective procedure for identifying the persons affected by Article 18(a) (ii) and that such procedure will be determined in the light of experience of this problem by the Occupying Powers.

8. Nothing in Article 19 shall oblige the Occupation Authorities to retain in full the powers which are at present vested in them.

9. The Signatory Governments undertake to seek the inclusion in the peace settlement of provision for the continued operation of a Ruhr Authority with powers appropriate to the conditions of the peace settlement.

10. It is agreed that the power of termination reserved to the Occupying Powers in Article 32 is to be exercised only in connection with an agreement relating to the whole of Germany now under Four-Power Occupation to which those Four Powers are party.

1 An earlier version of these Agreed Minutes was included as the concluding portion of document RC/21 Final, December 19, the recension of the Draft Agreement on the Ruhr approved by the London Conference on the Ruhr at its final plenary meeting, December 19. As indicated in the editorial note, p. 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369], conversations continued in London until December 24 among the representatives of the delegations to the Conference, land the Agreed Minutes were revised and amended. As agreed by the delegations to the Conference, these minutes were not released to the press at the time of the release of the text of the Draft Agreement, printed supra.

2 Brackets appear in the source text.

3  Ante, p. 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368].

C. Preparation of a draft occupation statute; the work of the Tripartite Committee on the Occupation Statute; the activities of the Committee on Allied ControlsC. Preparation of a draft occupation statute; the work of the Tripartite Committee on the Occupation Statute; the activities of the Committee on Allied Controls

[373] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, July 3, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–348: Telegram

[374] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Under Secretary of the Army (Draper)

[Berlin,] August 19, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[375] The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

[Washington,] August 29, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[376] The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

[Washington,] October 8, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[377] The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

[Washington,] October 9, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[378] Draft Occupation Statute for Germany, Prepared by the Office of Military Government for Germany (U.S.)

[Berlin,] 12 October 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables

[379] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Under Secretary of the Army (Draper)

[Berlin,] October 16, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[380] Note by the Secretariat of the Tripartite Committee on the Occupation Statute

[Frankfurt,] 25 October 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute

[381] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

Washington, October 29, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2848: Telegram

[382] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

[Berlin,] November 1, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[383] The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

[Washington,] November 3, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[384] Editorial Note

[385] Report by the Committee on Allied Controls to the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany

[Frankfurt ?] 12 November 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1748

[386] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

[Berlin,] 18 November 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2648: Telegram

[387] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

Washington, December 10, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1048: Telegram

[388] Resolution of the Parliamentary Council

[Bonn, December 12, 1948.]

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1748

[389] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 13, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1348: Telegram

[390] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

[Berlin,] December 18, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[391] Minutes of a Meeting Between the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany and a Parliamentary Council Delegation, Headquarters Building, Frankfurt, December 16, 1948, 3:40 p. m.

[Frankfurt,] 20 December 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute

[392] Notes Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting Between the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany and a Parliamentary Council Delegation, Frankfurt, December 16, 1948

[Undated.]

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1748

[393] Minutes of a Meeting Between the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany and a Parliamentary Council Delegation, Headquarters Building, Frankfurt, December 17, 1948, 5:30 p. m.

[Frankfurt,] 20 December 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute

[394] Report of the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany to the Governments of France, the United States, and the United Kingdom

[Frankfurt,] 17 December 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute

[395] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

Washington, December 17, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1348: Telegram

[396] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson)

Berlin, December 18, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1848

[397] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, December 27, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1548: Telegram

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–348: Telegram

[Document 373]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, July 3, 1948—4 p. m.

1592. Personal for Saltzman from Wisner.1 Subject is occupation statute. Following analysis and recommendations based upon extensive conversation with Clay, Murphy, Draper, and Litchfield.

It is envisaged that preparation and adoption occupation statute will take place in series of steps as follows: (a) CAD, OMGUS, now in process of preparing draft which will not be ready for submission Washington until expiration three or four weeks from now. Reactions and views German as well as preliminary discussions with British and French will be taken into consideration and appropriately reflected in OMGUS draft.

(b) As soon as possible State and Army should submit by way of suggestion and recommendation any broad principles confirming or enlarging upon principles embodied London agreement for guidance of OMGUS in preparation of draft.

(c) As soon as possible after submission to Washington of complete OMGUS draft, State and Army should forward such specific instructions as they may deem advisable regarding form and content of statute and also for guidance OMGUS in final negotiations with British and French.

(d) Following completion OMGUS negotiations with British and French, final form occupation statute will be submitted to three governments for approval pursuant London agreement and understandings arrived at there.

Regarding (a) above, General Clay considers it inadvisable submit Washington tentative and preliminary drafts for reason that they would represent OMGUS working level views only and would be without benefit German, British and French reactions or of level OMGUS thinking. Such drafts would provoke unnecessary and inconclusive discussions between Washington and Berlin.

Murphy and I consider above-outlined procedure sound and recommend Department approve this approach.

Murphy

1  Wisner was in Germany on a visit in connection with the future assumption of civilian responsibilities in occupied Germany by the Department of State from the Department of the Army.

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Under Secretary of the Army (Draper) CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[Document 374]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Under Secretary of the Army (Draper)1

secret
priority [Berlin,] August 19, 1948.

CC–5604. To Dept of Army personal for Under Secretary Draper from CINCEUR signed Clay. We have agreed with the British and French to start working party on preparation of occupation statute.2 We expect this to be a long process which will be influenced by the provisions of the German Constitution. In our view the occupation statute should be kept as short as possible if the German Constitution is fully satisfactory.

1. We propose a short preamble and then to list the broad objectives of the occupation to establish a just and lasting peace based on free political institutions; to prevent renascence of militarism and mis-use of economic resources for aggressive purposes; and to assist Germany’s integration with the Democratic Forces of a European Economic and Political System.

2. To accomplish objectives occupation statute will provide that German legislation must preserve the democratic freedoms under a federal system in which the Federal Government is limited to established constitutional powers; establish educational and public employment systems which guarantee equal opportunities; and provide for the renewal of political mandates by popular ballot. Trade Unions must be subject to principles of responsible leadership with financial and organizational autonomy for member unions within any federation. Non-Governmental organizations must not be permitted to exercise Governmental powers or to act in restriction of trade.

3. We will then state the German people may conduct their own affairs without interference, subject to the general objectives and specifically reserved powers. Otherwise, local, state, and federal Governments will be free to exercise legislative, executive and judicial powers. German courts will have full jurisdiction over German Nationals except for violation of International Law, Military Government Legislation and crimes against members of the occupation forces. In latter fields German courts will be given concurrent jurisdiction which can be exercised, however, only if Military Government approves. Military Government will reserve jurisdiction over members of occupation forces and displaced persons. German laws will come into force automatically within 21 days after their submission to Military Government unless disapproved by majority vote of Military Governors.

4. We will next list powers reserved to Military Government to include conduct of Germany’s foreign relations, exercise of minimum control over German foreign trade and exchange and over internal policies and measures which affect foreign trade; exercise of the controls necessary for reparations, decartelization, disarmament, demilitarization, scientific research and Ruhr authority; protect the prestige of occupation forces; to satisfy agreed requirements of occupying forces; to insure the observance of the federal constitution; to complete restitution and to continue responsible for displaced persons. The rights to veto conflicting legislation and the jurisdiction of Military Government Courts will be reserved.
It is proposed to keep these provisions in occupational statute in general terms if possible, as they will become less and less as and if the German Government accepts proper responsibility. Details will be covered in appropriate Military Government legislation.

5. Military Governors will also reserve right to observe, advise, and assist both Federal and State Governments in the democratization of political life, social relations, and education, but without a restriction of competence accorded to Land and federal Governments. The right to reassume full authority for security, because of failure to comply with the constitution, or defiance of reserved powers, will be reserved Military Government legislation will be revised and codified to continue only in the reserved fields as soon as it can be replaced by German legislation.

6. Military Governors will guarantee protection of individuals against unreasonable search, seizure and arrest, etc. Occupation costs will be limited as will powers of requisition. The occupation statute will be binding upon Military Government and all unilateral, bilateral or trilateral Military Government actions conform therewith.

7. I propose to sponsor a high court composed of selected judicial representatives from each of the three occupying powers and of two eminent German jurists to which appeals could be taken by the established German Government against decisions of Military Governors which Germans believe in conflict with the occupation statute with the majority decision of this court binding upon Military Governors. I recognize this provision to be a substantial abnegation of authority. However, I believe it only fair that there should be an independent judicial review to prevent arbitrary decisions and to give the German Government the confidence necessary to carry out its obligations under the occupation statute. It seems to me that the time has come to establish a real check on the powers of the Military Governors. I rather expect that this particular provision may not be liked by some of our colleagues. To my mind it is essential to insure the success of our program.

8. I realize that we have given you a rather broad outline. Nevertheless, in view of protracted negotiations (particularly in the absence of the German Constitution) it seems inadvisable to go into further detail at this moment. Therefore, US representatives of the working party are to be instructed in these general terms except as modified by your views and/or instructions.

We would appreciate your suggestions now and from time to time. Also, we particularly desire to receive as soon as possible any binding instructions so that our representatives may be governed accordingly and so that the final draft to be submitted to Government will not contain anything contrary to basic US policy.

[ Clay ]

1 The text of this message was transmitted to the Department of State by Ambassador Murphy in telegram 2121, August 23, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2348).

2 In mid-August the United States, United Kingdom, and French Military Governors for Germany agreed to establish a Tripartite Committee on the Occupation Statute. The Committee consisted of Edward Litchfield (U.S.), R. A. Chaput de Saintonge (U.K.), and Maurice Sabatier (France).

The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[Document 375]

The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

secret
priority [Washington,] August 29, 1948.

WX–88372. Part 1. Reur CC–5604, 19 Aug.1 We agree with principle that Occupation Statute should be as short as possible and that reserved powers should be as few as possible. Part 2 this cable contains State–Army agreed comments on Occupation Statute which were prepared prior to receipt urad. After examination urads it is still felt views will be useful to you and therefore they have not been changed. Further comments will be forwarded, but this message contains preliminary State–Army observations direct response points urad.

Re para 1, agree to first and second purposes occupation but prefer ours stated in para 1 (C) part 2 to your third. Feel your third may be misinterpreted to indicate proposal for participation in European Union, which of course cannot be determined now. Furthermore, purpose expressed in our 1 (C) refers to contribution to ERP which is desirable.

Re para 2, do not consider this appropriate in Occupation Statute. Subject matter contained in this para is appropriate for consideration in determination of whether constitutions submitted to Mil Governors are consistent with principles contained in annexes F and H of London Agreement.2

Re para 4. Attention invited to omission of reserve power to insure security of occupation forces. We assume reservation on disarmament covers necessary control over level of industry, such as steel limitation. Also feel reserve power necessary to ensure enforcement of Occupation Statute. Although latter not referred to in letter of advice,3 it is thought to be implicit therein. Realize security of forces covered in power to declare emergency, but believe it should also be a reserved power in order that action may be taken in situations not requiring declaration of emergency. Query whether word “restitution” intended to cover all restitution or only external restitution. Query meaning of “conflicting legislation.” Is it intended to limit veto power to legislation which conflicts with Occupation Statute or Control Council and MG legislation?

Re last sentence para 6, Para 13 of part 2 intended to reserve to Mil Governors right to amend or modify statute in order further to extend powers to German authorities and in order to revise or revoke statute in the event of subsequent quadripartite agreement on a unified Germany. Realize that former may be taken care of by general language in statute as indicated your para 4 but latter is point that must be reserved in order not to preclude ultimate unification. Without such reservation, Soviets could contend that Western Powers did not intend unification and had put themselves in such position that they could not agree to it.

Your para 7 being considered. You will realize this proposal involves very fundamental issues and cannot be commented upon without opportunity for full consideration. Suggest you avoid taking any position on this proposal pending decision here.

Part 2. This message contains preliminary State and Army views on content of Occupation Statute and is forwarded for your consideration in preparing draft of statute itself. Points are arranged in general sequence of London letter of advice. Many of the points below are discussed in considerable detail and may be inappropriate to include in any such detail in the Occupation Statute language itself. They are given you for consideration and comment. For example it may be impracticable and undesirable to define jurisdiction of courts as given under para 7 (a) below in any such detail and it may be possible to cover by general language. In the same way transport communication and requisitions as covered under para 7b and 7c may be adequately covered under some such phrase as “provision for needs of occupation forces”. The same may apply to para 9 where general language may adequately cover the several situations requiring declaration of emergency. In commenting please keep in mind the conflicting requirement that Occupation Statute should be brief and at the same time should define as closely as possible the reserved powers in order to avoid conflicts over interpretation, as well as a possible German reaction that more general reserved powers actually mean much broader and greater reserved powers.

1. Statute will presumably be in form of proclamation by Mil Governors. Preamble might state statute intended to define scope of powers of Mil Governors. Mil Governors will reserve to themselves those powers which are necessary to achieve basic purposes of occupation; subject thereto, German authorities will exercise legislative, executive, and judicial power. Purpose of occupation should be stated to include: a. Maintain public order and safety;

b. Prevent rearmament and resurgence of militarism;

c. Enable German people to reconstruct their life on Democratic basis, to make maximum contribution to German and European economic recovery, and in due course to participate in the community of free peoples.

2. In connection with German powers suggest avoid term “grant” as used in letter of advice, thus evading abstract issue as to source of authority of new German administration. However, we should like your comments re possible statement source of authority. This authority might be considered to be derived either directly from German people, or from occupying powers by grant to German people. While point perhaps need not be expressed in Occupation Statute, we realize it may be important to Germans and might have effect on their sense of responsibility for actions under new administration, particularly since they stated in Coblenz proposals that different consequences would follow from these 2 political theories.

3. Statute should make clear that enactments of Control Council and of separate Mil Governors continue in effect until modified or repealed by Mil Governors. Your views desired whether German authorities should be allowed to modify or repeal zonal MG enactments in their fields of responsibility subject to MG veto or whether it would be preferable to authorize German authorities to request Mil Governors to repeal or modify.

4. Conduct or direction of foreign relations is reserved to Mil Governors, and it is contemplated that diplomatic matters will be handled directly by Mil Government, at least for time being. However, Germans should be authorized to establish office to conduct consular activities, to issue travel documents, and to participate in work of appropriate international agencies and negotiation of appropriate international agreements. All such activities would be subject to direction or control of Mil Governors. Invite particular attention to aspects of travel control bearing upon emigration of scientists and technicians in view of allocation agreements.

5. Para 1 (b) of letter of advice specified “minimum control” over foreign trade and related internal policies. Essential minimize and clearly define such controls, but before transmitting our proposals would appreciate receiving your views.

6. In fields specified in para 1 (c) of letter of advice, and in additional fields of external restitution, treatment of DPs, and protection of foreign-owned property from discriminatory treatment, all powers of direct action should be reserved to Mil Governors, and German authorities will act only in accordance with directives issued to them. Further, all powers of direct action relating to custody and possible future clemency, with respect to major Nazi war criminals confined under sentences adjudged by the Nuremberg Mil Tribunals and other tribunals authorized or constituted under Control Council Law number 10, viz British and French Zonal Courts, if any, should be reserved to the Mil Governors jointly. Direct action with respect to minor, or conventional, war criminals should be reserved to the mil authorities of each of the occupying powers under whose jurisdiction such minor war criminals were tried and convicted. In order to make certain that policies and actions of Mil Governors in all reserved fields will not be obstructed, provision should be made for the removal from German to Occupation Courts of cases involving substantial Allied interests in these fields. While discretion to remove such cases would be for Mil Governors rather than Germans, it should be exercised as sparingly as possible, in order not to infringe unduly on independence of German judicial system. Statute should indicate that further powers within these fields may be extended to the German authorities from time to time.

7. This section deals with security and immunities of occupation forces and other matters found in para 1 (d) of letter of advice. a. Jurisdiction of Occupation Courts should be precisely defined, even if this is done at some length. While following does not cover subject fully, we consider that members of occupying powers and of occupation administration, their families, and non-German personnel accompanying forces or accredited to them, should have following immunities: (1). From criminal jurisdiction of German courts;

(2). From civil jurisdiction of German courts, except when authorized by Mil Governors;

(3). From arrest by German police, except when apprehended in act threatening or causing injury to persons or property and occupation police are not available;

(4). From search of homes or offices by German police;

(5). From appearance as witnesses before German courts, except with consent of Mil Governors;

(6). From German customs, foreign exchange regulations, and direct taxation (including income taxes).

Persons with these immunities would be subject to jurisdiction of occupation courts, and such courts would also have exclusive jurisdiction over all persons charged with offenses against persons, property, or security of occupation forces. Provision may be made for mixed tribunals in civil cases where both occupation personnel and Germans are parties. DPs should be immune from jurisdiction of German criminal courts. DPs while physically within camps should be immune from jurisdiction of German police. Consideration should be given to customs duty exemptions for DPs.

b. Transport and communications. Occupation authorities should reserve right maintain and operate all forms of transport, communications, and facilities, including such postal systems and press, as they may require. They should also reserve right to priority use of German radio and telecommunications systems, roads, railways, and waterways.

c. Requisition. Occupation authorities should reserve right to requisition supplies, services, property, and facilities for accomplishment of purposes of occupation. Mil Governors should periodically estimate occupation costs, and both in fixing amount of such costs and in exercising right of requisition, they should take into consideration German resources and budgets of Federal and Laender administrations.

d. German employees. Under Paperclip 4 contracts US obligated to afford certain protection to technicians, their families, and property. Please consider necessity for unimpeded fulfillment of these obligations and for protection of indigenous employees US Forces from discrimination or pressure.

8. Observance of constitutions. Statute should make it clear that Mil Governors maintain at all times right to take any direct action necessary to ensure observance of German constitutions and Occupation Statute. Desirable that Germans should understand, however, that we expect to enforce their constitutions only when they are unable or unwilling to do so.

9. Emergency resumption of powers. Mil Governors may in event of emergency threatening security or if necessary to secure compliance with constitutions or statute issue proclamation resuming full authority over all or part of occupied area. Statute should set out precise conditions under which Mil Governors may issue such a proclamation. The following conditions are suggested: a. Threat to security of Germany from outside Germany:

b. Threat to security or authority of German Federal or Laender administrations from inside, where Mil Governors consider that German authorities are unable to deal adequately with such threat;

c. Threat to security of the occupation forces from inside or outside Germany;

d. Substantial failure of German authorities to comply with provisions of the Occupation Statute, which failure may not be corrected as otherwise provided in statute;

e. Substantial failure of German authorities to act within scope of or to take necessary action for enforcement of Federal or State constitutions which failure may not be corrected as otherwise provided in the statute.

10. Reference para 3 letter of advice, proposed amendments to German constitutions must receive written approval of Mil Governors before ratification. All other laws and regulations of both Federal and Laender administrations shall be communicated to Mil Governors and shall become effective 21 days thereafter, unless disapproved by Mil Governors within that period.

Statute should provide that German authorities will comply with all decisions and directions of Mil Governors in fields of power reserved to latter. In order to make these decisions and directions effective, it should be recognized that Mil Governors also have rights to require furnishing of information by German officials; to inspect official records and correspondence; to issue directives binding upon individual Germans; and to enforce decisions by use of occupation personnel. It is not contemplated that such powers would be exercised except in cases of genuine need, but we feel these powers should be retained, and that it would not be satisfactory to confine issuance of directives by Mil Governors in all cases to highest German regional authorities, as proposed by Ministers-President at Coblenz. Statute should contain provisions ensuring observance of civil rights and liberties by occupation authorities in all dealings with Germans. Request your views on providing for exceptions in the event this infringes on security of occupation forces. Rights and liberties to be protected under Occupation Statute would, presumably be those protected under German constitutions.

11. Statute should make it clear that German authorities will be autonomous in fields not reserved to Mil Governors. However, latter will exercise a special responsibility to observe, advise, and assist Federal and Laender administrations in regard to democratization of political life, social relations, and education.

12. Since US favors formation of consolidated Tripartite authority, we think it would be desirable, if possible, to announce formation of such authority at time statute is proclaimed. MG Board exercising uniform authority in all fields except administration of justice, could be established either in statute or in accompanying announcement. It is strongly felt that all action taken by the 3 Mil Governors pursuant to statute should be by majority vote. If board is established in statute, provisions should be sufficiently general so that structure and operations of board could be modified later without amending statute itself.

13. Statute might provide that its interpretation will be by Mil Governors, and that it is subject to amendment or modification by future agreement among occupying powers. This should be phrased so as to permit inclusion of USSR.

14. While all rights of occupation authorities should be clearly expressed, we think it important that general tone and language of statute should not be unduly restrictive and should not imply that Mil Governors are still to exercise such sweeping powers that little authority is accorded to Germans.

Appreciate your comments on above.

1  Supra.

2 For Annexes F and H, see pp. 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205] and 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155].

3 The reference here is to London Conference document TRI/17 (Final), May 19, 1948, “Letter of Advice to Military Governors Regarding Powers of Civil and Military Governments”, p. 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], included as Annex I to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, June 1, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

4 Code name for the exploitation of selected German and Austrian scientists and technicians in the United States by American military authorities following World War II. For documentation on the program, see Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. v, pp. 682–684, 686–687, 689–691, 694–695.

The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[Document 376]

The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

[Extract]

top secret
priority [Washington,] October 8, 1948.

WX–90479. From Dept of Army from CSCAD to CINCEUR personal. Reurad Sept CC–6123.1 Fol are State–Army comments on urad.

Gen comments: 1. First whereas clause points to supreme auth to be exercised by each Commander in his own zone which is true today but will be changed when statute comes into effect. Believe draft should emphasize clearly in preamble the basic purposes of statute, namely (a) to have unified policy administered by integrated Tripartite Mil Govt auth for 3 Western Zones; (b) without relinquishing the supreme auth of the occupying powers, to limit its exercise and to further the assumption of greater initiative, responsibility and auth by the Germans; (c) to guarantee to the Germans the enjoyment of basic civil liberties; and (d) to delineate clearly the scope of auth to be exercised by the occupying powers and by the German adm.

2. Language of draft appears in part too vague for a statute designed to define and to delineate powers of Mil Govt and the Germans and to avoid conflict and difficulties of interpretation. Precision in legislative drafting seems essential if court is given jurisdiction to decide disputes based on statute.

Specific comments:

[Here follow detailed comments on individual articles together with proposed alternative or additional language. The changes, deletions, and additions set forth in this message and subsequently accepted by OMGUS are included, with appropriate identification, in the Revised Draft Occupation Statute prepared by OMGUS, October 12, page 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378].]

1 The message under reference, dated (September 30, not printed, set forth the text of the draft Occupation Statute prepared by OMGUS. All the provisions of that draft are included in the Revised Draft Statute, October 12, p. 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378].

The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[Document 377]

The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

top secret
priority [Washington,] October 9, 1948.

WX–90559. From Dept of the Army from CSCAD to CINCEUR personal for Clay. Reurad Sept CC–61231 ourad Oct WX–90479.2

1. This supplements ourad as indicated in Para 16 ourad.

2. (a) Re Paras 17 and 18 urad. Some apprehension here that cases coming before court which require interpretation of statute may raise questions of policy as well as legal issues. If the court should develop tendency to base decisions even partially on considerations of policy it would infringe on legitimate functions of Govts of Occupying Powers. For this reason believe that a clarification of courts jurisdiction and procedure is desirable. Govts of Occupying Powers should retain ultimate auth to reverse court by inter-governmental decisions taken jointly to extent indicated below. (b) Concur in the establishment of a High Appeals Court having auth to interpret statute. Decisions would be binding on the Mil Governors except that on recommendation of the 3 Mil Governors a particular case could be reviewed by the Govts of the 3 Occupying Powers which would have power by joint action to sustain, reverse or modify the judgment of the court.

(c) In your opinion should the Court have jurisdiction also to entertain appeals by individuals from decisions of other Courts in cases where it is alleged that MG or its agencies have violated basic civil liberties in contravention of this statute under appropriate procedure limiting cases to those involving fundamental issues we are considering this question here but have reached no conclusion.

(d) It is felt that the Court should be a larger body than indicated urad. Believe it should be composed of a total of either 8 members with 2 members each appointed by the US, UK, French and German Govts or a total of 9 members with 2 members appointed by each of the Govts of the 3 Occupying Powers and 3 Members appointed by the German Govt. It is assumed that all members of the Court will be judicially independent, appointed for a stated term by the respective Govt and would not be removable except for cause.

1 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram WX–90479, October 8, supra.

2  Supra.

Draft Occupation Statute for Germany, Prepared by the Office of Military Government for Germany (U.S.) CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables

[Document 378]

Draft Occupation Statute for Germany, Prepared by the Office of Military Government for Germany (U.S.)1

secret [Berlin,] 12 October 1948.

Proclamation

To the people of the British, French and US Zones of Germany:

Whereas, the Military Governors and Commanders in Chief of the British, French, sand US Zones of Occupation, acting on the instructions of their respective governments, are exercising supreme authority, each in his own zone of occupation, and

Whereas, the Military Governors and Commanders in Chief of the British, French and United States zones have agreed, that although a peace treaty has not yet been signed between the United Nations and Germany (TRI), pending quadripartite agreement on the unification of Germany, it is expedient for the better administration of their zones to establish provisionally a constitutional German government (TRI), and

Whereas, acting on instructions of their respective Governments, they have agreed to define on the basis of the present temporary organization of Germany a common policy as to their basic relations and with the German people in their Zones, to provide a unified administration of that policy (W), and

Whereas, the basic purposes of the occupation are to insure a just and lasting peace based on free political institutions, a stable society and a productive economy maximum German contribution to German and European economic recovery (W); to prevent the renaissance resurrection (TRI) of national socialism, militarism or aggressive purposes, the growth of any form of totalitarianism, or the misuse of German resources for any such purposes; and to assist Germany’s integration with the peace-loving democratic forces of Europe and of the world.

We, General Brian Hubert Robertson, Military Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the British Zone of Germany; General Pierre Koenig, Military Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the French Zone of Germany; General Lucius D. Clay, Military Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the United States Zone of Germany, do hereby jointly proclaim as follows:

article i

Powers of the Federal Government and of the Governments of the participating Laender .

1. The federal government and the governments of the participating German Laender shall exercise full legislative, administrative and judicial powers over the territory and persons within their jurisdiction (TRI) in accordance with the provisions of the basic law (provisional constitution) and their respective constitutions, subject only to the limitations imposed by this statute and by legislation of the occupying powers not inconsistent herewith. (TRI). Legislation of the Occupying Authorities remains in force. The legislative texts and regulations pertaining thereto in this category which are considered to be incompatible with this Statute will be expressly abrogated. A list of such texts will be issued from time to time by the Military Governors, acting in accordance with their legislative and administrative powers. (TRI)

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Statute, the laws and regulations of those governments will come into force automatically within 21 days of their official receipt by the appropriate occupation authorities unless, because they are in conflict with the provisions of this Statute or its implemented legislation, they are disapproved by the Military Governors. However, Land Constitutions (W), amendments to Land or federal constitutions and legislation in the fields outlined in Article II, para 4 of this statute which the Military Governors have authorized German governments to enact, will require prior written (W) approval of the Military Governors.

3. German courts shall exercise jurisdiction in all cases except those reserved to courts of the occupying authorities by para 7 hereof. The Military Governors may give German courts jurisdiction in any of the cases enumerated in para 7, except cases referred to in Article II, para 7A(1)a (W).

4. The Military Governors will guarantee that all agencies of the Occupation observe the rights of all persons under their jurisdiction to be protected against unreasonable search, seizure and arrest; to be admitted to bail as circumstances warrant; to communicate with relatives; to be represented by counsel, and to have a prompt and fair trial. (O&W)

article ii

Powers Reserved to the Occupying Authorities

5. In order to insure the fulfillment of the basic purposes of the occupation, the Military Governors reserve to themselves the powers to: A. Conduct or direct Germany’s foreign relations until such time as she may be permitted unrestricted foreign relations; (London exact)

B. Exercise the minimum control over German foreign trade and foreign exchange (and over internal policies and measures which could adversely affect them), necessary to ensure respect for obligations entered into by the occupying powers in regard to Germany and the proper use of funds made available to Germany;

C. Exercise such controls as have been or may be (L&W) agreed upon by the occupying powers to include, for example, the international authority for the Ruhr, reparations, restitutions, disarmament, decartelization, and certain aspects of scientific research.

D. Protect the prestige and ensure the security and guarantee the immunity from German governmental processes of the Occupying Forces and authorities and the satisfaction of their requirements within defined limits agreed upon between the Military Governors, conduct operations deemed essential to the national security of their respective countries (W&OMGUS/Legal);

E. Ensure the observance of this statute and of the Federal and State constitutions which they have approved. The Military Governors will require German legislation, administration, judicial processes and governmental procedures to conform to the provisions of the basic law (Provisional Constitution). (Reorganized as per Washington’s proposal)

F. Protect, maintain, insure non-discrimination against restitute property belonging to other governments or their nationals; protect and restitute property of victims of Nazi persecution;

G. Supervise the assimilation of expellees and (TRI) exercise control over the return of refugees, and over the protection, maintenance resettlement and repatriation of displaced persons. (Reorganized as per Washington’s suggestions)

H. Ensure the control of all aspects of civil aviation and facilities therefor throughout the combined area (W).

6. The Military Governors will require German legislation, administration, judicial processes and governmental procedures to conform to the provisions of the basic law (provisional constitution). (included in para 5 E as per Washington’s proposal)

7. The Military Governors reserve the right to set aside any decision of a German court which involves a challenge to the validity of or is in violation of any provision of this statute or implementing legislation of the occupying authorities. (deleted and changed as per Washington proposal; now included under para 7C)

6. The Military Governors reserve the right to control the disposition and care of all persons who have been or may be sentenced in occupation courts and tribunals (W & O/Legal).

7. Courts of the occupying authorities shall exercise jurisdiction in the following cases: A. Criminal Cases. (1) Offenses committed by: (a) Members of, or non-Germans serving with, accredited to, or in Germany under sponsorship of the occupation forces or authorities, or dependents of such persons;

(b) Nationals of an occupying power or their dependents;

(c) Displaced persons.

(2) Offenses under any law in force in their zones committed against the property or safety of any of the occupying powers or of the persons set forth in 7A (1).

(3) Offenses against legislation of the occupation authorities which the German authorities fail to prosecute.

B. Civil Cases. (1) Actions in which the persons enumerated in para 7A(1) (a) are parties defendant.

(2) Actions relating to monetary claims against any German, governmental unit, or legal entity existing under public law which arose before 8 May 1945.

C. Civil or criminal cases arising in a German court, which involves a substantial challenge to the validity of the occupation statute or to its effective operation. The Military Governors may direct removal of such cases to occupation courts either before or after judgment in a German court (W).

8. The occupying authorities shall resume their exercise of their full powers in an emergency threatening security, and if necessary to secure compliance with the Constitution, or the Constitutions of the participating Laender (TRI) or with the Occupation Statute.

9. The Military Governors reserve the right to require the dismissal of any German public servant who violates this Statute or takes any action which impairs the prestige or jeopardizes the security of the occupation forces. (deleted per Mr. Panuch’s suggestion and Washington’s proposal)

9. Before repealing former German (W) legislation found to be inconsistent with this Statute, the Military Governors will consult with appropriate German authorities.

10. The Occupying Authorities will have a special responsibility to observe, advise and assist the federal and state governments in regard to the democratization of political life, social relations and education. This shall not imply any restriction of the legislative, executive and judicial competence accorded to such governments in these matters.

11. The Military Governors will reserve the right to take action themselves, to direct such measures as may be required of German governments, to legislate in the fields reserved to the occupation authorities. In all other fields action of the occupation authorities will be limited to observation and advice.

12. All decisions and directives issued in accordance with the powers reserved under this statute will be transmitted to the head of the appropriate and competent level of German government.

article iii

Requirements of the Occupation

13. After consultation with federal and Land governments the Military Governors will establish annually a budget for total occupation costs, which will be provided the federal and Land governments in order to enable them to plan their budgets.

14. Except as qualified in para 8 above, requirements of the occupying forces will be limited by the following principles: A. No foodstuffs will be taken from the German economy except in exchange for comparable quantities procured from outside Germany.

B. Consumption of coal and electricity and gas will be limited to fixed annual percentages of the total amounts available in the occupied areas.

C. No new requisitions for furniture and other household goods will be issued. Any new requirements will be obtained from new production or from imports and not from individual owners.

D. The total number of Germans working for the occupying forces shall not exceed a figure agreed upon annually after consultation with the German authorities.

article iv

Appeal Procedure

15. Any German government may appeal from any action taken by occupying authorities on the ground that the action is in conflict with the provisions of this statute. Such appeals will be addressed to the appropriate occupying authorities according to such procedure as may be established, with ultimate appeal to a high court. However, no appeal hereunder will have the effect of suspending the action taken.

16. This court will be composed of 6 jurists appointed by the Military Governors and 2 jurists to be appointed by the Federal Government. Its decisions will not be subject to reversal by the Military Governors and will be binding on the occupation authorities and the German governments, Said decisions may, however, be appealed by the Military Governors to their respective governments (W).

article v

Amendments to this Statute

17. No amendment to this Statute will be made without prior notice to and consultation with the federal and Lamd governments concerned.

1 The source text was accompanied by a memorandum of October 12 from Edward Litchfield, Director of the Civil Administration Division, OMGUS, to General Clay, which read in part as follows: “1. Attached herewith (Tab–A) is a revised draft of the Occupation Statute. It contains all of the provisions of the draft which you forwarded to Washington on 29 September [see footnote 1 to message WX–90479, October 8]. Those provisions which it is now suggested be deleted have been entered and then crossed out. Those provisions which it is now proposed be inserted have been underlined.

“2. The underlined insertions include all of the Washington suggestions [see message WX–90479, October 8, to Berlin, p. 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]] which seem to us desirable. These additions are parenthetically shown as follows: (W). The additions also include proposals which will make our draft more nearly similar to the draft which the UK and French members of the Tripartite Committee have already tentatively agreed upon. These additions are also underlined but are identified as follows: (TRI); OMGUS proposals shown as (O); return to London text shown as (L).” The “London text” referred to in the Litchfield memorandum presumably is document TRI/17 Final, May 19, p. 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170].

The revised text printed here was transmitted to Washington by General Clay in his message CC–6348, October 16, infra.

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Under Secretary of the Army (Draper) CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[Document 379]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Under Secretary of the Army (Draper)1

[Extract]

secret
priority [Berlin,] October 16, 1948.

CC–6348. To Dept of the Army Personal for Undersecretary Draper from CINCEUR signed Clay. Reference your WX–904792 and WX–905593 and our CC–6123.4 Appreciate both content and promptness your suggestions regarding contents of occupation statute. I am setting forth several general observations regarding your comments, and will then set forth revised text which includes modifications to meet many of your proposals and other suggestions which are designed to facilitate French UK agreement. This test I propose to use as US position in further negotiations here.

Many of your proposals are questions of terminology and I am sure you will understand that we must be free here in our negotiations to make a substantial number of adjustments in text in order to comply with preferences of the French and British. Likewise we will of necessity be required to alter terminology in order to obtain the maximum German support for the statute. In this connection, may I remind you of the London instructions to obtain specific comments from the Ministers Presidents and from the Constituent Assembly regarding the occupation statute.

The organization of the statute is also a question which we must treat flexibly in order to meet the different views of the other allies. The French and the British have already agreed upon a substantially different organization and we may be required to make substantial changes in organization though not in content in order to speed agreement.

I also believe that as a master of general observation I should point out that we must adhere to the terms of London if we are to avoid opening the door to a tremendous number of French and British proposals which go beyond either the language or the intent of London. If there is to be agreement here it can only be if we adhere rigidly to London and if we limit the statute to the shortest possible length and set forth its provisions in general rather than detailed terms.

Text of revised draft follows:

[Here follows the revised text of the draft statute; see supra.]

[ Clay ]

1 In message W–91431, October 25, from Washington, not printed, the Department of the Army replied in part as follows: “Revised draft of Occupation Statute appears to cover most important items discussed in previous exchanges. Necessity of flexibility in negotiations with British and French fully appreciated and understand that it is highly improbable any US text will prove acceptable to British and French without change. Recognize that Tripartite negotiations may well result in substantial changes of substance as well as of form. Will therefore reserve further comment regarding phraseology pending development of Tripartite draft.”

(CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 121, File—Occupation Statute, Cables)

2 October 8, p. 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376].

3 October 9, p. 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377].

4 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to message WX–90479, October 8, p. 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376].

Note by the Secretariat of the Tripartite Committee on the Occupation Statute CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute

[Document 380]

Note by the Secretariat of the Tripartite Committee on the Occupation Statute

secret [Frankfurt,] 25 October 1948.

TOS/P(48)1

1. At their meeting held on 16 October 1948 in Frankfurt, the Military Governors instructed the Tripartite Committee on the Occupation Statute to submit prior to their next meeting a report setting forth specific disagreements encountered so far in the joint draft of the Occupation Statute.1

2. Pursuant to the above, there is circulated herewith for the consideration of the Military Governors at their meeting to be held on 30 October 1948: a. A list of “Disagreements on Matters of Principle in the Draft of the Occupation Statute dated 25 October 1948” (Annex “A” to TOS/P(48)1).

b. Draft joint text of the Occupation Statute (Annex “B” to TOS/P(48)1).

A. R. Forest

Moira Seale

M. Vinatier

Annex “A”

Document Prepared by the Tripartite Committee on the Occupation Statute
secret 25 October 1948.

Disagreements on Matters of Principle in the Draft of the Occupation Statute Dated 25 October 1948

Proclamation

Form of Statute (Preamble)

The French and US members are agreed that the Occupation Statute should be promulgated in the form of a joint proclamation.

The British member has so far reserved his position on this question as he prefers separate identical proclamations.

article i

No disagreements.

article ii

powers reserved to the occupation authorities

Expellees & Refugees.(para 2 (h))

The French and US members wish to reserve to the Occupation Authorities control of expellees and refugees while the UK member wishes to leave control over refugees and expellees to German jurisdiction.

Access to Information (para 2 (j))

The French and US members reserve to the Occupation Authorities the right to require reports and have access to all sources of information. The British member would require the German authorities to furnish only such information and statistics as may be needed by the Occupation Authorities in the exercise of their powers retained in Article II.

article iii

No disagreements.

article iv

No disagreements.

article v

judicial powers

Jurisdiction over nationals of Occupying Powers and their dependents (para 11 (iv))

The US and French members desire exclusion from German jurisdiction of all offenses committed by nationals of an Occupying Power or their dependents. The UK member opposes this exclusion.

Jurisdiction over Displaced Persons (para 11, (d) (v))

The US and French members desire the exclusion from German jurisdiction of all offenses committed by Displaced Persons. The UK member opposes this exclusion.

article vi

No disagreements.

article vii

requirements of the occupation

Control of Occupation Cost expenditures (para 18)

While the French and UK members desire to retain flexible control of occupation cost expenditures, the US position calls only for a more definite control and limitation.

The Fr and UK members also desire to ensure payments of mandatory expenditures which are not proper occupation costs.

Limitations of Occupation Requirements (para’s 19 & 20)

The French and UK members are not prepared to lay down in this Statute specific limitations with regard to personnel, utilities and furniture, which the US feel to be essential, although they believe that such limitations shall be taken into account when the Occupation Costs are drawn up.

article viii

interpretation of statute

Supreme Court (para 21 to 25)

The French position calls for a Council with advisory functions and not for a Supreme Court of appeal.

The US position calls for a Supreme Court to which any German Government may appeal actions taken by Occupation Authorities; its decisions to be binding on both the Military Governors and the German governments.

The UK position is the same as the US position but calls for a different composition of the Court.

article ix

No disagreements.

Annex “B”

Draft Joint Text of the Occupation Statute, Prepared by the Tripartite Committee on the Occupation Statute
secret 25 October 1948.

Proclamation

To the people of the British, French and United States Zones of Germany,

Whereas the Military Governors and Commanders-in-Chief of the British, French and United States Zones of Occupation, acting on the instructions of their respective Governments, are exercising supreme authority each in his own Zone of Occupation, and

Whereas the Military Governors and Commanders-in-Chief of the British, French and United States Zones have agreed that, in spite of continuance of the state of war between the United Nations and Germany, pending quadripartite agreement on the unification of Germany, it is expedient for the better administration of their Zones to establish provisionally a constitutional German government, and Whereas without prejudicing the provisions of the peace treaty, they have agreed to define on the basis of the present temporary organization of Germany a common policy as to their basic relations with the German people in their Zones, and

Whereas the basic purposes of the Occupation are a just and lasting peace based on the disarmament, demilitarization and democratization of Germany, and Germany’s integration with the peace-loving democratic forces of Europe and the world,

We, General Brian Hubert Robertson , Military Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the British Zone of Germany,

General Pierre Koenig , Military Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the French Zone of Germany,

General Lucius D. Clay , Military Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the United States Zone of Germany do hereby jointly proclaim as follows:*

article i

powers of the federal state and of the participating laender

1. The Federal state and the participating Laender shall exercise full legislative, executive and judicial powers in accordance with the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution) and with their respective constitutions subject only to the limitations imposed in this Statute.

article ii

powers reserved to the occupation authorities

2. The Occupation Authorities reserve to themselves those powers necessary to enable them to: (a) Conduct or direct Germany’s foreign relations, until such time as she may be permitted unrestricted foreign relations;

(b) Exercise the minimum control over German foreign trade and exchange and over internal policies and measures which could adversely affect them, necessary to ensure the respect for obligations entered into by the Occupation Authorities in regard to Germany; and the proper use of funds made available to Germany;

(c) Exercise such controls as have been or may be agreed upon by the Occupation Authorities, their Governments or agents acting on their behalf as for example, regarding the International Authority for the Ruhr, reparations, level of industry, decartelization, disarmament and demilitarization, and certain aspects of scientific research; control of frontiers and the movement of persons in and out of Germany;

(d) Protect the prestige, ensure the security and guarantee the immunity from German governmental processes, of the Occupation Forces and the satisfaction of their requirements within defined limits agreed upon between the Military Governors; conduct operations deemed essential to the national security of their respective countries;

(e) Ensure the observance of this Statute and of the Federal and Laender constitutions which they have approved;

(f) Protect and restitute property belonging to other Governments or their nationals; protect and restitute the property of victims of Nazi persecution;

(g) Prevent any act or practice, (including acts or practices by private organizations or individuals), which: (i) discriminates in any way whatsoever against nationals of other governments are compared with German nationals, or

(ii) is in any way inconsistent with the principles and objectives of the Havana Charter for an International Trade Organization and in particular with the principles of most favored nation and non-discrimination;

(h) [Supervise the assimilation of expellees and exercise control over the return of refugees, and over the protection, maintenance and repatriation and resettlement of displaced persons;]2 (Fr/US)

(h) [Implement any agreement between the Occupation Authorities and the International Refugee Organization;] (UK)

(i) Ensure the control of all aspects of civil aviation and facilities therefor throughout the combined area;

(j) [Require reports from German authorities and have access to all sources of information;] (Fr/US)

(j) [Require the Federal State and the participating Laender to furnish any information and statistics which they may need for the exercise of the powers retained in this paragraph.] (UK)

article iii

legislative powers

3. The Federal State and the participating Laender shall have full authority to legislate on all matters within their competence and, under the reservations made below, their laws and regulations will come into force automatically 21 days after their official receipt by the Occupation Authorities, unless they have been disapproved by the Military Governors. The Military Governors will not disapprove such legislation unless it violates the provisions of the respective constitutions or of this Statute, or the legislation of the Occupation Authorities in force.

4. Land constitutions, amendments to the Federal constitution and to the constitutions of the participating Laender shall not come into force until they have received written approval of the Occupation Authorities.

5. The Occupation Authorities retain the right to legislate on matters referred to in Article II above and, except as may be necessary to implement the provisions of paragraph 16, Article VI, will in the future limit their legislation to these matters. Legislation in those fields which the Federal State and the participating Laender have been empowered to enact by the Occupation Authorities will not come into force until it has received the written approval by the Occupation Authorities.

6. In those matters where the Occupation Authorities have full authority to legislate they may repeal or modify any existing legislation of the former Reich or of a Land. In other matters, before repealing former German legislation found to be inconsistent with this Statute, the Occupation Authorities will consult with appropriate German authorities.

7. Legislation of the Occupation Authorities remains in force. The legislative texts and regulations pertaining thereto which refer to the powers reserved to the Occupation Authorities under Article II and which cannot be amended or repealed by the German authorities shall be harmonized and codified. Other texts shall remain in force until such time as they are amended by German legislation in accordance with paragraph 3 above. Those which are considered incompatible with this Statute will be expressly abrogated.

article iv

executive powers

8. The Federal Government and the governments of the participating Laender shall have full authority to exercise executive powers in all matters within their competence. The Occupation Authorities, however, reserve the right to take action themselves, or to direct such measures as may be required of German governments, in the fields reserved to the Occupation Authorities. In all other fields, action of the Occupation Authorities will be limited to observation and advice.

9. Action of the Occupation Authorities under the preceding paragraph includes the right to require the dismissal of any German holding public office or any German public servant who restricts the Occupation Authorities in the exercise of their powers as set forth in this Statute.

10. All decisions and directives issued in accordance with the powers reserved under this Statute will be transmitted to the head of the appropriate and competent level of German government.

article v

judicial powers

11. German courts shall exercise jurisdiction in all criminal cases except the following cases reserved to courts of the Occupation Authorities in this Article: (a) Offenses falling under the jurisdiction of Military Courts according to the legislation of the Occupation Authority which established such courts;

(b) Offenses jeopardizing the security or prestige of the occupation;

(c) Offenses mentioned in legislative provisions of the Occupation Authorities if such legislation provides that German courts have no jurisdiction;

(d) Offenses committed: (i) By members of the Forces and organizations of the Occupation Authorities or their dependents;

(ii) By non-German persons serving with, accredited to or under the sponsorship of the Forces and organizations of the Occupation Authorities or their dependents;

(iii) By German nationals employed by the Forces and organizations of the Occupation Authorities where the acts alleged against them were done in the course of or arose out of their duties;

(iv) [By nationals of an Occupying Power or their dependents.] (Fr/US)

(v) [By Displaced Persons.] (Fr/US)

(e) Offenses committed against any person mentioned in paragraph (d) above or his property, or against the property or safety of the Occupying Powers, their Forces, or any organization connected with the occupation, unless the exercise of jurisdiction is authorized by the Occupation Authorities.

12. German courts shall exercise jurisdiction in all civil cases, provided that unless expressly authorized by the Occupation Authorities they shall not exercise jurisdiction in cases in which any non-German person mentioned in para 11 (d) is plaintiff or defendant. Jurisdiction may be conferred by the Occupation Authorities upon their courts to try the cases so excluded from the jurisdiction of the German courts.

13. A German court shall not exercise jurisdiction in any case involving a challenge to the validity of the enactments or orders of the Control Council or of the Occupation Authorities which are in force.

14. The Occupation Authorities reserve the right: (a) to try offenses against their legislation which the German authorities have neglected to prosecute;

(b) to set aside the decision of any German court in any criminal or civil case which violates the provisions of this Statute, or of any legislation enacted by them, or of any German legislation enacted at their instance pursuant to Article III of this Statute, or discriminates against any United Nation or national thereof, and to order a retrial of the case either in one of their courts or in a German Court.

15. Subject to the requirements of their security, the Occupation Authorities shall guarantee that all agencies of the occupation shall observe the rights of all persons under their jurisdiction to be protected against unreasonable search, seizure and arrest; to be admitted to bail as circumstances warrant; to communicate with relatives; to be represented by counsel, and to have a prompt and fair trial.

article vi

special powers and responsibilities of the occupation authorities

16. The Occupation Authorities will resume the exercise of their full powers in an emergency threatening security, and if necessary to secure compliance with the Federal Constitution and the Constitutions of the participating Laender or with this Statute. Before exercising these powers the Military Governors will formally advise the responsible German authorities of their decision and of the reason for it.

17. The Occupation Authorities will have a special responsibility to observe, advise and assist the Federal state and the participating Laender in regard to the democratization of political life, social relations and education. This shall not imply any restrictions of the legislative, executive and judicial competence accorded to them in those matters. Legislation in these fields shall be subject to the provisions of paragraph 3 of this Statute.

article vii

requirements of the occupation

18. [The powers of the Occupation Authorities under Article II include the power to require the Federal state and participating Laender to make such financial or other provision as may, in the opinion of the Occupation Authorities, be necessary for the discharge of the responsibilities thereby reserved to them. The Federal state and the participating Laender will be consulted regarding the procedure by which such requirements are to be satisfied.] (Fr/UK)

19. [In respect both of the requirements of the Occupation Forces (Occupation Costs) and of the other provisions required to be made under the preceding paragraph, the Occupation Authorities shall after consultation with the Federal Government and the governments of the participating Laender, establish in advance annual budget estimates of the expenditure involved. These estimates will be communicated to the governments affected and will not be exceeded except in accordance with supplementary estimates similarly established and communicated to those governments. In principle such supplementary estimates will not be presented in respect of Occupation Costs unless, in the course of the year, there are significant increases in prices or wages or in the size of the Occupation Forces required to be maintained in Germany.] (Fr/UK)

19. [After consultation with Federal Government and the governments of the participating Laender, the Occupation Authorities shall establish annually a budget for total Occupation Costs, which will be provided these governments in order to enable them to plan their budgets. In principle no increase in this established total shall be made except where substantial wage and price increases have occurred or where the Occupying Forces have been increased.] (US)

20. [Except as qualified in paragraph 16 above, requirements of the Occupation Forces will be limited by the following principles: (a) No foodstuffs will be taken from the German economy except in exchange for comparable quantities procured from outside Germany;

(b) Consumption of coal and electricity and gas will be limited to fixed annual percentages of the total amounts available in the occupied areas;

(c) No new requisitions for furniture and other household goods will be issued. Any new requirements will be obtained from new production or from imports and not from individual owners; and

(d) The total number of Germans working for the Occupying Forces shall not exceed a figure agreed upon annually after consultation with the German authorities.] (US)

article viii

interpretation of the statute

21. [A Council, the task of which is to inform the Commanders-in-Chief on all questions arising from the application of this Statute, is instituted as Advisory Board to the Military Governors.

22. This Council is composed of jurists appointed respectively by the Military Governors and selected at the rate of one adviser by each Occupying Power.

23. The Council will give its advisory ruling on evidence which must be submitted to it in documentary form.] (Fr)

24. [Any German government on its own behalf, or on behalf of anyone of its citizens may appeal from any action taken by Occupation Authorities on the ground that the action is in conflict with the provisions of this Statute. Such appeals will be addressed to the appropriate Occupation Authorities according to such procedure as will be established, with ultimate appeal to a High Court. However, no appeal hereunder will have the effect of suspending the action taken.] (US/UK)

25. [This Court shall be composed of six jurists appointed by the Military Governors and two jurists to be appointed by the Federal Government. Its decisions will not be subject to reversal by the Military Governors and will be binding on the Occupation Authorities and the German governments.] (US)

25. [The Supreme Court will be composed of three representatives of the Occupation Authorities appointed by the Military Governors. Its decisions will be binding.] (UK)

article ix

amendments to the statute

26. No amendment to this Statute shall be made without prior notice to and consultation with the Federal and Land governments concerned.

1 For an extract from Ambassador Murphy’s record of the October 16 meeting of the Military Governors, see p. 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 379].

* Position on joint declaration reserved by UK. [Footnote in the source text.]

2 Brackets throughout document appear in the source text.

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2848: Telegram

[Document 381]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

secret
us urgent
niact Washington, October 29, 1948—6 p. m.

1778. Personal for Murphy (Eyes Only). Draft joint text of Occupation Statute (urtels 2621, 2622 of Oct 271 ) is disappointing to us. We recognize intrinsic contradiction in London program in its endeavor to establish provisional Govt in western Germany, under conditions which necessitate continued Allied Mil Govt controls. Nevertheless, unless occupation statute restricts Allied controls to minimum, and, even more, appears in German eyes so to restrict them, it is questionable whether provisional German Govt will really assume responsibilities desired and will enjoy confidence and support of German population. Document as at present drafted appears dominated by extensive and wordy list of powers reserved in Art. 2. Rearrangement of articles, as well as paring down of language, as we suggested in Warx 90479 of Oct 7, might be improvement.

We believe first “Whereas” clause of preamble should be deleted or modified, for reasons given in Warx 91431 of Oct 25.2

In second “Whereas” clause delete “to establish provisionally a constitutional German Govt” and replace by “that a provisional constitutional German Govt be established”. This change takes cognizance of desired German initiative and responsibility.

Likewise, we believe second sentence of para 5 in draft text should be deleted for reasons given in para 3 of Warx 91431 of Oct. 25.3

We agree with the Brit that the fourth Whereas clause in the preamble might well be omitted.

We like the Brit view re German participation in conduct of Germany’s foreign affairs and commercial relations abroad, as expressed in No. para 4 of urtel 2622, except insofar as “executive control of commerce,” might be used to circumvent JEIA.

We do not quite see necessity of last twelve words of para 2(d). Is not matter covered by “Ensure the security of the occupation forces”.

Lovett

1 Neither printed; they transmitted the texts of Annexes “B” and “A” respectively of document TOS/P(48) 1, October 25, supra (740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2748).

2 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to message CC–6348, October 16, from General Clay, p. 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 379]. Paragraph 2 of W–91431 explained that a statement in the preamble of the draft occupation statute to the effect that the Military Governors each exercised supreme authority in his own zone might furnish the Soviet Union with the basis of a contention that the Quadripartite agreements regarding Germany had been abrogated by the Western powers. (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 121, Occupation Statute, Gables)

3 Paragraph 3 of cable W–91431, October 25, not printed, explained that German legislation in reserved fields should not require prior written approval of the Military Governors because it would be difficult in some cases to determine whether certain German laws, particularly economic laws, were in the reserved field or not. It would be far more desirable to have a uniform approval procedure for all German laws. (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 121, Occupation Statute, Cables)

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[Document 382]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

secret
priority [Berlin,] November 1, 1948.

CC–6525. To Dept of the Army for CSCAD from CINCEUR personal from Clay. A substantial amount of progress iii clearing differences in the occupation statute was made at meeting of 3 Mil Governors in Frankfurt on Saturday, 30 Oct 48; however, this meeting developed several principal points of difference which will undoubtedly have to be resolved at governmental level.1 An effort is being made to develop a joint report to the 3 Governments outlining these differences. However, the differences which appear to be irreconcilable at this time follow herewith:

Displaced Persons: UK insists on giving German Courts exclusive jurisdiction over Displaced Persons. The French join US in opposing this in view of our responsibility to protect, maintain, repatriate and resettle the DPs. Personally, I am convinced that the feeling between the Germans and DPs would make it most undesirable to give the German courts jurisdiction over DPs. I have stated this to be our definite policy and I recommend that we stand firm in this policy. I think the British policy results in part from it already being applied in British Zone and in part from the strong resentment now prevalent in Great Britain against the Jewish people.

Occupation costs: here there is a fundamental difference with the French who wish occupation costs to be pro-rated by the Mil Governors among the member states rather than being made a responsibility of the Federal Govt established under the constitution. I think behind this lies the French desire to be able to require the individual states to meet certain occupation requirements, thus giving Zone Commanders a greater flexibility and perhaps enabling them to escape whatever restrictive provisions that may be agreed in a separate paper being prepared covering occupation costs. Our position is that it is unfeasible for the occupying authorities to even attempt to proportion costs among the states and that this is a task which must be undertaken by the Federal Govt.

Another basic difference lies in the procedures proposed for interpretation of the statute. The French insist on a Council of Jurists appointed by the Military Governors and responsible to them which will have an advisory function only. The members of the Council would be nationals of the occupying powers. The British have now come around somewhat to our way of thinking and are suggesting a court composed of 1 representative of each occupying power, 1 German, and 1 Neutral Jurist. I have stated that we would probably accept the British proposal; however, both the British and ourselves consider the French proposal to be one which would add nothing to our own deliberations nor in convincing the Germans of our determination to make the occupation statute a legal and valid agreement. We propose to stand firm for a court with real power and with German representation.

Would appreciate any comment which you may have.

More disturbing than any difference in wording of the occupation statute was continued French reference in discussion to responsibilities of the Zonal Commanders and to Control of State Governments.

These French comments do not appear to be in the spirit of the occupation statute. Of course, it will be impossible to so word the occupation statute as to prevent continuing efforts at local control. I bring this up merely to indicate the difficulties which will arise in the interpretation of the occupation statute no matter how carefully it may be drawn.

Full consideration has been given to yourad W–914312 in our negotiations and several of the suggestions have been accepted in present tripartite agreed portion of text.

[ Clay ]

1 The October 30 meeting of the three Military Governors was also reported upon in telegram 2654, November 1, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–148).

2 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to message CC–6348, October 16, from General Clay, p. 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 379].

The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[Document 383]

The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

secret
priority [Washington,] November 3, 1948.

W–91904. From Dept of Army from OUSA to CINCEUR for Clay. 1. State and Army reiterate concurrence in your previous position that the body for interpretation of the statute should be a court rather than a council. In case you believe you should accept the British proposal outlined in your CC–65251 Rathecmkei [rather than?] continuing to adhere to your previous position State and Army will concur in your action.

2. In connection with the foregoing, the Army furnishes for your consideration the fol views to which State neither object nor subscribe;

Original proposal under which members of court consist of Allied and German only, particularly in view of 3 Govts’ right to override court’s action in exceptional cases is much preferred. We are prepared to go along with British compromise, which includes one neutral and one German member if you consider this not politically unacceptable in Germany. In this connection, you might point out to British privately that your proposal of two each British, French, US and German meant British and US together at least held equal representation, whereas under present British proposal French, German and neutral could clearly outvote US and British members.

1  Supra.

Editorial Note [Document 384]

Editorial Note

At a meeting at Frankfurt on November 4, the United States, United Kingdom, and French Military Governors for Germany briefly discussed the preparation of a draft occupation statute and the status of the problem of trizonal fusion. For records of the proceedings of the meeting, see the notes prepared by Ambassador Murphy and telegram 2686, November 5, from Berlin, pages 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291] and 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292].

Report by the Committee on Allied Controls to the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1748

[Document 385]

Report by the Committee on Allied Controls to the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany 1

confidential [Frankfurt ?] 12 November 1948.

TOR/Sec(48)2

1. Organisation

The Committee on Allied Controls was designated at the meeting of the three Military Governors held on the 16th day of August 1948. The Committee held its organisation meeting at Frankfurt on the 9th day of October 1948.2 The Committee’s Terms of Reference are attached hereto as Appendix C.

2. Summary of Committee Activity

Upon completing the detail of its organisation, the Committee immediately considered the following organisational matters of primary significance.

(a) Establishment of a Sub-Committee on the harmonisation of the US/UK/French Military Government legislation.

(b) Organisation of Allied Controls in the Laender.

(c) Consideration of the powers in the police field to be granted to the German Federal Government.

3. Sub-Committee on Harmonisation of Legislation

This Sub-Committee was organised by the Committee pursuant to the terms of an agreed US/UK/French paper (Appendix A3 ) as a Sub-Committee of the Committee on Allied Controls.

Its mission is to proceed with the harmonisation of all essential Military Government legislation, having first made a selection of fields wherein harmonisation is a matter of urgency such as Police, Press and Radio, Frontier Control, Property Control, etc.

The Sub-Committee has been instructed to prepare: (a) a list of Military Government legislation which will remain in force and is therefore to be harmonised and codified, and

(b) a list of Military Government legislation which is considered incompatible with the Occupation Statute and is therefore to be abrogated,

and to report without delay a date by which it expects to complete the work.

Permanent members of the Working Party are as follows:— US UK France

Mr. Samuel Kramer Mr. Marreco M. Lebegue

Mr. Lawrence de Neufville Miss Thorneycroft M. Becq

4. Organisation of Allied Controls in the Laender

The US and British members have placed a paper (Appendix B4 ) before the Committee, the substance of which is as follows:—

At each Regional Headquarters there shall be established a Tripartite Commission consisting of one representative of each of the Occupying Powers and reporting directly to the supreme tripartite authority for Germany. The Commission will deal with matters on which the Allies will exercise control over the Laender Governments after the issue of the Occupation Statute. In a Land occupied by the armed forces of only one Occupying Power, the Regional Commissioner (Land Director or Délégué Supérieur) representing that power shall be chairman. In a Land occupied by forces of two Occupying Powers, the Chairmanship will rotate between the representatives of those two powers.

The functions of the Tripartite Commission will be: (a) To consider Land legislation and to conduct negotiations with the Land Government thereon as may be necessary or appropriate.

(b) To observe and ensure compliance on the part of the Land Government with the provisions of the Federal and Land Constitutions, the Occupation Statute and any pertinent Military Government legislation.

(c) To convey to the Land Government the instructions of the Military Security Board arid to ensure compliance therewith.

(d) To carry out any other instructions received from the three Military Governors.

The Commission shall act in an executive capacity only through its Chairman who will be responsible to his Zone Commander for ensuring the implementation of the functions of the Commission. The Regional Commissioner (Land Director or Délégué Supérieur) will also be responsible to his Zone Commander for the conduct of all relationships between the Occupying Forces and the civil authorities of the Land; for handling the executive work in connection with certain subjects reserved for unilateral administration under the Occupation Statute; and for observing, advising and assisting the Land Government in regard to the democratisation of political life, social relations and education.

Whilst not objecting to the proposals contained in the papers summarised above, the French Delegation considers that in the event of possible future territorial reorganisation it might be preferable to modify at Land level the powers envisaged in the present document which are to be granted to the Occupying Authorities.

5. Powers of Federal Government in the Police Field

The Committee has submitted a paper to the Military Governors covering this subject.5

6. Control Machinery for Austria

At the invitation of Lieutenant-General Geoffrey Keyes, the Committee and its staff visited Vienna, Austria, on 19–22 October 1948 to inspect the operation of Multipartite Allied Machinery vis-à-vis the Austrian Government. The Committee feels that this survey has been most useful in providing a practical example of the fact that minimum controls can be effective and that a practical and effective day-to-day working relationship is possible between a Control Authority and a Government.

7. Conclusion

The Committee does not consider that it can make further progress on the organisation of Allied Controls in the Laender until instructions have been received from the Military Governors on the point raised in paragraph 4 of this report.

The Committee intends to proceed with the organisation of Allied Controls at Federal level.

Annex “C”

Terms of Reference of the Committee on Allied Controls
confidential [Frankfurt,] 21 October 1948.

TOR/P(48)1

Designation of Committee on Allied Controls

1. There is hereby established a Committee on Allied Controls consisting of:

1. M. Sabatier France

2. Major-General N.C.D. Brownjohn United Kingdom

3. J. Anthony Panuch United States

2. The Committee shall formulate, and submit to the Military Governors for approval, such plans as may be necessary or appropriate for the re-organisation and/or realignment of the structure of Military Government on a tripartite basis, in the three Zones of Germany occupied respectively by the United States, the United Kingdom and France, in order to implement the provisions of the London Report.

3. The Committee’s recommendations shall include such plans as may be necessary for their implementation.

1 This source text was transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to a letter of November 17 from Ambassador Murphy to John D. Hickerson, not printed. The paper was circulated to the Military Governors as document TRIB/P(48)5, November 12 and was considered by the Military Governors at their meeting on November 16; see General Clay’s message CC–6781, November 18, infra.

2 The record of the first formal meeting of the Committee on Allied Controls is not printed.

3 The paper under reference here, document TOR/P(48)3, November 12, is not printed.

4 Not printed.

5 The document under reference here, TRIB/P(48)4, November 12, is not printed, but it is briefly described in General Clay’s message CC–6781, November 18, infra.

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2648: Telegram

[Document 386]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

[Extracts]

secret
priority [Berlin,] 18 November 1948.

CC–6781. From CINCEUR Berlin Germany sgd Clay to Dept of Army for CSCAD. The US, British and French Military Governors held their 4th meeting in Frankfurt on 16th November 1948.1 It was a long 6 hour meeting emphasized by general reluctance of General Koenig to commit himself on any except relatively minor issues. The following were the subjects discussed:

[Here follows a report on agenda item 1, the financial situation in Berlin. For documentation on this topic, see Chapter IV, Part E.]

2. Powers of Federal Government in the police field—this was an agreed paper of one [of] our working parties which recommended that the provisional constitution should provide for certain federal law enforcement agencies subject to the restrictions that no federal police agencies have command authority over any Land or local police agency and that each federal agency shall have its powers defined by federal law which shall be subject to disapproval by Military Governors. It went on to recommend the establishment of a federal frontier control service, a customs control service, and a special criminal investigation bureau without the power of arrest.2

The paper, in general, was suitable so far as Robertson and I were concerned. He also felt that the federal government should have the authority to move police from one Land to another if the situation might require and at the discretion of some federal agency. He also proposed that the federal government be enabled to make grants-in-aid to cover the cost of Land police. His general feeling on the matter was that we must leave some permanent impression in Germany on the democratization of the police force and he, therefore, proposed that a working party now set up to consider harmonization of legislation should consider what legislation the three Military Governments should have on the general question of police forces and police power.

General Koenig reacted very strongly to this paper and to Robertson’s comments. He felt that there was no necessity for the creation of a federal police and considered that all of the functions to be assumed by this proposed federal police could be handled by Laender police forces. He was prepared to approve the concept of federal police in the capital of the country but he was not prepared to have federal police in the Laender. He also could not agree with Robertson’s concept on federal grants-in-aid to Laender police. I informed my colleagues that I wished to strengthen my position as stated in the paper and that I now felt that we must have sufficient federal police force to protect the future government. This force should not be large. It should have the right to arrest in the government’s capital, to guard and protect the assembly and to have the constitutional right to be sent into any state to bring before federal jurisdiction any federal employee who was violating federal law. This force need not be more than 5,000 in number and could possibly be only 1,000. It might be under the control of the sergeant at arms of the assembly or under the marshals of the federal court. I felt that such a force constituted no military danger, and meant less, not more, danger of dictatorship. Koenig thereupon proposed that such force as the Federal Government found necessary should be furnished by the Laender, but be detached while serving, and thus be controlled by the Federal Government. He suggested that there be no federal recruiting or federal promotion in such forces. Robertson and I agreed that such a proposal was impractical since the Federal Government would not have the means of controlling the type, quality or number of police to be furnished by the Laender.

We, therefore, agreed to refer our differences on this subject to our governments. I think our position is a minimum and would appreciate it being confirmed.

3. Progress report of the committee on allied controls—this was a report from our working party3 which set out the tentative organization of the allied controls in the Laender based on the concept of a tripartite commission in each Land. The French had a general reservation that in the event of future territorial reorganization, it might be preferable to modify at Land level the powers envisaged in this document which were to be granted to the occupying authorities. General Koenig questioned whether in this contemplated organization, the Land director would be responsible to his commander in chief on all matters reserved to military government as listed in the occupation statute. I pointed out that in matters where we had reached tripartite agreement we must no longer act unilaterally. Of course, we would have to exercise our joint powers through the Land directors. However only on matters specifically reserved for unilateral action, should the Land director act under the orders of his zone commander. I was prepared to agree, and I so informed my colleagues, to withdraw the concept of a tripartite commission in each Land, since in fact there was only one recommendation for a change in Land boundaries and, to disapprove this change so that we could leave each Land as it is now, governmentally, territorially and occupationally; thus reducing our own difficulties in reaching agreement.

General Koenig thereupon quoted from the letter signed by Winant, Campbell, and Massigli in connection with the establishment of the zones of occupation pursuant to the EAC agreement, which informed the French Government, on behalf of the US and UK Governments, that later the US and UK Governments were prepared, in conjunction with the French Government, to revise the zones of occupation in light of the occupation conditions then existing. He wished to know whether Robertson and I could now proceed to implement this letter, inferring very definitely that it was time to give the French some portions of the British and American zones. I told him that I was willing to discuss this and suggested that he give the US zone the area of South Baden which was desirable to our defense plan and which could have also the desirable result of recreating the state of Baden. He asked whether the US was prepared to give to France North Baden with the understanding that the US would maintain its defense positions there. I refused to do this and pointed out that discussion on the subject was useless since our positions in North Baden were maintained as a matter of military necessity. Not only had our military installations been installed at great cost but also this was our defensive position which we would not possibly let come under other control. This is issue which French will press again and again. Any acceptance of French position would be disastrous to our own position in Germany.

Robertson was prepared to go along with my suggestion on leaving the Laender in status quo, rather than setting up a tripartite commission. He preferred the system whereby the states in each zone continued under the control of the military government of the zone.

We discussed, in a tentative way, the question of allied controls at federal level. Robertson was dubious about the value of tripartite integration under German Government. He proposed that the BICO pattern be used and that the new agency simply consist of three unilateral chairmen each with his own staff and with no functional groups under these chairmen. We agreed to develop his idea in a separate paper and to consider it, together with the original concept of a tripartite commission at Land level. In this general question of integration I pointed out that certain agencies, such as those concerned with military security, must be joint and not integrated and must report to the military governors the decisions of the latter to be implemented through the Land directors. The finance agencies should also be joint. I considered, however, that the agencies for foreign trade should be integrated. So far as those functions which we were restoring to the Germans, such as transportation and communications, the three Military Governors should not deal with these matters except through the German Government. Our advisers should work in joint committees, reporting to the three Military Governors who, in turn, would deal directly with the German Government. General Robertson agreed generally with my comments on our organization at federal level. General Koenig asked whether there would be some provision for suspensive veto in the case of an important point in discussion by the three Military Governors not being unanimously agreed. I told him that in the bizone we had always had the right of appeal to the governments in such cases, that no specific time limit had ever been set for a reply, but I felt that ten days was a reasonable interval. General Koenig stated that he would report to his government the ideas expressed by Robertson and myself on these points. We, therefore, instructed our committee to consider this paper again in light of our discussion and to present us with a redraft based on control at the Land level by tripartite commission, another draft based on no tripartite agency at Land level, and a third paper on the subject of allied controls at federal level.

[Here follow numbered sections 4–8 covering the discussion on the first draft of the German constitution, questions related to limited and prohibited industries in Western Germany, possible customs legislation, and foreign investment policy. Regarding this portion of the meeting of the Military Governors, see footnote 1, above.]

9. Report on liaison with the Parliamentary Council regarding the occupation statute4 —This was a proposal of our liaison officers to send to the Germans for their guidance a précis of the occupation statute. I was not in favor of this and pointed out that we could not give the Germans a précis of a document which we were under obligation to send to our Governments for approval. We therefore disapproved this request and proceeded to discuss the occupation statute itself.

10. Revised draft of the occupation statute5 —We considered this document in detail and reached some agreement on phraseology. There remained only a few substantial points of disagreement which will probably have to be referred to Governments before they are reconciled. These substantially disagreed points are as follows: a. Issuance of a statute as a joint declaration—Robertson agreed at this meeting to issue jointly proclamations and laws in the period subsequent to the issuance of the occupation statute. However, he adhered to his former position that this proclamation should be issued unilaterally. Koenig proposed that the statute be drafted jointly and signed jointly but that each Military Government issue the document unilaterally. I could not agree with Robertson’s position on this since I felt that joint proclamation and issuance was necessary to demonstrate clearly the creation of a tripartite military government which was superior to the acts of a zone commander. I pointed out that after issuance of this proclamation there should be no operation by the zone commander in his zone except at Land level. Robertson then proposed that each zone commander should issue the proclamation adding thereto that he was hereby turning over his zone to the tripartite military government. I could not agree with this proposal either, and therefore I informed my colleagues that I would report my position to my Government.

b. Inclusion of power of censorship in powers reserved to occupation authorities—The British and French still adhere to their positions on this matter in that they wish to reserve to themselves the right to censor mail in their zones. I cannot agree to this.

c. German control of displaced persons—The French and US agreed that the protection, maintenance, and repatriation and resettlement of displaced persons should continue to be a matter reserved to the occupation authorities. General Robertson cannot agree on this position but wishes to reserve to Military Government only the implementation of any agreement between the occupation authorities and the IRO. I pointed out that no one knows how long the IRO would last. The question of displaced persons also arises in the statute in that section whereby we reserve to the courts of the occupation authorities rather than to the German courts, cases involving them.
General Robertson questioned whether the US and French would be prepared to accept a time limit on the jurisdiction to be exercised by Military Government courts over displaced persons. He would be willing to seek his Government’s approval to such Military Government court control for a period of two years from the promulgation of the occupation statute. I told him that I would report his proposal to my Government and recommend that we set a two year limit on this control. Request approval soonest.

d. Inclusion of occupation personnel in jurisdiction of German courts in civil cases—Robertson stated his position was that the German courts should have jurisdiction to try civil cases by or against occupation forces personnel in matters not arising out of their official duties. He felt however that the occupation authorities should reserve the right to remove any case from the courts as well as to retry any case in which it was felt that the Germans had shown discrimination. I informed him that I would report his position to my Government but that I could not recommend that we give German courts any jurisdiction over occupation forces personnel. Request confirmation soonest.

e. Requirements of the occupation—The US and UK on one hand and the French on the other disagreed as to whether occupation costs should be borne by German Government at levels other than federal. The US and UK concept is that occupation costs are a matter for the federal government and that Military Government should not deal with any agency other than the federal government on the question of occupation costs among the states. This [is] a part of French theory of decentralization and also represents their desire to hold a positive control in the states in the French zone. The Military Governors would never agree on the division and it would prove a constant source of friction. This is a basic issue. Request strong support and confirmation of my position.

f. Interpretation of the statute—The US position, with which Robertson stated he could agree, is that the high court should consist of 8 jurists, 2 appointed by each of the Military Governors, la German appointed by the federal government, and 1 a neutral appointed by the President of the International Court of Justice, decisions of this court to be binding upon the occupation authorities and the German Government. Robertson and I agreed that the number of jurists is unimportant but that it is important that the concept prevail that it is now time that the acts of Military Governors be subject to review by an agency not controlled by Military Governors. The French will not agree with this concept. They propose a council composed of 3 jurists, 1 for each of the occupying powers, appointed by the Military Governors, with German appeals to be first submitted to a separate German chamber which will decide on their admissibility and only those appeals declared admissible to be transmitted to the Council, which is advisory to the Military Governors. This is also a basic issue.

There are three basic issues only now left:

The police on which I think we must stand firm; the occupation budget on which I think we must stand firm; and the court. I think the latter will come about in time under any event and would like to compromise on it to secure other concessions. Please advise soonest.

[The meeting concluded with a discussion of certain minor points regarding the draft occupation statute together with an inconclusive consideration of conditions at Spandau Prison.]

[ Clay ]

1 For portions of Ambassador Murphy’s report on this meeting of the Military Governors covering in greater detail the discussions of the Parliamentary Council’s first draft of a constitution and the question of limited and prohibited industries in Western Germany, see extracts from telegram 266, November 17, from Frankfurt, pp. 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496] and 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], respectively.

2 The paper under reference in this paragraph, document TRIB/P(48)4, November 12, 1948, not printed, was an agreed paper of the Committee on Allied Controls. The text was transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to a letter of November 17, from Ambassador Murphy to John D. Hickerson, not printed. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1748)

3 The document under reference here is TMB/P(48)5, November 12, supra.

4 Under reference here is document TRIB/P(48)7, November 13, entitled “Report to the Military Governors on Liaison with the Parliamentary Council and the Ministers President Regarding the Occupation Statute,” not printed, a copy, of which was transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to Ambassador Murphy’s letter of November 17 to John D. Hickerson, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1748).

5 The Military Governors had before them the revised draft text of the occupation statute designated TOS/P(48)1/1, November 15, not printed. This draft incorporated those amendments and modifications in the earlier draft made by the Military Governors at their meeting on October 30 (see message CC–6525, November 1, p. 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]) as considered and agreed upon by the Tripartite Working Party on the Occupation Statute at a meeting on November 13; the text of TOS/P(48)1/1 was transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to the Murphy letter cited in the previous footnote.

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1048: Telegram

[Document 387]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, December 10, 1948—7 p. m.

1945. Dept has seen Clay’s signal CC–7026, Dec 9,1 to Army and agrees that differences re occ statute should be handled through diplomatic channels. Dept did not suggest intergovernmental conference but this was done by Fr and Brit.

Subject to urgent comments yourself and Gen Clay, with whom Army is communicating, Dept feels it might be advantageous to inform Brit Emb Monday, Dec 13, that we are prepared to discuss immediately basic points of difference with Brit on occ statute as outlined Clay’s message, namely, responsibility for DP’s and reservation financial and economic controls. (Ur Dec 3 letter1 containing supplementary info meantime received.) This step would enable us to put before Brit strongly our views, which are those of Gen Clay and might produce change Brit position at next Mil Govs meeting Dec 16. If this were the case it would strengthen subsequent concerted effort on Fr after Mil Govs meeting respecting remaining differences.

On assumption principal difficulties to be worked out with Fr relate only to court and occupation costs, in regard to which State and Army are now informed, we are prepared to initiate discussions with Fr Emb here. If necessary Brit could joint us here or act independently in London with Fr Emb. If these first discussions unsuccessful we and Brit could then make joint approach in Paris to Schuman.

Lovett

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

Resolution of the Parliamentary Council 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1748

[Document 388]

Resolution of the Parliamentary Council 1

[Bonn, December 12, 1948.]

Comments of the Parliamentary Council on the Occupation Statute as Worked Out in Interfactional Meeting, Introduced in the Main Committee and Passed by Vote of 20–1 (KPD)

According to the content of Document No. 32 and of the common German-Allied press release of 26 July 1948,3 the Parliamentary Council was supposed to be currently informed by the Occupying Powers on the stages of the preparations for the Occupation Statute. Furthermore, the Council was supposed to have an opportunity to submit to the Military Governments suggestions concerning the development of the Occupation Statute. Since the negotiations meanwhile are approaching their end, the Parliamentary Council deems it timely to present its opinions to essential questions of the pending Occupation Statute.

It believes that the Occupation Statute should contain the following principles in order to start a development which ought to be aimed at in the common interest of Germany and the Occupying Powers.

I. Leading Principles

1. Taking over of German state sovereignty by the German state organs provided in the Basic Law.

2. Legal regulation of the relationship of the Occupying Powers to Germany within the framework of the reservations conditioned by the occupation purposes.

3. Avoidance of regulations which could impair the normal opportunities of the German people and development of a living, peaceful democracy in Germany.

II. Objectives of the Occupation

1. Security of the Organs of the Occupation

2. Promotion of a peaceful democratic development

3. Germany’s security

III. Presumption in favor of German competence

Limitations on German competencies for legislation, jurisdiction, and administration solely by competencies of the Occupying Powers which result from the Occupation Statute.

IV. Controls

Joint measures of supervision by the Occupying Powers exclusively for the purpose of realizing the objectives of the occupation, and also exclusively from the viewpoint of the legality of German measures. Exercise of this right vis-à-vis the federal government.

V. Implementing Regulations

Preparation of implementing regulations for the Occupation Statute in mixed committees with German agencies participating.

VI. Legislation

Joint right of the Occupying Powers, limited in time, to veto German legislation so far as it is incompatible with the objectives of the occupation.

VII. Jurisdiction

1. Complete independence of the German judiciary.

2. Jurisdiction of German civil courts also over members of the occupation except in cases of extra-territoriality and of civil claims against members of the occupation resulting from their official actions.

3. Jurisdiction of military courts in principle only over offenses committed by a member of the occupation or its attendance as well as for offenses committed by Germans or foreigners against occupation laws serving the security of the occupation.

VIII. International Affairs

1. Freeing of German economic relations with foreign countries from existing limitations.

2. Establishment of German Consulates abroad.

3. Re-application of international agreements in favor of Germany.

4. Participation of German representatives in international conferences.

5. Restoration of the protection of German patents-, patterns-, trademarks-and copy-rights abroad.

6. Limitations on restitutions to property for which it is established that it was removed from foreign territory by force or coercion.

IX. Occupation Requirements

1. Occupation requirements according to the Hague Convention, with due consideration for the German population, its housing space, for the German economy within the framework of the productivity of the territory, and after consultation of the competent German authorities.

2. Annual fixing of the total of the occupation requirements in advance, in consultation with the federal government and with regard to the general situation of the German budgets, the German population and the German economy.

3. Crediting of all payments made and services rendered to the occupation including in this amount all recompensation paid for occupation damages.

X. Emergency Measures

Joint emergency measures of the Occupying Powers, limited in time, in case of serious danger to security and order, if the German authorities are unable to provide redress.

XI. Basic Rights

1. Validity of the individual rights and freedoms guaranteed in the German Basic Law, also in relation to the organs of the Occupying Powers.

2. Limitations of the freedom of scientific research only to the extent as it serves to develop and produce instruments destined for war use.

XII. Arbitration and Revision

1. Settling of disputes regarding the interpretation and application of the Occupation Statute through mixed courts or mixed arbitration boards.

2. Inclusion into the Occupation Statute of a clause according to which the reserved rights of the Occupying Powers and the rest of the Statute will be revised at regular intervals with a view to their reduction, in order to further Germany’s development towards full independence.

1 This resolution was adopted by the Main Committee of the Parliamentary Council on December 12. Only a Communist (KPD) voted against its adoption. The source text, presumably a translation prepared by Western military authorities, was circulated as Appendix “C” to document TRIB/P(48)14–TOS/P(48)1/5, December 15, a collection of materials prepared by the Tripartite Committee on the Occupation Statute for consideration by the Three Western Military Governors at their meeting on December 16. Ambassador Murphy transmitted a copy of the source text under cover of a brief letter of December 17 to John D. Hickerson, not printed.

2 The reference here is to the statement by General Koenig at the meeting at Frankfurt on July 1 between the Military Governors and the Ministers President; see the editorial note, p. 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255].

3 See footnote 3 to telegram 65, July 26, from Frankfurt, p. 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 270].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1348: Telegram

[Document 389]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent
niact London, December 13, 1948—9 p. m.

5226. Bevin has just sent me word that subject to final approval by Ministers he is most anxious to hold an inter-governmental meeting on December 20 to settle any remaining points of difference on occupation statute which may exist after military governors have met on fifteenth and sixteenth. Bevin suggests meeting be held in London or Paris.

Foreign Office believes it should be possible to conclude meetings in three days, but that it is important to avoid delay which would result if meetings were postponed until after Xmas holiday period.1

Douglas

1 In telegram 5255, December 15, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas reported having been informed by Strang that the British continued to feel that a governmental level meeting to settle final points of the occupation statute would have to be held. The French were apparently agreeable to a meeting in London after Christmas. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1548)

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[Document 390]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

[Extract]

secret [Berlin,] December 18, 1948.

CC–7108. To Dept of Army for CSCAD from CINCEUR signed Clay. The 6th meeting of the French, US, and UK Military Governors took place in Frankfurt on 16 Dec 1948.1 It was a long 9 hour meeting interrupted in the middle by a conference with representatives from the Parliamentary Assembly concerning which I will advise you by separate cable.2 The formal agenda was as follows:

1. Draft Occupation Statute

“In discussion of the current draft at this meeting it was very apparent that instead of it being possible for us to reduce our minor disagreements it seemed that we were introducing new points of interpretation upon which we did not completely agree. We therefore ceased discussion of the Occupation Statute and agreed to refer it to our governments in its present form for resolution of the outstanding differences. However, we did agree on a formal report to our governments delineating the outstanding disagreements and asking for a reconciliation of these disagreements.” This document has been cabled separately.3 The present draft Occupation Statute is being dispatched to you by courier.4

[The remainder of this message reported on the discussion of the trade agreement between France and Western Germany, the Military Security Board, the Ruhr, prohibited and limited industries, and civil aviation in Western Germany. For portions of this message dealing with the Ruhr, see page 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366]. For Ambassador Murphy’s notes of the portion of this meeting devoted to the Military Security Board, see page 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]. For documentation regarding the question of limited and prohibited industries, see pages 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403] ff.]

[ Clay ]

1 The American Delegation minutes of this two-part meeting, documents TRIB/USDel/M(48) 2 and 3, December 22 and December 16, respectively, are included in the CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 121, File—Occupation Statute.

2 The cable under reference is not printed, but see Minutes of the meeting between the Military Governors and the Parliamentary Council Delegation, infra.

3 General Clay’s cable (7107) is not printed; the Report of the Military Governors is printed, p. 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394].

4 The Draft Joint Text of the Occupation Statute (Appendix “B” to TRIB/P(48)14/1–TOS/P(48)1/6) is printed, p. 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 394].

Minutes of a Meeting Between the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany and a Parliamentary Council Delegation, Headquarters Building, Frankfurt, December 16, 1948, 3:40 p. m. CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute

[Document 391]

Minutes of a Meeting Between the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany and a Parliamentary Council Delegation, Headquarters Building, Frankfurt, December 16, 1948, 3:40 p. m.1

confidential [Frankfurt,] 20 December 1948.

MGPC/M(48)1

Present Gen. Koenig, Chairman

Gen. Clay

Gen. Robertson

France United Kingdom United States

Gen. Noiret Maj. Gen. Brownjonn Maj. Gen. Hays

M. François-Poncet Mr. Steel Amb. Murphy

Amb. Tarbé de St. Hardouin Mr. Cnaput de Saintonge Mr. Wilkinson

Mr. Bennett

M. Sabatier Dr. Litchfield

M. Seydoux Dr. Simons

M. Laloy Maj. Mather

M. Lefebvre de Laboulaye

Parliamentary Council Members

Dr. Adenauer

Dr. Schmid

Dr. Menzel

Dr. Hopker-Aschoff

Dr. Pfeiffer

Dr. Suesterhenn

Dr. Seebohm

Secretariat

M. Varreux

Mr. Forest

Mr. McCutcheon

In his capacity as Chairman of the month, General Koenig addressed the Delegation from the Parliamentary Council. He stated that in agreement with his colleagues he had accepted the Delegation’s request for a confidential meeting. The Military Governors were ready to receive any statements of the Delegation and would request it to remain in Frankfurt until the 17th of December, when Dr. Adenauer and his co-delegates would receive the answers to their quests [questions] at an hour to be determined later.

Dr. Adenauer , speaking for the Delegation, thanked the Military Governors for the opportunity of a confidential meeting. He went on to state that when in his capacity as Chairman of the Parliamentary Council, he requested the three Military Governors to receive the Delegation, he expected the work of the Parliamentary Council to progress to a greater extent. The task of the Council, however, has proved more difficult than was anticipated. This was, in part, due to divergencies of opinion which have arisen within the Council on a number of points. Notwithstanding this it could be expected that the task of the Council would be accomplished by the end of January.

Dr. Adenauer went on to state that since the Military Governors have reserved to themselves the right of disapproval of the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution) before the Council proceeds to vote upon it, the Delegation was desirous to discuss certain matters in order to enable the Council to reach an agreement at the earliest possible date. The main points which still demanded attention of the Council were concerned with cultural questions, with the Laender chamber, and with financial matters. The Aide-Mémoire 2 transmitted to the Council contained certain statements of the Military Governors as regards the finance question. There existed also a resolution of the Main Committee of the Parliamentary Council embodying views on many aspects of the Occupation Statute. It would be profitable to compare the views on these various aspects as expressed in this resolution and as envisaged by the Military Governors. A complete clarification with regard to the above would contribute to the success of the Council’s work.

Dr. Adenauer then assured the Military Governors of the Parliamentary Council’s desire to see a Western German government come into being as soon as possible. The time at which this government could be established depended to a certain extent on whether the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution) was to be ratified by popular referendum or by the Landtage. Although this question was discussed previously among the Military Governors and the Ministers-President, a positive decision had not yet been taken.

The members of the Parliamentary Council working on the draft of the Basic Law, Dr. Adenauer continued, were very anxious to be acquainted with the contents of the Occupation Statute. So far as he could remember the Military Governors agreed in a letter dated 19 July3 to acquaint the Constituent Assembly with the Statute as it would near its completion so as to facilitate the work of the Assembly. The Delegation would be grateful if the Military Governors would at this time convey to the Parliamentary Council the basic principles of that document since these principles were of great importance to the body drafting the constitution.

In summing up, Dr. Adenauer stated that the following were the points causing the Parliamentary Council the greatest concern: a) The relationship of the views expressed by the Main Committee of the Parliamentary Council on the question of finance to the ideas expressed on the same subject in the Aide-Mémoire of the Military Governors;

b) The basic principles contained in the Occupation Statute;

c) The method of ratification of the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution); and

d) A clarification by the Military Governors on the problem of the upper chamber since the views of Military Government on this problem so far expressed were liable to various interpretations.

General Koenig stated that, before hearing any other members of the Delegation, he would like to know on what aspects of the Occupation Statute information was requested. Such knowledge would facilitate the formulation of replies to be made at next day’s meeting.

Dr. Adenauer answered that, as far as he knew, the draft of the Occupation Statute was practically ready and that this document would regulate a great number of points. Although he did not expect that the Military Governors would enter into a discussion of details, he hoped that, in accordance with the London provisions, the Delegation would be acquainted with the basic principles of the Statute, at this or the next meeting.

General Koenig thanked Dr. Adenauer and expressed the willingness of the Military Governors to receive whatever statements other members of the Delegation were prepared to make.

Dr. Adenauer replied that no member of his Delegation would like to make a statement at this time.

It was decided by mutual agreement to meet on the 17th of December 1948 at 1700 hours at which time the Military Governors would make their statements to the Delegation of the Parliamentary Council.

The meeting adjourned at 1545 hours.

1 A note on the source text indicates that these minutes were prepared by the United States Delegation Secretariat. The circumstances leading to this meeting are discussed in Ambassador Murphy’s notes, infra.

This meeting followed the meeting of the Three Military Governors reported upon in General Clay’s message CC–7108, supra.

2  Ante, p. 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 294].

3 The reference here probably is to the statement made by General Clay at the outset of the July 20 meeting between the Military Governors and the Ministers President; see footnote 1 to the Minutes of the Meeting, p. 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 269].

Notes Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting Between the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany and a Parliamentary Council Delegation, Frankfurt, December 16, 1948 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1748

[Document 392]

Notes Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting Between the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany and a Parliamentary Council Delegation, Frankfurt, December 16, 1948 1

secret [Undated.]

The Parliamentary Council at Bonn passed by a vote of twenty to one (KPD) in an inter factional meeting a resolution regarding the Occupation Statute. A copy of this resolution (TRIB/P(48)14) is attached.2 The President of the Council, Dr. Konrad Adenauer, recently approached the British with the suggestion that he would like to be received by the Military Governors for an informal discussion of this matter, and this developed into an agreement by the three Military Governors to receive him and a delegation of six other members at Frankfurt, December 16. Whether the delegation should have been received at this particular moment might be open to question but, in any event, it is hoped that it will not adversely affect the work of the Parliamentary Council. I attach in that connection a brief biographical sketch of the members included in the Parliamentary delegation.3

Prior to the reception of the Germans, about which the French Military Governor particularly seemed apprehensive, the three Military Governors had a brief discussion concerning procedure. General Robertson said that the British delegation was actuated by a desire to see the constitutional law enacted as soon as possible. He said that if we wait for a final seal of governmental approval to be given the Occupation Statute we will not achieve this result. He pointed out that the draft of the Occupation Statute is not yet complete and certain points are not resolved. The legal drafting is not final. For that reason the Military Governors are unable to give the Germans the text for the present. Furthermore, General Robertson noted that the Military Governors are working on the text as a recommendation to Governments. He thought that subject to these preliminary remarks the Military Governors could give the Germans information on the Statute except on points where there is no agreement, and on these he thought the Chairman should exercise tact. General Koenig thought that the situation might be met by merely reading to the Germans the contents of Document No. 34 which had already been communicated to them last July in accordance with the London Agreements. General Clay thought that it might be possible for the Chairman to make a brief statement to the Germans to the effect that negotiations are now in course and after the Military Governors had made their recommendations and the Governments had approved that then the Germans would be notified. Not having reached a clear-cut understanding as to the procedure to be followed, the Germans were then received in a formalized manner and in a rather unhappy atmosphere. I felt that for this particular meeting there was little to be gained and possibly something to be lost.5

The meeting opened with a formal greeting by General Koenig who introduced himself as the Military Governors’ Chairman for the month of December. He stated that the Military Governors had not had sufficient time to consider the comments of the Parliamentary Council on the Occupation Statute and, for this reason, while prepared now to hear what the Germans had to say would not reply to the questions until the evening of December 17.

Dr. Adenauer spoke on behalf of the delegation, declaring that the work of the Parliamentary Council had been more difficult than expected but that nevertheless the progress already made indicates that the text of the Basic Law will be finished by the end of January 1949. He pointed out that as the Military Governors have reserved the right to approve or disapprove the text before the vote of the Parliamentary Council, the Germans were anxious to achieve the maximum agreement with the Military Governors now. He said that the principal questions pending include those relating to cultural affairs, to the upper chamber and to the question of financial powers.

On the subject of financial powers Dr. Adenauer stated that the Military Governors have provided the necessary information in an aide-mémoire.6 He felt that the resolution of the General Committee should be compared with the Military Governors’ memorandum and that that would suffice. He said that the Parliamentary Council is eager to see the law accelerated and the Western German Government established as soon as possible. So far as completion of work is concerned much depended on whether ratification of the Basic Law is to be made by popular referendum or by legislative sanction. This question is not yet decided. The Members of the Parliamentary Council are keenly interested to know the eventual contents of the Occupation Statute. He reminded the Military Governors that on July 19 they had said “According to the London Agreement the basic principles of the Occupation Statute will be given to the Parliamentary Council”.7 The Germans would be gratified if they could be informed of these basic principles as soon as possible. The main points on which they are concerned are: (1) Financial powers, (2) the basic principles of the Occupation Statute and (3) the question of the form of ratification. He said that the Military Governors’ views on the upper chamber are not clear and the Germans would like to have greater precision. If the Military Governors cannot inform the Germans now of the details of the Occupation Statute in accordance with the London Agreements, probably they could do so a little later.

Robert Murphy

1 The source text was transmitted to the Department under cover of a brief letter from Ambassador Murphy to John D. Hickerson, dated December 17, not printed. Much of the substance of these notes were contained in telegram 334, December 17, from Ambassador Murphy in Frankfurt, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1748). This, of course, is the same meeting for which minutes are printed supra.

2 For the text of the resolution under reference here, see p. 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388].

3 The biographical sketch is not printed.

4 The reference here is to the document on the occupation statute presented to the Ministers President by the Military Governors at their meeting at Frankfurt on July 1; see the editorial note, p. 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255].

5 The discussion among the Military Governors described in this paragraph was recorded in detail in the United States Delegation Minutes of the Sixth Meeting of the Military Governors (Second Part), held at Frankfurt on December 16, 10 a. m., not printed (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 121, File—Occupation Statute).

6  Ante, p. 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 294].

7 The reference here probably is to the statement made by General Clay at the outset of the July 20 meeting between the Military Governors and the Ministers President; see footnote 1 to the minutes of the meeting, p. 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269].

Minutes of a Meeting Between the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany and a Parliamentary Council Delegation, Headquarters Building, Frankfurt, December 17, 1948, 5:30 p. m. CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute

[Document 393]

Minutes of a Meeting Between the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany and a Parliamentary Council Delegation, Headquarters Building, Frankfurt, December 17, 1948, 5:30 p. m.1

confidential [Frankfurt,] 20 December 1948.

MGPC/M(48)2

Present Gen. Koenig, Chairman

Gen. Clay

Gen. Robertson

France United Kingdom United States

Gen. Noiret Maj. Gen. Brownjohn Maj. Gen. Hays

Amb. Tarbé de St. Hardouin Mr. Steel Amb. Murphy

Mr. Chaput de Saintonge Dr. Litchfield

M. Sabatier Dr. Simons

M. Seydoux Maj. Mather

M. Laloy

M. Lefebvre de Laboulaye

Parliamentary Council Members

Dr. Adenauer

Dr. Schmid

Dr. Menzel

Dr. Hopker–Aschoff

Dr. Pfeiffer

Dr. Suesterhenn

Dr. Seebohm

Secretariat

M. Varreux

Mr. Forest

Mr. McCuteheon

In opening the meeting, the Chairman, General Koenig , asked the Delegation from the Parliamentary Council whether they wished to make any statements before receiving answers of the Military Governors to questions submitted at the previous meeting on 16 December 1948.

Dr. Adenauer , the leader of the Delegation, made reference to a news agency (DENA) report from which the conclusion was drawn in the press that the Delegation requested the Military Governors to decide on several points which had caused differences within the Parliamentary Council. Dr. Adenauer termed these conclusions as incorrect and stated that, in his opinion, the Military Governors have not been asked to make any decisions, nor have they given any indication that they wished to do so. The impression should be avoided that the Parliamentary Council was acting according to direction received from the Military Governors. Dr. Adenauer proceeded to state that several provisions contained in the Aide-Mémoire of the Military Governors were capable of various interpretations. He requested the Military Governors to comment on these points.

General Koenig replied that, while taking note of Dr. Adenauer’s statement, it was the opinion of the Military Governors that the press interpretations were purely a German internal affair. It was also General Koenig’s impression that the press information was incorrect.

Professor Carlo Schmid , Social Democratic member of the Delegation, then stated that the substance of Dr. Adenauer’s statement, made at the preceding meeting (16 December), as well as the manner in which this statement was presented might have created the impression that the whole Delegation subscribed to it. Speaking in the name of Dr. Menzel, another SPD member of the Delegation, and himself, Professor Schmid said he thought that the meeting with the Military Governors would provide an opportunity of receiving information as to the content of the proposed Occupation Statute. In addition to that, Dr. Menzel and Professor Schmid were prepared to offer whatever additional information might be desired by the Military Governors regarding decisions taken by the main committee of the Parliamentary Council in Bonn.

The Chairman thanked Professor Schmid for his statement. General Koenig then reminded the meeting of Dr. Adenauer’s request, made at the preceding meeting on 16 December, for information regarding the Occupation Statute which was desired by the Parliamentary Council. Dr. Adenauer understood that the Military Governors were not in a position to divulge the contents of the Occupation Statute, since the document was still under discussion. Dr. Adenauer’s request was based on the promise contained in the letter addressed to the Ministers-President, dated 19 July 1948.2 Since the Statute has not yet been examined by the Governments and was subject to modifications after such a scrutiny, the Military Governors could not at this time comply with the request of the Delegation. To reply in detail to any question on the subject would be difficult without having the text of the Statute available. Should, however, questions on the Statute be formulated and submitted in the form of a list, the Military Governors would consider the questions and reply to them in the shortest possible time. The Military Governors hoped that they would be able to give the required information within the time period necessary for the completion of the work on the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution).

Referring to the questions asked at the preceding meeting by the German Delegation, General Koenig made the following reports:

a. Ratification of the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution)

Article 148 (e) of the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution) as passed at its first reading in the Constituent Assembly3 specified that the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution) should be adopted by popular referendum in the participating Laender. This solution was in accordance with the London Agreements, and made known to the Ministers-President in the form of Document I.4 Should the provisions of Article 148 (e) be modified, the Military Governors would be prepared to consider such modification.

b. Financial Powers

The Articles pertaining to the financial powers of the Federal government as they appeared in the draft of the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution) mentioned in a above were reviewed by the Military Governors with considerable concern. According to this draft, the Federal government retained exclusive legislation on customs, fiscal monopolies, and priority legislation on nearly all important taxes like the excise, turnover, income, property, and inheritance taxes. Minor taxes only were reserved for the exclusive competence of the Laender, as for example: taxes on motor vehicles, alcoholic beverages, etc. Thus, the Laender were left without adequate independent sources of revenue for the conduct of their affairs. This distribution of power of taxation as between Federal and Laender governments was in contradiction with the provisions of the Aide-Mémoire which specified that the Federal government could raise and dispose of monies only for specific functions for which it was responsible. While the Federal government could legislate on the general principles of assessment with regard to other taxes for which uniformity was essential, the collection and utilization of such taxes should be left to the individual Laender. The Parliamentary Council should be conscious of the fact that distribution of finance powers was one of the most critical aspects of sound Federal organization.

c. Upper Chamber

The problem of composition and powers of the Upper Chamber should be one for discussion by the Parliamentary Council. The Military Governors could state only that one of the chambers should represent the several Laender and possess such powers as were necessary to protect the interests of those Laender. The Council had made a good start in this direction and it was hoped that it would continue along the same lines.

d. Ratification of the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution)

The Basic Law (Provisional Constitution) could be ratified either by popular referendum in each Land, or by the Landtage in the several Laender. Article 148 (e) of the present draft of the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution) called for a popular referendum as method of ratifying the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution). This solution was in accordance with the London Agreement and was contained in Document No. I, handed to the Ministers-President on 1 July 1948. The Military Governors would be available to consider a modification on the present plans on this subject.

General Koenig then stated that there were other questions that were worthy to be commented upon. He mentioned as examples the question of police and the election of officials. In his opinion, certain provisions of the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution) were in formal contradiction of the Aide-Mémoire transmitted to the Constitutional Assembly through the Liaison Officers. The latter, whose function it was to convey instructions of the Military Governors were at the disposal of the Constituent Assembly. General Koenig concluded by stating that the Military Governors learned with great satisfaction of the desire of the Assembly to complete its work as rapidly as possible.

The Delegation was then allowed by the Chairman a short recess in order to formulate any further questions.

After a short consultation among themselves, the Delegation stated, through its speaker, that no questions were to be asked and also expressed its thanks to the Military Governors for the information received.

At General Koenig’s suggestion, a joint communiqué of the following contents was drafted to be released at 1000 on 18 December 1948: “In the course of conversations which took place on the 16th and 17th of December in Frankfurt between the three Military Governors and a Delegation from the Parliamentary Council, and which gave occasion for a valuable exchange of views, the Military Governors have indicated that the draft Occupation Statute has not yet been submitted to their Governments for examination, and for that reason, it was difficult at this time to provide information on this subject. It was, however, the intention of the Military Governors to furnish as soon as possible the text of the Statute to the Parliamentary Council. Besides the Military Governors had given the Delegation of the Parliamentary Council information which may assist in interpretation of certain points which were previously communicated through the Liaison Officers.”

The meeting recessed at 1900 hours.

1 A note on the source text indicates that these minutes were prepared by the United States Delegation Secretariat.

2 See footnote 3 to the Minutes of the Meeting of December 16, supra.

3 The Main Committee of the Parliamentary Council concluded its first reading of the Draft Basic Law on December 10; for the text of the Draft Basic Law as passed in the third reading on February 10, 1949, see Documents on the Creation of the German Federal Constitution, p. 88.

4 Regarding the document under reference here, see the editorial note, p. 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255].

Report of the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany to the Governments of France, the United States, and the United Kingdom CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute

[Document 394]

Report of the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany to the Governments of France, the United States, and the United Kingdom 1

secret [Frankfurt,] 17 December 1948.

Appendix “A” to TRIB/P (48) 14/1
TOS/P(48)1/6

1. In accordance with the approved recommendations of the Six-Power Conference on Germany held in London in 1948, and the provisions of Appendix I to their Report,2 the Military Governors of the French, US and British Zones of Occupation in Germany have prepared the attached draft Occupation Statute3 for the German territory under their control.

2. Agreement was reached on the form and most of the substance of the Statute subject to an agreement on the whole; it is to be supplemented by letters of interpretation or Minutes to be exchanged among the Military Governors, or their Governments.

3. Several points of disagreement, however, still exist. These are as follows:

a. Article II, paragraph 2(b)

The US Military Governor prefers his version of this sub-paragraph, because it more nearly adheres to the text of the London Agreement, and because its broad terms are deemed necessary for the protection of US interests at the present time.

The UK Military Governor prefers a more specific language; since he considers that the text should state definitely that it is for the Military Governors to decide the extent of the control to be maintained.

The French Military Governor is willing to accept either the US or the British version.

b. Article II, paragraph 2(i)

The French and US Military Governors wish to continue to ensure the protection, maintenance, and repatriation and resettlement of displaced persons, while the UK Military Governor wishes to limit the responsibility of the Military Governors to the strict observance of agreements with the International Refugee Organisation.

c. Article III, paragraph 5

The French Military Governor believes that the German authorities should only legislate in reserved fields after the express authorisation of Military Government. In this case, the authority to legislate will be subject to the following conditions: (i) German enactments which will have the effect of amending the legislation of the Occupation Authorities will have to be submitted for the prior approval of the Military Governors, as provided in the first sentence of paragraph 4 of the Statute;

(ii) German legislation which may be enacted in any field not covered by legislation of the Occupation Authorities will become law if approved within the delay provided in the second sentence of paragraph 4 of the Statute.

The US Military Governor believes it necessary clearly to authorise the German governments to exercise concurrent legislative jurisdiction in the fields reserved to Military Government; to require those governments to obtain prior approval for legislation in those fields would seriously restrict effective governmental operation.

The British Military Governor believes it necessary to authorise German governments to legislate on economic and possibly other matters covered by Article II without seeking the prior express authorisation of the Military Governors, such legislation being subject only to their disapproval. Failure to disapprove will be considered the presumption of German competence to legislate on these matters.

d. Article IV, paragraph 9

The US and UK Military Governors consider that consular representatives for the protection of the interests of German nationals abroad should be established by the German authorities under regulations approved by the Occupation Authorities, while the French Military Governor considers this measure to be premature.

The US Military Governor proposes the following compromise solution: Delete the UK/US text in brackets and substitute “The Commercial representatives may be given such other functions as the Occupation Authorities may agree”. The French Military Governor agrees to this proposal, pending final confirmation by his Government.

e. Article V, paragraph 14

The French and US Military Governors desire to exclude from German jurisdiction, civil cases which involve any non-German person mentioned in paragraph 13(d) of the draft Statute, unless specifically authorised by the Occupation Authorities. The UK Military Governor admits the competence of German courts under certain circumstances.

f. Article VII, paragraphs 20 and 21

The US and UK Military Governors wish to require the payment of all Occupation Costs and Mandatory Expenditures by the Federal State government, while reserving the right to require the satisfaction of other requirements from the Laender governments.

The French Military Governor considers that a maximum of financial powers should be granted to the Laender, and that therefore Occupation Costs, Mandatory Expenditures or other requirements of the Occupation should be assumed by the Laender, the Federal Government intervening only to ensure an equitable apportionment.

g. Article VIII,paragraphs 23

The US and UK Military Governors consider that the judicial body established to interpret the provisions of this Statute should consist of Allied, neutral and German members. The French Military Governor considers that representation should be restricted to the Allied Powers.

The US and UK Military Governors consider that the decisions of this judicial body should be binding on the parties. The US Military Governor further believes that those decisions could be appealed to Governments by the Military Governors. The French Military Governor, on the other hand, considers that it should be within the power of the Military Governors to transform the conclusions of this organ into decisions.

4. The letters of interpretation or Minutes referred to in paragraph 2 above will cover the following points:

a. Article II, paragraph 2(a)

The Military Governors will be instructed to send to the Germans invitations to such international conferences as they may be invited to attend.

b. Article II, paragraph 2(c)

As a condition for agreement to paragraph 2(c), the Military Governors will be given a list of controls to be exercised.

c. Article IV, paragraph 10

The Military Governors interpret this paragraph as permitting groups of the Military Security Board to visit any installation without prior notification.

5. a. Since the report of the Intergovernmental Working Party on the protection of foreign interests was not available for reference, subparagraphs (c), (f) and (g) of Article II, paragraph 2 of the Statute will require further consideration at governmental level in the light of that report.

b. The Military Governors have not considered it opportune to communicate the provisions of the Statute to Benelux representatives, inasmuch as this draft has not yet been submitted to the French, US and UK Governments.

Pierre Koenig
Military Governor and Commander-in-Chief

Lucius D. Clay
Military Governor and Commander-in-Chief

Brian H. Robertson
Military Governor and Commander-in-Chief

[Annex]

Draft Joint Text of the Occupation Statute

secret [Frankfurt,] 17 December 1948.

Appendix “B” to TRIB/P(48) 14/1
TOS/P(48)1/6

Proclamation

To the people of the French, United States and British Zones of Occupation in Germany.

Whereas supreme authority is exercised by the Military Governors and Commanders-in-Chief of the French, United States and British Zones of Occupation who are acting on the instructions of their respective Governments each in his own Zone of Occupation, and

Whereas the fundamental purposes of the occupation are a just and lasting peace based on the disarmament, demilitarisation and democratisation of Germany, and Germany’s integration with the peace-loving democratic forces of Europe and the world, and

Whereas the Military Governors and Commanders-in-Chief of the French, United States and British Zones have decided that pending agreement on Germany as a whole, it is expedient for the better administration of their Zones to establish provisionally a constitutional German government, and

Whereas, without prejudice to the provisions of the Peace Treaty, they have agreed to define, on the basis of the present temporary organisation of Germany, their common policy with respect to their relations with the German people in their Zones,

We, General Pierre Koenig , Military Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the French Zone of Germany,

General Lucius D. Clay , Military Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the United States Zone of Germany, and

General Sir Brian Hubert Robertson , Military Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the British Zone of Germany,

Do Hereby Jointly Proclaim The Following Occupation Statute:

article i

powers of the federal state and of the participating laender

1. The Federal State and the participating Laender shall have, subject only to the limitations imposed in this Statute, full legislative, executive and judicial powers in accordance with the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution) and with their respective constitutions.

article ii

powers reserved to the occupation authorities

2. The Occupation Authorities reserve to themselves the exercise of those powers necessary to enable them: (a) To conduct or direct Germany’s foreign relations, until such time as she may be permitted unrestricted foreign relations. However, German representation at international conferences attended by one or more of the Occupying Powers shall be permitted, provided that the members of the delegation have been approved by the Military Governors and no international obligation entered into by such delegation shall become effective without the Military Governors’ approval;

(b) [To exercise the minimum control over German foreign trade and foreign exchange and over internal policies and measures which could adversely affect them, necessary to ensure the respect for obligations entered into by the Occupation Authorities in regard to Germany, and the proper use of funds made available to Germany.]4 (US)
[To exercise such control over German foreign trade and foreign exchange and over internal policies and measures which could adversely affect them, as they may consider necessary to ensure: (i) respect for Germany’s international obligations including those entered into by the Occupation Authorities in regard to Germany;

(ii) the proper use of funds made available to Germany; and

(iii) the repayment in due time of expenditure incurred by the Occupying Powers in respect of or on behalf of Germany.] (UK)
Note: (The French delegation is prepared to accept either text for this sub-paragraph.)

(c) [To exercise such controls as have been or may be agreed upon by the Occupying Powers or Occupation Authorities, including those regarding the Ruhr, reparations, prohibitions and limitations on the level of industry, decartelization, disarmament, demilitarisation, industrial ownership, and certain aspects of scientific research; to control the frontiers in respect to movement of persons entering or leaving Germany;] (Fr)
[To exercise the controls required by the Occupying Powers or the Occupation Authorities to ensure international security and cooperation;] (US/UK)

(d) To protect the prestige, and to ensure the security of the Occupation Forces; to guarantee their immunity from German legislative, executive and judicial action, and the satisfaction of their requirements; to conduct operations they deem essential to the national security of their respective countries;

(e) To ensure the observance of this Statute, of the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution) and of the Land constitutions;

(f) To protect and restitute property belonging to non-German states or their nationals and property of victims of Nazi persecution; to protect the claims to compensation of persons affected by seizure of external assets and reparations removals;

(g) To prevent any official or private action which: (i) discriminates in any way against any non-German national as compared with German nationals, or

(ii) is in any way inconsistent with the principles and the aims of the Havana Charter for an International Trade Organisation and in particular with the principles of most favored nation treatment and non-discrimination;

(h) To regulate the admission of refugees;

(i) [To ensure the protection, maintenance, repatriation and resettlement of displaced persons;] (Fr/US)
[To implement any agreement between the Occupation Authorities and the International Refugee Organization;] (UK)

(j) To ensure the control of all aspects of civil aviation and facilities therefore;

(k) To require the Federal State and the participating Laender to furnish periodically the information and statistics needed by the Military Governors for the exercise of the powers reserved in this Statute, and in addition, to furnish any special information and statistics which may be requested by the Military Governors. The Military Governors will be provided with every facility to verify all such information and statistics; and

(l) To control the care and treatment of persons charged before or sentenced by Occupation Courts or Tribunals and the carrying out of sentences imposed on them; to decide questions of amnesty, pardon or release in relation to them.

article iii

legislative powers

3. The Federal State and the participating Laender shall have full authority to legislate on all matters within their competence, subject to the provisions of this Article.

4. Land constitutions and amendments to the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution) or any Land constitution and any legislation enacted pursuant to paragraph 5 of this Article shall not come into force until approved by the Military Governors. Other legislation enacted by the Federal State or the participating Launder shall come into force on the twenty-first day after its official receipt by the Occupation Authorities or such later date as may be provided in law, unless within the said period of twenty-one days it has been disapproved by the Military Governors. The Military Governors will not disapprove such legislation unless in their opinion it violates the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution), the Land constitution, legislation of the Occupation Authorities or the provisions of this Statute.

5. The Occupation Authorities retain the right to legislate on matters referred to in Article II above and, except as may be necessary to implement the provisions of paragraph 18, Article VI, will in the future limit their legislation to those matters. Legislation in those fields which the Federal State and the participating Laender have been empowered to enact by the Occupation Authorities will not come into force until it has received the written approval of the Military Governors.

6. In those matters where the Occupation Authorities have full authority to legislate they may repeal or modify any existing legislation of the former Reich or of a Land. In other matters, before repealing former German legislation found to be inconsistent with this Statute, the Military Governors will consult with the appropriate German authorities.

7. Legislation of the Occupation Authorities enacted before the effective date of this Statute shall remain in force until repealed or amended in accordance with the following provisions: (a) The Occupation Authorities will repeal or amend legislation which they deem inconsistent with this Statute;

(b) Within ninety days, they will codify legislation pertaining to the matters mentioned in Article I, and as far as possible, harmonize it;

(c) Legislation not referred to in (a) and (b) may be repealed or amended by the German authorities.

article iv

executive powers

8. The Federal State government and the governments of the participating Laender shall be entitled to exercise executive authority in all matters within their competence, subject to the provisions of this Article.

9. The German authorities may enter into commercial relations through commercial representatives abroad, under regulations approved by the Occupation Authorities. [They may also appoint to any nation prepared to accept them consular representatives for the protection of the interests of German nationals abroad.] (US/UK) Such representatives shall be appointed by the German authorities with the approval of the Military Governors.

10. In the exercise of their powers under Article II the Occupation Authorities reserve the right to take action themselves, or to direct such measures as may be required of German governments.

11. Action of the Occupation Authorities under the preceding paragraph includes the right to require the dismissal of any German holding public office or any German public servant who obstructs the Occupation Authorities in the exercise of their powers as set forth in this Statute.

12. All orders and directives issued by the Occupation Authorities under this Statute will be transmitted to the head of the appropriate and competent level of German government.

article v

judicial powers

13. German courts shall have jurisdiction in all criminal cases except the following: (a) cases falling under the jurisdiction of military courts;

(b) cases involving offences jeopardising the security or prestige of the occupation;

(c) cases arising under legislation of the Occupation Authorities where such legislation provides that German courts shall have no jurisdiction;

(d) cases against: (i) members of the Occupational Forces;

(ii) non-Germans accredited to or sponsored by the Occupation Authorities;

(iii) nationals of the Occupying Powers;

(iv) dependents of persons in categories (i), (ii) and (iii) above;

(v) German nationals employed by the Occupation Forces, where the charge is in respect of any matter arising in the course of or out of their official duties;

(vi) displaced persons, where the charge is in respect of an offence committed before the expiration of a period of two years from the effective date of this Statute.
Note: (This text is subject to confirmation by the UK Military Governor.)

(e) cases involving offenses against any non-German person mentioned in sub-paragraph (d) above or his property, or against the property or safety of the Occupying Powers or Occupation Forces, unless German courts are authorized by the Occupation Authorities to exercise jurisdiction.

14. [German courts shall have jurisdiction in all civil cases, provided that unless expressly authorized by the Occupation Authorities they shall not exercise jurisdiction in cases in which any non-German person mentioned in paragraph 13 (d) is a party.] (Fr/US)

[German courts shall have jurisdiction in all civil cases, subject to the following provisos: (a) Except where expressly authorized by the Occupation Authorities, such courts shall not have jurisdiction in any case in which any person within categories (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), and (v) of sub-paragraph (d) of paragraph 13 is plantiff or defendant, unless the case relates to matters not arising in the course of or out of his official duties;

(b) A certificate from the Occupation Authorities concerned that a case relates to matters arising in the course of or out of official duties shall be conclusive and binding on such courts;

(c) The Occupation Authorities reserve to themselves the right to withdraw any case involving persons mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) from the jurisdiction of such courts.] (UK)

15. German courts shall not have jurisdiction in any case involving a challenge to the validity of any legislation of the Occupation Authorities or of any order issued by them.

16. The Occupation Authorities reserve to themselves the right: (a) To try offenses arising under their legislation which the German authorities have neglected to prosecute;

(b) To try any person, irrespective of his nationality, who is charged with participation in an offense committed by a person mentioned in sub-paragraph (d) of paragraph 13, or with being an accessory thereto;

(c) To set aside the decision of any German court: (i) which violates the provisions of this Statute or any legislation of the Occupation Authorities or any German legislation enacted at their instance or under paragraph 5 of Article III, or

(ii) which discriminates against any non-German national as compared with German nationals;

and in either event to order a retrial of the case, either in one of their courts or in a German court; and

(d) To establish such courts as they may consider necessary for the trial of cases excluded from the jurisdiction of German courts or withdrawn from such jurisdiction under the provisions of this paragraph.

17. Subject to the requirements of their security, the Occupation Authorities shall guarantee that all agencies of the Occupation respect the right of every person to be protected against arbitrary arrest, search or seizure; to be represented by counsel; to be admitted to bail as circumstances warrant; to communicate with relatives; and to have a fair and prompt trial.

article vi

emergency powers and special responsibilities of the occupation authorities

18. The Occupation Authorities reserve the right to resume their full powers in an emergency threatening security, or if they deem it necessary to secure compliance with this Statute, the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution) or the Land constitutions. Before so doing, the Military Governors will formally advise the appropriate German authorities of their decision and of the reasons for it.

19. The Occupation Authorities will have a special responsibility to observe, advise and assist the Federal State and the participating Laender in regard to the democratisation of political life, social relations and education of the German people. This shall not imply any restrictions of the legislative, executive and judicial competence accorded to them in those matters. The Federal State and the participating Laender will furnish any special information, facilities and statistics which may be requested by the Occupation Authorities in the exercise of this responsibility. Legislation in those fields shall be subject to the provisions of paragraph 3 of this Statute.

article vii

requirements of the occupation

20. [The powers of the Occupation Authorities under Article II include the power to require the Federal State to make such financial or other provisions and the participating Laender to make such provisions other than financial as the Military Governors may deem necessary for the discharge of their responsibilities. The Federal State and the participating Laender will be consulted as to the procedure to be followed for the satisfaction of such requirements.] (US/UK)

20. [The powers of the Occupation Authorities under Article II include the power to require the Federal State and the Laender to make such financial or other provisions, as in the opinion of the Military Governors, are necessary for the discharge of responsibilities which, up to the present day, were reserved to the Occupation Authorities and which they preserve by the application of this Statute. The Federal State and the participating Laender will be consulted regarding the procedure by which such requirements are to be satisfied.] (Fr)

21. [The Occupation Authorities shall in respect of every financial year establish after consultation with the Federal State authorities estimates of the requirements of the Occupation Authorities (Occupation Costs) and of the other provisions to be made under paragraph 20 of this Article (Mandatory Expenditures). The estimates shall be presented to the Federal State government before the beginning of the financial year and shall not be exceeded without supplementary estimates similarly established, which shall likewise be presented to the Federal State government as the occasion arises. In principle, supplementary estimates in respect of occupation costs shall not be presented except for special reasons, such as important errors in the original estimate, changes in the functions, size or deployment of the Occupation Forces, increases in prices and wages. All costs arising under this Article shall be borne by the Federal State.] (US/UK)

21. [The Occupation Authorities, after consultation with the Federal Authorities and those of the participating Laender shall establish in advance annual budget estimates of Occupation Costs and other expenses to be borne by Germany in accordance with paragraph 20 above. Concerning Occupation Costs these estimates will not be exceeded except in accordance with supplementary estimates established and communicated under the same conditions as the original estimates. In principle, these supplementary estimates will not be presented except for such specific reasons as major imperfections in the original estimates, changes in the functions, size, or deployment of the Occupation Forces, or increases in prices and wages. The Federal government will distribute equitably among the participating Laender the burden of these Occupation Costs, the sum of which will be covered by contributions of the participating Laender credited to a special section of the Federal budget.] (Fr)

article viii

interpretation of the statute

22. The Government of the Federal State or any participating Land may, on its own behalf or on behalf of any one of its citizens, appeal from any action taken by the Occupation Authorities on the ground that the action is in conflict with the provisions of this Statute. Such appeals shall be addressed to the appropriate Occupation Authorities according to procedure to be established.

23. In case of adverse decisions on the appeal, there shall be a further right of appeal to a:

[High Court] (US/UK) [Judicial Council] (Fr), according to procedure to be established.

[The Judicial Council shall consist of two jurists appointed by each of the Military Governors. It will be within the power of the Military Governors to transform the conclusions of this organ into decisions. The Judicial Council will give its ruling within two months on the basis of the written evidence submitted to it.] (Fr)

[The High Court will be constituted as follows: two jurists appointed by each of the Military Governors, one German jurist appointed by the Federal government, and one neutral jurist appointed by the president of the International Court of Justice. Its decisions will be binding on the parties, subject to the right of appeal by the Military Governors to their Governments.] (US)

[The High Court shall consist of five members: one jurist appointed by each of the Military Governors, one German jurist appointed by the Federal State government, and one neutral jurist appointed by the president of the International Court of Justice. Its decisions will be binding on the parties.] (UK)

24. No appeal under paragraphs 22 or 23 shall have the effect of suspending the action taken by the Occupation Authorities.

article ix

amendments to the statute

25. The Military Governors will examine from time to time the desirability of amending this Statute with a view to extending the jurisdiction of the German authorities in the legislative, executive and judicial fields. No amendments of the Statute shall be made without prior notice to and consultation with the Governments of the Federal State and of the participating Laender.

article x

definitions

26. For the purposes of this Statute: (a) The term “Occupying Powers” shall mean the French Republic, the United States of America, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland;

(b) The term “Occupation Authorities” shall mean the authorities, civil and military, in Germany, of the Occupying Powers as defined in (a) above.

(c) The term “Occupation Forces” shall include: (i) the Occupation Authorities,

(ii) the Armed Forces, including the Auxiliary Contingents of Allied Powers, serving under the Commanders-in-Chief of the Occupying Powers, and

(iii) non-German organizations and persons accompanying or serving with the said Authorities or Forces;

(d) The term “legislation of the Occupation Authorities” shall include the legislation of the Control Council;

(e) The term “Federal State” shall mean [The Federal Republic of Germany];

(f) The term “Basic Law (Provisional Constitution)” shall mean the Basic Law (Provisional Constitution) for the [Federal Republic of Germany].

article xi

effective date

27. This Proclamation shall come into force on . . . . . and shall be effective in the territory of the [Federal Republic of Germany] composed of the following Laender: (here set out the Laender of the French, US, and British Zones).

1 This report was agreed upon by the Military Governors at their meeting at Frankfurt on December 16 (see General Clay’s cable CC–7108, December 18, p. 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]) and was signed in Frankfurt and approved for immediate dispatch on December 17. The source text was circulated as an appendix to a note by the secretariat of the Tripartite Committee on the Occupation Statute, not printed.

2 London Conference document TRI/17 (Final), May 19, p. 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170].

3  Infra.

4 Brackets throughout document appear in the source text.

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1348: Telegram

[Document 395]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

secret Washington, December 17, 1948—7 p. m.

1983. Re Benelux request for copy draft Occ Statute (urtel.2931, Dec 13; Deptel 281, Dec 15 to Frankfort; London’s tel 5269 Dec 16 to Dept rptd Berlin as 6681 ), Dept received yesterday formal requests from Benelux missions citing para 4 Annex A of final report London talks on Ger, June 1948,2 and continuing that Belg and Lux Govts attach utmost importance to full opportunity for final consultation on matter.

Dept received yesterday Aide-Mémoire from Swiss Leg3 questioning whether Art 2f and Art 5 para 16 might be of discriminatory nature toward Swiss interests. Contents Aide-Mémoire sent you yesterday by airgram.

Since Swiss apparently have obtained copy of draft Occ Statute, or at any rate have exact knowledge of certain provisions, Dept inclined now to believe that copy of draft Occ Statute in present form should be given Benelux. If Clay concurs, request arrangements be made with Fr and Brit authorities for delivery copies to Benelux.4

Lovett

1 None printed.

2 Annex A of the Report on the London Conference on Germany, June 1, (p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]) is the same as document TRI/10, March 6, p. 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 95].

3 The Swiss aide-mémoire, dated December 15, is not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1548).

4 In telegram 2950, December 18, from Berlin, not printed, Ambassador Murphy explained that General Clay’s original objection to furnishing the Benelux countries with copies of the draft statute was the fear that the Benelux would wish to participate in the finalization of the agreement and would become involved in the remaining disagreements. Inasmuch as the matter of the draft statute had been passed on to the governmental level, however, General Clay felt a copy of the draft could be furnished to the Benelux provided it came from the governments concerned and not from the military governors in Germany (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1848). Acting on instructions from the Department, Ambassador Douglas in London subsequently furnished the Benelux representatives with a copy of the draft statute.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1848

[Document 396]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson)

secret Berlin, December 18, 1948.

Dear Jack : Yesterday at Frankfurt I had occasion to talk individually with members of the German delegation and among those was Herr Carlo Schmid, leader of the German Social Democratic Party in the French Zone of Occupation. I think it worthwhile repeating, as it undoubtedly reflects other German opinion, that Herr Schmid emphasized as far as the text of the statute of occupation is concerned he has only one preoccupation and that is the degree of control which will be exercised by the occupation authorities below the Federal governmental level. He said that for him the rest of the statute is unimportant. He thought the occupation authorities should know that if their objectives regarding the establishment of a democratic Germany were to be obtained, it would be necessary for the occupation authorities to stop interfering with German life at all levels and in all fields the way it is now being done. Whether in the domain of politics, business, finance, public and cultural affairs, according to Herr Schmid, the occupation authorities interfere with German life at every step. If there is to be a real German sovereignty, Herr Schmid said, with any hope of success in the development of the type of Germany that the Allies say they wish to see, this situation would soon become intolerable and lead to the greatest sort of difficulties. In other words, Herr Schmid feels, and in this I am sure that he has the support of an important segment of German public opinion, that occupation controls by and large should be restricted to the Federal governmental level.

Sincerely yours,

Robert Murphy

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1548: Telegram

[Document 397]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

secret Washington, December 27, 1948—7 p. m.

4768. Although Dept had previously hoped that Mil Govs’ differences re Occ Stat could be settled by diplomatic exchange rather than by meeting at govt level, Joint Report2 prepared 17 [16] Dec meeting Mil Govs at Frankfort3 reveals so many differences remaining in draft Occ Stat that meeting at govt level required to resolve them. Anticipate that meeting should be brief, that Holmes and Trimble will represent US, that they will consult directly by telephone with Clay and Murphy during talks.

In Dec 27 note Brit have suggested Jan 10 as date of meeting. If date satisfactory to you (Urtel 5255, Dec 154 ), pls inform FonOff accordingly.5 Detailed instructions will follow.

Berlin: Pls request OMGUS send rep to assist Holmes, should this prove necessary.

Also request OMGUS transmit copy CC–7107 Dec 186 and CC 7063 Dec 127 to Mil Att London for Holmes. Also send Holmes at once final draft text Occ Stat with disagreed portions as well as any other material that might be useful. Would appreciate your suggestions re instructions to London.

Lovett

1 This telegram was repeated to Berlin as 2018 and to Paris as 4941.

2  Ante, p. 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394].

3 Regarding the Military Governors meeting of December 16, see message CC–7108, December 18, from General Clay at Berlin, p. 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390].

4 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 5226, December 13, from London, p. 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390].

5 Agreement was eventually reached with the British to hold the meeting on January 18, 1949.

6 Not printed; it transmitted the text of the Report of the Military Governors to the Governments (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 121, File—Occupation Statute, Cables).

7 Not printed; it described and commented upon the disagreements with the British and the French regarding the draft occupation statute. These disagreements are reviewed in the Report of the Military Governors on the Occupations Statute, December 17, p. 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394].

D. Establishment of the Military Security BoardD. Establishment of the Military Security Board

[398] Editorial Note

[399] The British Permanent Under-Secretary of State for the German Section (Strang) to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas)

[London, November 26, 1948.]

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2648

[400] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

[Berlin,] December 2, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[401] Notes Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting Between the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, Frankfurt, December 16, 1948

[Undated.]

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1748

[402] Editorial Note

Editorial Note [Document 398]

Editorial Note

In a paper agreed upon by the London Conference on Germany entitled “Report on Security”, dated May 26 (page 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]), the United States, French, Benelux, and United Kingdom Delegations to the Conference agreed to recommend to their Governments that the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany establish a Military Security Board to ensure the maintenance of disarmament and demilitarization in the interests of security. The “Report on Security” was included as Annex L to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, June 1, page 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]. During August 1948, the United States, United Kingdom, and French Military Governors agreed to establish a working party on security to implement the recommendations of the “Report on Security”. The transactions of the working party are not delineated here. The documents that follow present the principal final actions and decisions by the Military Governors in connection with establishment of a Military Security Board.

During the meetings of the London Conference on the Ruhr in November and December, 1948, the functions of the proposed Military Security Board were discussed or alluded to frequently. The documentation on the Conference is presented in Chapter II, Part B.

The British Permanent Under-Secretary of State for the German Section (Strang) to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2648

[Document 399]

The British Permanent Under-Secretary of State for the German Section (Strang) to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas)1

[secret] [London, November 26, 1948.]

You will recall that during the meeting between Mr. Marshall, M. Schuman and Mr. McNeil in Paris on 19 November2 the Minister of State made the suggestion that you, M. Massigli, and I should call for a progress report from the Military Governors on their discussions relating to the establishment of the Military Security Board for Germany, for which provision is made in Annex L of the report on the London talks on Germany dated 1 June 1948.3

The British Military Governor in Germany has been informed accordingly and, unless they see objections, the US Government may wish to arrange that instructions be sent to the US Military Governor requesting him to associate himself with General Robertson in the preparation of a joint report on the discussions on the Military Security Board, following the meeting of the Military Governors on 30 November.4

I am writing in similar terms to the French Ambassador.

1 The source text was transmitted to Ambassador Douglas, who was visiting briefly in Paris, in telegram 934, November 26, from the Chargé in London to Paris, repeated to the Department of State as telegram 5015.

2 For the minutes of the meeting under reference here, see p. 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334].

3 Regarding the documents under reference here, see the editorial note, supra.

4 Telegram 6077, November 29, from Paris, not printed, reported that the French Government had instructed General Koenig to make a request at the next meeting of the American, British and French Military Governors for a prompt report from the working party on security (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2948). Telegram 1880, November 29, to Berlin, not printed, stated that the Department of the Army was requesting General Clay to associate himself with the other Military Governors in the preparation of a report by the working party on security (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2948).

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 121: File—Occupation Statute, Cables: Telegram

[Document 400]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

[Extract]

secret
priority [Berlin,] December 2, 1948.

CC–6943. To Dept of the Army for CSCAD from CINCEUR sgd Clay. The fifth meeting of the United Kingdom, French and United States Military Governors took place in Frankfurt on 30 November 1948. Substantial agreement was reached on most of the items discussed. The agenda was as follows:

[Omitted here is the report of the discussion of the Occupation Statute.]

2. Organization of the Military Security Board—we agreed on a paper1 on this subject except for one slight reservation by General Koenig and intend to proceed to implement it as soon as my colleagues have nominated their members of the “commission” which is the senior element of the Military Security Board. My nominee is General Hodges who will also continue as head of my Armed Forces Division.

The Military Security Board will consist of a commission composed of three officers of General or equivalent rank, a board of deputies, a secretariat, three divisions (Military, industrial, and scientific research) and inspection commissions. It will operate by majority rule with the proviso that the minority member may refer the question at issue to the three Military Governors, this to have a suspensory effect until a decision has been rendered. Each Land director will act as the agent of the Tripartite Board of the three Military Governors for disarmament and demilitarization. He will report to the three Military Governors through the Military Security Board. If and when Military Government is no longer exercised at Land level, the Military Security Board will establish its own organizations in the Laender. I feel that as Military Government gets smaller these organizations will eventually take its place. This technique of representation in the Laender of the Military Security Board is the one point which General Koenig wishes to consider further, but I believe he will accept it in the next few days.

The text of this paper as finalized will be forwarded to you shortly.2

. . . . . . . .

[ Clay ]

1 The text of the document under reference here, as slightly revised and subsequently approved by the Military Governors as document TRIB/P(48) 17, December 17, 1948, was released to the press on January 17, 1949; see the editorial note, p. 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403].

2 Numbered section 2 of this message as printed here was transmitted to the Department of State in telegram 2897, December 8, from Ambassador Murphy at Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–848).

Notes Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting Between the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, Frankfurt, December 16, 1948 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1748

[Document 401]

Notes Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting Between the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, Frankfurt, December 16, 1948 1

secret [Undated.]

Military Security Board

The following are notes I made of a meeting of the three Military Governors at Frankfurt on December 16, at which the draft directive on the organization of the Military Security Board was agreed. Please see the attached papers, TEIB/P (48) 17 etc.2

There was a discussion of paragraph 10 and the addition of the following language at the beginning of the second sentence was agreed: “until tripartite commissions in the Laender are established” the Regional Commission etc. Koenig said that he thought he could agree but that he would have to refer this point to Paris for confirmation as he was strictly held by his instructions. He agreed ad referendum.

At this point General Koenig announced the appointment of General Paskevitch as a member of the Military Security Board; General Robertson announced the appointment of General Westropp, and General Clay the appointment of General Hodges.

General Clay suggested December 21 as the effective date for the organization of the Military Security Board and this was agreed subject to French confirmation. It was also agreed that whatever the date might he, this would be announced by the Members of the Board. There was a brief discussion regarding the headquarters of the Board and it was decided that the Board itself should determine where it wants to sit. General Koenig reminded the meeting that he had offered Bad Ems in the French Zone. General Clay suggested and it was agreed that the initial announcement of the establishment of the Board should be made in Berlin for psychological reasons.

Robert Murphy

1 The source text was transmitted as an enclosure to a letter of December 17 from Ambassador Murphy to John D. Hickerson, not printed. This meeting of the Military Governors was devoted to a number of subjects, General Clay made a complete report on the meeting in his message CC–7108, December 18. Extracts of General Clay’s message covering the discussion of the draft occupation statute and the Ruhr are printed at pp. 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366] and 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], respectively.

2 Regarding the document under reference here, see the editorial note, infra.

Editorial Note [Document 402]

Editorial Note

At their meeting on December 16, 1948, the United States, British, and French Military Governors approved document TRIB/P(48)17, December 17, 1948, entitled “Directive on Organization of the Military Security Board”; see the notes of the meeting prepared by Ambassador Murphy, supra. At that meeting, the Military Governors tentatively agreed that the Military Security Board would hold its “first meeting in Berlin on December 21, and representatives of the press would be informed at that time of the Board’s establishment. Convening of the Military Security Board and publication of the Directive were delayed, however, while the British and French Governments reviewed the document. Final formal approval of the Directive was given by the Military Governors at their meeting in January 1949, at which time a press release was also agreed upon. For the texts of the statement to the press and the Directive, as issued on January 17, 1949, see Germany 1947–1949, page 102, or Department of State Bulletin, February 6, 1949, page 195.

E. Consideration of the question of prohibited and restricted industriesE. Consideration of the question of prohibited and restricted industries

[403] Editorial Note

Editorial Note [Document 403]

Editorial Note

In a document entitled “Report on Security”, dated May 26 (page 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]), subsequently included as Annex L to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, June 1 (page 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]), the United States, United Kingdom, French, and Benelux Delegations to the London Conference on Germany agreed to ask the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation to establish a working party to consider what prohibitions and restrictions should be placed upon peacetime industries of Western Germany in addition to those prohibitions on the production of war material which were currently in effect and were to be continued. During August 1948 the Military Governors agreed to Establishment of a working party on prohibited and restricted industries which began meeting in Frankfurt during September. Detailed recommendations for the initial negotiating position of the U.S. representatives were set forth by General Clay in his message CC–5595, August 19, to the Department of the Army, not printed. These recommendations were generally confirmed by the Department of the Army in message War–88817, September 7, to General Clay, not printed. Negotiations of the working party on prohibited and restricted industries were suspended after October 1948 pending further instructions from the Military Governors and the resolution of policy questions affecting the general question of prohibited and restricted industries. Telegraphic reports from General Clay to the Department of the Army during September and October regarding the negotiations of the working party are included in the files of the Department of Defense. Documents regarding the establishment of the working party and the views of Department of State officers regarding its negotiations are included in Department of State file 740.00119 Control (Germany).

During November and December 1948, the question of prohibited and limited industries came under discussion at the inter-governmental level, particularly in connection with the reparations question and the work of the Industrial Advisory Committee of the Economic Cooperation Administration (the Humphrey Committee) as well as during the meetings of the London Conference on the Ruhr. For documentation on the reparations question, see pages 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417] ff.; for documentation on the London Conference on the Ruhr, see pages 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299] ff.

F. Problems of trizonal fusionF. Problems of trizonal fusion

[404] Editorial Note

[405] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, July 31, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–3148: Telegram

[406] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, August 24, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2448: Telegram

[407] The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, September 22, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–2248: Telegram

[408] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman)

[Washington,] October 2, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–248

[409] Record Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting of the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, Frankfurt, October 16, 1948

[Undated.]

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–1748

[410] Agreement Between the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany

Berlin, 18 October, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–248

[411] Editorial Note

Editorial Note [Document 404]

Editorial Note

In document TRI/22 (Final), May 26, 1948, entitled “Trizonal Export/Import Policy” (page 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]), subsequently included as Annex J to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, June 1 (page 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]), the American, British, French, and Benelux Delegations to the London Conference agreed that the external trade of the French Zone of Occupation should be conducted through the American-British Joint Export Import Agency (J.E.I.A.). It was further agreed that discussions should be opened forthwith among the American, British and French authorities with a view to reaching agreement on French participation in J.E.I.A. The documentation presented in this section deals with the closing stages of the discussions called for in document TRI/22 (Final) and other matters related to the larger question of trizonal (U.S.-U.K.–French) fusion.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–3148: Telegram

[Document 405]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, July 31, 1948—5 p. m.

1897. Personal for Lovett. Please see my 74, July 30 from Frankfurt.1 At Frankfurt yesterday there was a development which might be the cause of difficulty. I was there for attendance at the US/UK bipartite board meeting and other staff meetings during which there was discussion of the question of French participation in JEIA under the trizonal fusion plan as approved by the London Agreements (annex J of final report2 ) and as you know, August 1 is established as the date of the beginning of French participation in JEIA but as yet there is no agreement on details and a major stumbling block has appeared in US objection to the fact that French Army of Occupation is living off the land in the French zone as contrasted with the maintenance of the British and US Forces of Occupation at the expense of their respective governments. The item in question is an estimated $10,000,000 annually although this estimate is subject to verification.

Clay took the position that Bizone could not supply the French zone unless French took prior action to rectify this practice and remove the expense of feeding the French Forces from the trizonal budget. The French apparently are not at all prepared to do this now and had talked in terms of taking this action effective 1 January 1949. Robertson of the British delegation concurred in the US viewpoint and the French have been so informed. I am sure that you will agree that this is a matter which deserves immediate study as it is capable of inducing friction and delay in the implementation of this feature of the London Agreements. Both the US and British delegations here feel that it is necessary for us to have a firm understanding with the French now on the theory that if we do not the American taxpayer will for the indefinite future be granting indirect subsidy to the French Army. Clay informed.

[ Murphy ]

1 Not printed.

2 Regarding the document under reference here, see the editorial note, supra.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2448: Telegram

[Document 406]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]

secret Berlin, August 24, 1948—6 p. m.

2136. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. Reference Deptel 1467, August 17.1 Negotiations regarding inclusion French zone in JEIA are summarized as follows:

OMGUS reported to Army on August 18th providing text of draft agreement between French zone and Bizonal area on the subject of fusion of foreign trade. The draft text is given below.2

According to General Clay, it was his understanding that US had agreed to trizonal fusion of foreign trade on the condition that there would be no increased cost to any of the three countries participating in the London agreement on this question, and pending the development at governmental level of an over-all fusion agreement. It is not contemplated that additional funds will be requested because of French participation in JEIA and, therefore it can be said that this participation will not cost the US any additional money. Actually, however, French participation will require a substantial diversion of food and raw materials to the French zone to bring latter up to level of bizonal area. In practical effect this will mean wider distribution of US/UK assistance so that the spread will be thinner throughout the 3 zones than it would have been in only 2 zones. Some economic savings will derive from unification of the 3 zones and in some measure this will offset the spread of US/UK aid. This, of course, would be further reduced by aid which French zone will receive from ECA. General Clay entertains the view that there should be at least token financial participation by French to extent that francs can be used to provide German essentials. It had been expected that this would be worked out at governmental level but OMGUS recently received a telegram from Army indicating that latter expected three military governors to discuss problem initially and then submit to governments the question at issue. Clay is not certain regarding the willingness of Robertson and Koenig to proceed on this basis but he has reported to Army that matter will be discussed with them at earliest opportunity.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Sent Department 2136, repeated London 517, Paris 528.

Murphy

1 Not printed; it stated that the Department of State was awaiting the results of working party negotiations on the subject of the fusion of foreign trade before taking up on the governmental level those economic and financial matters relating to French participation in JEIA (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1748).

2 The draft text under reference is not printed here. For the final text of the agreement as signed at Berlin on October 18, see p. 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 410].

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–2248: Telegram

[Document 407]

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, September 22, 1948—8 p. m.

2364. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. Regarding tripartite fusion developments, following are two telegrams from BICO to OMGUS for bipartite secretariat for Major Mather (US member of secretariat):

September 20:

“Following is first consolidated report on tripartite working parties

A. Foreign Trade Fusion

(1) The European Recovery Program plans of the Bizone and the French Zone for the FY 1948/49 have been mutually adjusted.1 The French Zone has agreed to reduce exports of newsprint and textile rayon pulp in order to make them available to the Bizone in internal trade. The Bizone has agreed to process raw rubber imported by the French Zone into tires for the French Zone.

(2) The French Zone has agreed to adopt the transport priorities in force in the Bizone.

(3) The representatives of the French Zone were supplied with a list of items that have been decontrolled in the Bizone. They expressed themselves as being in general agreement with the list except for paper and timber.

(4) Discussions on mutual adjustments in the European Recovery Program plans for 1949/50 and in the long-term plan will be conducted as soon as possible.

B. Occupation Procurement

There has been no progress in this field since 18 August when the working party met in Baden Baden. A report2 on this meeting and their developments was forwarded to you by our letter of 27 August (Bipartite Control Office/British element 500/20) and cannot be condensed.

C. Food Importation, Procurement and Rations

(1) It has been determined that the French Zone will have deficit of approximately $75,000,000 for food during the current year, based on the ration level planned for the Bizonal area. An additional undetermined deficit exists in seeds, fertilizer and other agricultural prerequisites. French Zone authorities are now studying means of financing this deficit so that the terms of the London agreement, requiring that the merger be made without additional cost to the US/UK Governments, may be complied with.

(2) In order to permit negotiations looking to uniform ration levels and rationing procedures to begin without further delay, French military government has established in Baden Baden a food and agriculture secretariat, consisting of representatives of each of the Land and Agriculture Ministries. French military government has requested this secretariat to work directly with Bizonal food and agriculture authorities in drawing up proposals for a unified ration for the trizonal area, in view of the delay encountered in establishing this body, however, it is unlikely that plans for the unified ration can take effect before 1 November at the earliest.

(3) French Zone food and agriculture officials have informally indicated that the French Army will cease requisitioning food from German sources on 15 October, although no formal assurances have yet been made in the negotiations at this level.

(4) French Zone representatives participated in the regular monthly Bizonal food and agriculture conference held at Stuttgart on 27 August 1948, and have been invited to attend the next conference scheduled for Frankfurt on 24 September.

D. Customs Report 3 Tripartite Finance Customs Working Party Sent Forward 10 August

(1) Action is awaited on recommendations creating tripartite liaison groups German and Allied.

(2) The implementation of the agreed transport tax plan is delayed pending French concurrence.

(3) Automobile club discussions are under way.

(4) The recommendations of the Bizonal Department for Finance on uniform customs administration have been received.

(5) German tariff studies as a basis for future discussions are presently under way.”

September 21:

“Reference is made to paragraph B of our cable (Bipartite Control Office secretariat 262). Subject tripartite working parties.

The following additional information is submitted:

UK/US agreed upon: (1) Central approval by Bipartite Control Office of all allocations of indigenous material procurements. (2) No export indigenous material unless paid for through JEIA at export prices. (3) Demands approved by Bipartite Control Office for indigenous goods to have priority over export demands and articles manufactured from imported materials not available to occupation forces unless materials furnished in kind or paid for to JEIA in hard currency. French representative lacks authority to agree. Information exchange continuing.”

Ambassador Murphy sent you copy of draft of fusion agreement approved by JEIA September 14 in letter dated September 20.4

riddleberger

1 Documentation regarding the relationship between the European Recovery Program and the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany is included in volume iii .

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

4 Neither the draft agreement for the fusion of the foreign trade of the French Zone and the combined U.S.–U.K. zones, nor Ambassador Murphy’s letter is printed. For the text of the agreement as signed on October 18, see p. 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 410].

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–248

[Document 408]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman)

top secret [Washington,] October 2, 1948.

This morning Mr. West, Mr. Tracy Voorhees’ deputy, called me and asked whether it was the view of the State Department and the intention of my letter to Mr. Draper dated September 30,1 that General Clay should not enter into the JEIA Agreement with the French presently being negotiated until he has obtained from the French a commitment to work out a satisfactory formula for computing occupation costs which would result in charges which will not strain unduly the German budget and which will provide equitably for the three Western occupying forces. He said that Mr. Draper was proposing, subject to our concurrence, to send General Clay an instruction as follows: “You should complete the JEIA Agreement as soon as French have taken a commitment to work out a formula for computing occupation costs which would result in charges which will not strain unduly the German budget and which will provide equitably for the three Western occupying powers.”

I informed Mr. West that the State Department did not believe that the conclusion of the JEIA Agreement with the French should be made contingent upon obtaining such a commitment from the French. I told him that although we were in agreement that such a commitment was important, we did not think there was a suitable basis for making it a prerequisite for the JEIA Agreement which under the London Agreements was to be entered into provided it did not involve additional expense to the U.S. I pointed out that it was desirable for us to conclude the JEIA Agreement promptly in view of the importance of progressing with existing plans for Western Germany and in view of the necessity for close cooperation with the British and French in the present European situation. Consequently, if the JEIA Agreement was otherwise satisfactory to us and did not involve additional cost to the U.S. because of this particular point under discussion, the Agreement should be concluded.2

Charles E. Saltzman

1  In his letter of September 30 to Under Secretary of the Army Draper, not printed, Assistant Secretary Saltzman observed that General Clay had questioned the practice of the French occupation authorities paying their troops in marks as an occupation cost and had expressed hesitancy in completing the JEIA agreement with the French unless the French desist from the practice. Saltzman expressed Department of State attitude in the matter as follows: “In our judgment, this problem should be dealt with in relation to the overall budgets of the three western zones. We are, of course, anxious to prevent the German budgets from being unduly burdened by unreasonably large occupation costs. If the French or the British desire to use funds received as occupation costs for troop pay, we should not object if the total amounts charged as occupation costs are reasonable. The Department of State suggests that General Olay take up with the French at once the obtaining from them of a commitment that they will join in working out a formula for computing occupation costs. The formula should be such as to result in charges which will not strain unduly the German budgets and which will provide equitably for the three western occupying powers.”

Saltzman, however, concluded his letter as follows: “I understand that it has been suggested that the conclusion of the agreement providing for French participation in JEIA be delayed pending decisions on this matter of troop pay, control of ECA supplies to the French Zone, and perhaps revision of the bizonal fusion agreement. At the present moment, full cooperation of the western occupying powers is of vital importance. The Department of State consequently feels strongly that it is urgent that the JEIA agreement be concluded as soon as possible; and that any unnecessary delay would prejudice the working out of more far-reaching agreements relating to Western Germany.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–3048)

2 The views set forth in this paragraph were reaffirmed in a letter of October 4 from Assistant Secretary Saltzman to Under Secretary Draper, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–248).

Record Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting of the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, Frankfurt, October 16, 1948 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–1748

[Document 409]

Record Prepared by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) of a Meeting of the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, Frankfurt, October 16, 1948 1

[Extracts]

secret [Undated.]

. . . . . . . .

7. It was agreed that the JEIA agreement2 is now ready for signature and will be signed Monday.

. . . . . . . .

16. Subsequently discussion developed surprise on the part of the French that the US and UK Delegations contemplated the preparation and conclusion of a trizonal fusion agreement. General Noiret said this was a new position as far as he was concerned and that he was positive that his government contemplated nothing more than the harmonization measures which have been under discussion3 and the conclusion of the JEIA participation agreement. The US and UK Delegations refreshed his recollection regarding the conversations at London last spring and made particular reference to Annex D, Article 6b4 which relates to the paper on international control of the Ruhr and specifically refers to the bizonal fusion agreement and to any trizonal fusion agreement which may be concluded. The French asserted that there never had been any thought on the part of Paris to entering into a fusion agreement which might call for a contribution of expense to the German economy.

. . . . . . . .

Robert Murphy

1 The source text was sent to the Department of State as an enclosure to a brief transmittal letter of October 17 from Ambassador Murphy to Assistant Secretary of State Saltzman, not printed. The source text does not contain a list of participants, but the record indicates that the discussion was carried on between Generals Clay, Robertson, and Noiret (substituting for General Koenig). Also present for the United States were Ambassador Murphy and OMGUS Finance Director Jack Bennett.

For another portion of this record dealing with the work of the Parliamentary Council, see p. 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290].

2 The agreement is printed infra.

3 The discussion under reference occurred during the consideration of the draft Occupation Statute.

4 The reference here is to document TRI/23 (Final), May 26, p. 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], which was included as Annex D to the Report of the London Conference on Germany, June 1, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

Agreement Between the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–248

[Document 410]

Agreement Between the Military Governors of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany 1

confidential

Agreement Relating to the Fusion of the Foreign Trade of the French Zone and of the Combined US/UK Zones of Germany

I. In accordance with the agreement reached at London between the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, and France, and as of 18 October 1948, the foreign trade activities of the French Zone of Germany will be merged with the foreign trade activities of the Combined US/UK Zones of Germany. The foreign trade of the French Zone as carried out by the Foreign Trade Office of the French Zone (OFICOMEX) and any other branch of the French Military Government will thereafter be carried out by the Joint Export-Import Agency (JEIA).

II. The JEIA Board will make the necessary decisions to carry out the following [:]

administration

1. Present JEIA staff and executive offices both at Headquarters and Branch Offices will be enlarged by participation of French members.

2. French personnel will participate in all trade missions and negotiations.

3. Two French members will join JEIA Board of Directors; until the question of contributions and related issues are settled the voting will proceed as at present except that decisions may be referred to Military Governors or for consultation among governments according to the terms and practice of the Bizonal Fusion Agreement.

4. OFICOMEX will be transformed into a Branch Office of JEIA (to be known as JEIA Branch Office for French Zone) and will operate under general JEIA rules and regulations and under JEIA directions.

5. US/UK personnel will be co-opted on the staff of former OFICOMEX offices.

6. The staff of all JEIA and former OFICOMEX offices will function on an integrated basis.

fusion of accounts

7. Assets and liabilities (including stocks, cash, foreign exchange accounts, receivables) derived from import-export operations (including therein capital transfers, service or invisible transactions, etc.) of OFICOMEX and Office des Changes will be transferred to or assumed by JEIA.

8. All foreign exchange proceeds will be received by JEIA.

9. All imports will be paid for or authorized by JEIA.

10. Existing OFICOMEX contracts and commitments will be examined as the basis for a report on the procedure under which these will be assumed or transferred to JEIA after 18 October.

11. In carrying out the above, an effort will be made to unify handling of accounts to the greatest extent practicable, although special accounts incidental to special trade agreement programs may be maintained.

import-export programming

12. Import Requirements and Allocations

Import requirements will be programmed by JEIA to realize the maximum benefit for the whole Trizonal Area regarded as a single economic entity.

13. Trade Agreements

Existing trade agreements will be tabled for joint review and will be continued in effect in accordance with their terms. As rapidly as possible, separate Bizonal and French Zone agreements will be consolidated by New Trizonal agreements negotiated by JEIA.

14. Exports

Every effort will be made to maximize exports subject to JEIA rules and procedure and pricing standards.

15. Other Aspects

A practical programme should be elaborated to assimilate export-import procedure (including forms, rules, financial methods, instructions) in the French Zone to the system in effect in the Bizone, making allowance for procedural changes impending and confining to a minimum administrative disruption.

It is further agreed as follows:

iii. preliminary period

The policies and procedures of JEIA will be put into effect in the French Zone progressively and at as early a date as possible, and it is anticipated that this will be fully accomplished not later than 31 December 1948. It is understood that the term “preliminary period” referred to hereinafter, will be that period between the effective date of this agreement and the date on which the decisions of the JEIA Board as provided in Para II above will be put into effect.

iv. accounting

As of 18 October 1948, a statement will be made of the assets and liabilities on the books of accounts of OFICOMEX and the Office des Changes as provided in Article II, Para 7, above. After said date the accounts will be administered in accordance with their present operating procedures until otherwise decided.

v. personnel of the french zone

Retroactive to 18 October 1948, funds for the payment of German personnel of OFICOMEX and Office des Changes will be provided by the German authorities and funds for the payment of French personnel of OFICOMEX and Office des Changes will be provided by appropriate budgetary provision of the French Government. Pending the availability of these funds, the present OFICOMEX payment arrangements will remain in force and a proper accounting of all such expenditures will be maintained.

vi. imports

a. The import requirements of the French Zone will be determined on the basis of the import plan established for the French Zone by periodic conferences between the representatives of JEIA, Bipartite Control Office, and the French Zone. The representatives of the appropriate German administrations of the three Western Zones of Germany will be consulted in the preparation of these programs. JEIA will be responsible for the imports necessary to fulfill the requirements mentioned above. These said imports will be subject to the approval of JEIA.

b. During the preliminary period, JEIA Branch Office for the French Zone will be authorized to enter into contracts for the approved imports in the name and for the account of JEIA, according to the present procedure of OFICOMEX, it being understood that American and British personnel in that Branch Office will have the right to ask that any contract be submitted to Main Office, JEIA, for approval.

vii. exports

All proceeds of exports (including exports of services and invisibles) from the French Zone will accrue to JEIA, subject to the reservations contained in Article VIII below. During the preliminary period, JEIA Branch Office for the French Zone will be authorized to enter into export contracts where deliveries there under do not extend beyond six months after date of contract in accordance with the existing procedure of OFICOMEX, it being understood that American and British personnel in the Branch Office will have the right to ask that any contract be submitted to Main Office, JEIA, for prior approval. All contracts providing for deliveries beyond six months after date of contract will be submitted for prior approval of Main Office, JEIA.

viii. commercial relations between franch and the french zone of occupation

a. On and after 18 October and until the Trade and Payments agreement between the three Western Zones and the Franc area is put into effect, the payments for deliveries from the French Zone to the Franc area, other than those mentioned in para (d) will be credited to a special account in Francs opened at the Banque de France in the name of the “JEIA Branch Office for the French Zone” and payments for deliveries from the Franc area to the French Zone will be debited to the said special account.

b. The Bank Deutscher Laender and the Banque de France will, by mutual agreement, establish all technical details relating to the functioning of the special account.

c. To the extent that the sums available in this account shall prove insufficient to pay for the imports of the French Zone from the Franc area during the same period, the French Government will advance the necessary funds to meet such payments by crediting the special account.

d. (1) A separate dollar suspense account entitled “operations entre la France et la Z.F.O.-compte d’attente”, will be opened in the books of the Banque de France. To the debit of this account will be entered; Firstly, the balance of the advance payments made prior to 18 October 1948 to the French Zone by the French Government and not covered by deliveries from the French Zone to the Franc area (excluding Saar) prior to that date. Secondly, the further advance payments mentioned in para c. To the credit of this account will be entered all payments for deliveries from the French Zone to the Franc area (excluding Saar) on or after 18 October 1948 under contracts entered into prior to that date.

(2) The repayment conditions of the advance payments of the French Government to the French Zone as defined above and the disposal of the amounts credited to the suspense account will be determined by mutual agreement between the three Military Governors of the Western Zones and the French Government at a later date.

ix. french military government and forces procurement

The French Government will undertake to replace any food procured from the German economy for the consumption of French Military and civilian personnel in Germany subsequent to the effective date of this agreement. The rate of replacement shall be determined by the US, UK and French Military Governors within thirty days after the signature of this agreement. The US, UK, and French Military Governors agree to establish such a replacement rate on a reasonable and not unduly prolonged basis, and every effort will be made by the French authorities to reduce the procurement as quickly as possible. A proper accounting shall be made by the French Military Government of any food received and of any replacements made.

Berlin, 18 October, 1948.
By order of General Noiret,
Deputy to the General Commander-in-Chief,
for:
Pierre Koenig
Général d’Armée Military Governor French Zone

Lucius D. Clay
General, U.S. Army Military Governor U.S. Zone

B. H. Robertson
General Military Governor British Zone

1 The source text was circulated to the Bipartite (U.S./U.K.) Board as document Bisec/Memo (48) 54, October 19, 1948, a copy of which was transmitted as an enclosure to despatch 1563, November 2, from Berlin, not printed. The signing of this agreement occurred during a meeting of the American and British Military Governors with representatives of France, Belgium, Netherlands, and Luxembourg at Berlin on October 18. General Bapst, representing General Koenig at the meeting, stated that he had been authorized to sign the agreement for France. Regarding the meeting, see telegram 2537, October 19, from Berlin, p. 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303].

Editorial Note [Document 411]

Editorial Note

In a letter of December 8, 1948, to General Koenig, not printed, General Clay and General Robertson confirmed that arrangements had been made for the entrance of representatives of the French Military Government into the Combined Coal Control Group. The letter explained that the senior French representative would become a member of the Board of the Coal Control Group with full voting rights. Pending the full fusion of the French Zone with the Bizone, however, the chairmanship of the Board would continue to alternate between the U.S. and U.K. members. This letter was discussed by the Three Western Military Governors at their meeting in Frankfurt on December 16, 1948; regarding that discussion, see the extract from General Clay’s message CC–7108, December 18, from Berlin, page 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366].

G. Rectification of the western frontier of GermanyG. Rectification of the western frontier of Germany

[412] Editorial Note

[413] Report of the Working Party on Provisional Adjustments to the Western Frontier of Germany

Paris, September 1, 1948

862.014/9–1348

[414] Memorandum by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay)

Berlin, October 11, 1948.

862.014/10–2848

[415] Memorandum Prepared by the Department of State

Washington, December 31, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–448

Editorial Note [Document 412]

Editorial Note

During the second part of the London Conference on Germany, April 20 to June 1, agreement was reached on the terms of reference for a Working Party of representatives from the United States, United Kingdom, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg to study proposals and prepare a report regarding proposals for the readjustment of the western frontiers of Germany. These terms of reference were set forth in conference document TRI/20 (Final), May 26, page 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]. The agreement on this document was noted in paragraph F of the Report of the London Conference on Germany, June 1, page 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], and document TRI/20 (Final) was included as Annex K of the Report.

In a note to Secretary of State Marshall dated June 26, not printed, French Ambassador Bonnet proposed that the six-power Working Party on Western German Boundaries be convened at Paris in early July in order to take up its tasks. (862.014/6–2648) Following an exchange of communications during early July among the governments concerned, a time and place for convening the Working Party was agreed upon.

The Working Party on Western German Boundaries met in Paris from July 22 to August 5 and from August 24 to September 1. Professor David Harris, of Stanford University, former Assistant Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs of the Department of State, served as United States Representative on the Working Group. Harry I. Nicholas served as Economic Adviser to Professor Harris. Professor Harris’ telegraphic reports from Paris on the progress of the meetings of the Working Party together with the Department of State’s telegraphic instructions to Harris are included in Department file 862.014.

Report of the Working Party on Provisional Adjustments to the Western Frontier of Germany 862.014/9–1348

[Document 413]

Report of the Working Party on Provisional Adjustments to the Western Frontier of Germany 1

Paris, September 1, 1948

[Translation]

In implementation of the recommendations which appear in [paragraph] F of the report of the Six-Power Conference on Germany (1st June, 1948) and which are laid out in detail in Annex K of the same report, a Working Party consisting of representatives of the United States of America, France, the United Kingdom, Belgium, The Netherlands and Luxembourg has proceeded to examine the proposals for adjustments of the western frontier of Germany made by the Governments of The Netherlands, of Belgium, of Luxembourg and of France.

The Working Party has also examined the limits of the Saar.

The Delegations met in Paris from 22nd July until 5th August. There was then an adjournment to allow certain representatives, who so requested, to visit certain points of the frontier affected by the claims. The Delegations met again in Paris from 24th August to 1st September, 1948.

The Working Party submits the present report to the attention of the Governments concerned. According to the terms of Annex K mentioned above the solutions which are recommended, if they are approved by Governments, would be put into force as a provisional measure.

Done in Paris in 6 copies the first day of September, 1948.

Part I

general observations

1.—In cases where a modification of the frontier is recommended, the Working Party proposes a line which is described in the report as precisely as possible.

The Working Party wishes to stress the necessarily indicative nature of this line. It will be the function of a future Delimitation Commission to determine the exact line of the provisional frontier according to the indications which are given in the report and taking into account the various local interests at issue.

2.—In cases where the modifications of the frontier would involve the transfer of an inhabited area to one of the four countries which border upon Germany, the Working Party recommends that the future of the inhabitants of such an area should be dealt with in the following way:—German nationals who were in the area concerned before 23rd February, 1948 (date of the opening of the First Session of the Six-Power Conference) should be given the opportunity:— (a) either to settle in Germany; in this case they would be allowed to take with them the movable property which belongs to them, even when they wish to retain ownership of their real property,

(b) or to continue to reside in the area concerned. They would then have no privileged status. No guarantee would be given against individual measures of expulsion; but any such measures of expulsion would be taken only as a defensive measure against subversive elements.

3.—The following idea was developed in the course of the discussions of the Working Party.

With a view to avoiding in the future the creation of new anomalies it would be desirable that by virtue of an international arrangement the construction of new buildings or roads should be forbidden within a reasonable distance of either side of the frontier. The Working Party considers that this question goes beyond its competence. Nevertheless, it draws the attention of the Governments concerned to the value to be had by making a study of this suggestion.

Part II

rectification of the western frontier of germany

The Working Party unanimously recommends the following modifications:—

A. German-Netherlands Frontier.

1.—From frontier stone 202E to frontier stone 1963 the frontier should follow the west bank of the Wijmeersersdiep, leaving in Germany the track which follows this bank over the greater part of its length. As an exception to the above, opposite the pumping station 1 kilometre south of Nieuwe Statenzijl, the apex of the triangle formed by the Wijmeersersdiep should be included in Netherlands territory, in such a way as to give to The Netherlands at this point a strip of about 100 metres on the east bank of the present course of the Westerwoldsche A. It is understood that The Netherlands Government would bear the cost of or carry out the realignment of the Wijmeersersdiep resulting from this rectification. (N.M. 1)*

2.—Between Nieuwerschans and frontier stone 187 the frontier should run along the east bank of the Moersloot.

From frontier stone 187 to frontier stone 186 a strip of about 20 metres depth should be ceded by Germany to The Netherlands.

From frontier stone 186 to about 700 metres north of frontier stone 183 and between frontier stones 181 and 172 (Ter Apel) except for a distance of about 180 metres to the north of frontier stone 176, the frontier should run along the east side of the track and embankment. (N.M. 4&5)

3.—Between frontier stones 49 and 41 the frontier should run along the east bank of the Ramelbeek where this is not already the case; thence from a point on the Nordhorn-Amelo Canal, just to the north of frontier stone 41, as far as frontier stone 33 it should follow the east side of the German road about 75 metres from the present frontier, it being understood that the houses on the German side of the road would not be included in Netherlands territory; from frontier stone 33 to frontier stone 24 it should follow the east side of the Vrijedijk. (N.M. 14a, 14b)

4.—Between frontier stones 15 and 5 the frontier should be drawn along a straight line between these two frontier stones in such a way, however, as to include in The Netherlands the tributaries of the River Dinkel and to take account of the contours. (N.M. 15)

5.—To the south of Losser in the area of frontier stone 79 a small portion of German territory to the north of the River Dinkel should pass under Netherlands sovereignty in such a way that the frontier would follow the south bank of this river (N.M. 17)†

6.—Between frontier stones 831 and 830 (Rekken) the path which follows the frontier should be entirely included in The Netherlands. (N.M. 20)

7.—Between frontier stones 811 and 810 the frontier should follow the east bank of the Ramsbeek. (N.M. 20)

8.—The German part of the village of Dinxperlo should come under Netherlands sovereignty. The Delimitation Commission should be instructed to determine a new frontier line between frontier stones 737 and 731, it being understood that Hubers Mill should remain in German territory; this line should be at a distance of about 300 metres from the present frontier.

It is understood that arrangements should be made for the use of the road by Germans living in the frontier area on the basis of the prewar arrangements and subject to a simple and effective system of control: this system should be established by The Netherlands authorities and the British Occupation Authorities. (N.M. 21)

9.—From frontier stone 702 to frontier stone 660 the frontier should approximately follow a straight line. (N.M. C)‡

10.—From frontier stone 652 to the road junction 500 metres short of frontier stone 650 the track should be included entirely in Netherlands territory. From the road junction to frontier stone 650 the road should be in German territory. (N.M. 28)

11.—From the northern end of the Quer Dam the frontier should follow the south-eastern edge of the Quer Dam and the south bank of the Wijler Meer (in such a way as to include the road in Netherlands territory) as far as the road which forks to Lagewald and from there it should follow the west side of this road as far as frontier stone 627. (N.M. 29)

12.—Between frontier stone 594 and frontier stone 589 the road which follows the frontier should come entirely under Netherlands sovereignty. (N.M. 30)

13.—In the area of frontier stone 563 the frontier should be moved to the east bank of the River Niers where over a distance of about 200 metres it at present follows the west bank. (N.M. 32)

14.—Between frontier stones 561 and 555 in the area of Hommersum the frontier should be drawn along the following line:—

From frontier stone 561 to frontier stone 560 along the south side of the Vee Dijk, then along the east side of the track which, after following the frontier as far as frontier stone 558, follows a straight line to frontier stone 555;

Between frontier stones 537 and 535 the frontier should be moved so as to bring into The Netherlands the track which follows the frontier, it being understood that the local German users would retain access to this track. (N.M. 33)

15.—In the area of frontier stone 531 the frontier should cross the road at right angles at a point between the two road junctions. From there it should follow the west side of the road as far as frontier stone 532. (N.M. 34)

16.—In the area of Arcen the frontier should follow approximately a straight line between frontier stones 499 and 488, leaving in German territory the road between Walbech and Auwel via Lingsfort.

Between frontier stones 484 and 480 the frontier should follow the east bank of the Lugenia Canal as far as the bridge opposite frontier stone 481. From this bridge it should follow a straight line to frontier stone 480. (N.M. 36)

17.—In the area of Sittard the frontier should follow a line from frontier stone 324 to rejoin the present frontier to the north of Schinveld; this line, whose exact course should be fixed by the Delimitation Commission, would leave in German territory the localities of Saef-felen, Hastenrath and Gangelt. (N.M.D)

18.—In the area of Ubach the track to the north-west of frontier stone 256 should pass under Netherlands sovereignty for a distance of about 125 metres. (N.M. 49)

19.—In the Rimburg-Kerkrade sector between frontier stones 239 and 238 the frontier should follow the west side of the railway line from frontier stone 239 as far as a point to the north of frontier stone 238 where a branch railway line crosses the River Wurm; from there it should follow the east bank of the River Wurm as far as frontier stone 238. (N.M. 50, 51)

20.—In the village of Kerkrade the road and the track which follow the frontier between frontier stones 237 and 236 and between frontier stones 236 and 234 respectively should come under Netherlands sovereignty. Between frontier stones 232 and 229 the Working Party recommends that the Delimitation Commission should seek to determine a frontier line mid-way between the two north/south roads. If the work of this Commission makes it clear that such a line would result in more inconveniences than the present line, the de facto frontier at present marked by the fence should be confirmed. (N.M. 52)

21.—Between frontier stones 197 and 195 (Vaals) the road which runs along the frontier should come under Netherlands sovereignty. (N.M. 53)

Note: Where it is proposed that the frontier should run along the German bank of a river or stream, the Netherlands Delegation considers that for technical reasons a strip of territory should also be ceded to The Netherlands.

This opinion was not unanimously adopted by the Working Party since the British Delegation could not support it.

B. German-Belgian Frontier.

1.—Between frontier stones 1017 and 980 the frontier should follow the following line:

From frontier stone 1017, the former limit of Kreis Lupen prolonged to the east of the railway line at the entrance of the tunnel towards Aachen; thence a line along the railway as far as frontier stone 980.

The attention of the Delimitation Commission should be especially drawn to the first of the general observations in respect of the houses situated in the northeastern corner of this area.

2.—Between frontier stones 943 and 920 the road which runs along the frontier should come under Belgian sovereignty, as also:— (a) the German customs post at the junction between this road and the road from Ober to Forstbach and the portion of this road opposite the customs post;

(b) the forest of Freyen (Aachen-Eynatten).

3.—The road from Rötgen to Konzen and the branch road from Fringshaus to Lammersdorf should be transferred to Belgian sovereignty, it being understood that the Belgian Government would undertake to conclude with the British occupation authorities a provisional arrangement to ensure the maintenance and use of these roads for transit traffic between Aachen and Monschau by the inhabitants of these two towns and of the area between them.

In the arrangements to be concluded with the British occupation authorities provision should also be made to ensure a simple and effective system of control which would prevent smuggling and any abuse of the roads.

The above undertaking by the Belgian Government would cease as soon as another route between Monschau and Aachen is developed into a satisfactory condition, and at the latest by a date to be fixed by common agreement between Belgian and British experts, taking account of technical considerations which only they are competent to judge.

4.—The German enclaves of Münsterbildchen, Rötgen, Lammersdorf, Konzen, Mützenich and Ruitzhof to the west of the Raeren to Kalterherberg railway should be included in Belgian territory; as also the village of Rötgen up to a line which from frontier stone 886F would come out at the railway in the area of frontier stone 790, leaving in German territory the Dreilägerbach Dam and reservoir and hydraulic installations, it being understood that the Belgian authorities would undertake to do nothing which would prejudice the supply of the reservoir. A strip of an average width of 100 metres to the east of the railway should be ceded to Belgium where this is possible without including German houses. The Administration of the Belgian railways would make the necessary arrangements, based on the rules governing the normal working of their system, to deal with the new situation so created along the Belgo-German frontier.

5.—Between frontier stones 652 and 648 the frontier should follow the Breitenbach stream.

6.—Between frontier stones 624 and 572 the German salient should be eliminated. The Delimitation Commission would be instructed to determine the line which would be most suitable to adopt.

7.—In the region of Losheim the following areas should be ceded by Germany to Belgium:— (a) the triangle of forest-land extending for 1,500 metres to the north of Weisserstein, bounded on the west by the present frontier and of a width at its widest point of approximately 700 metres;

(b) the triangle between the present frontier and the road L. 25 where the road leaves the present frontier south of Losheimergraben;

(c) the area around Losheim village up to a line running east from the road/railway bridge north-west of Losheim, along the southern edge of the forest to the present Kreis boundary, thence south along the Kreis boundary to rejoin the present frontier at the road-bend 1,000 metres south-east of Losheim railway station;

(d) the road L. 25 through this area.

If after an examination by British and Belgian experts it is found that the alternative road which the Belgian Government considers to be adequate, is not equally satisfactory, a time limit would be fixed by common agreement between the experts for the adequate development and improvement by the Germans of the alternative road. In this case, during the agreed period the Belgian Government would permit German transit traffic to use road L. 25 in accordance with arrangements to be worked out with the British occupation authorities. There arrangements would include adequate provisions to prevent smuggling and any other abuse of the road.

8.—Between frontier stones 159 and 151 the German enclave to the west of the St. Vith-Trois Vierges railway and a strip of about 100 metres to the east of this railway should be included in Belgian territory.

C. German-Luxembourg Frontier.

To the east of Vianden the frontier should be modified in such a way as to include in Luxembourg territory the forest called Kammerwald and the village of Roth.

The new frontier should follow a line from the south of Roth to the west of Obersgegen and should then run north, following the river Gay as far as the south of the Wirbelkopf. Then, after passing slightly to the north of hill (trig, point) 497.5 (between Neuscheuerhof and Bauler), it would rejoin the present frontier at a point on the present frontier about 1,200 metres south-west of Bauler. The future Delimitation Commission should be instructed to establish the exact frontier line.

D. French-German Frontier.

To the north of Wissembourg the village of Schweigen should be included in French territory.§

Part III

Agreement cannot be reached on certain frontier rectifications but the Working Party recommends that in the following cases special arrangements should be concluded:—

A. German/Netherlands Frontier.

1.—The Ems Estuary and the Dollart: The Working Party has been unable to reach unanimous agreement on frontier rectifications in the Ems Estuary and the Dollart. In view of the absence of a frontier in the Ems Estuary defined by international agreement it recommends that as a provisional measure arrangements should be worked out between the Netherlands authorities and the British military occupation authorities with a view to:— (a) facilitating the detailed study of the projected plans for the development of the Ems Estuary and for the reclamation of the Dollart;

(b) ensuring that no work is undertaken in the Ems Estuary, apart from normal routine dredging, without the consent of both parties. The Netherlands authorities and the British military occupation authorities will agree upon rules to cover the extent of normal routine dredging.

2.—The Elten Area: ║ The Working Party has been unable to reach agreement on the western part of the Netherlands claim (rectification of the frontier on the River Rhone between frontier stones 657 and 660) but it recommends that The Netherlands authorities, in accordance with arrangements to be agreed with the British occupation authorities, should have the right to anchor, search and control vessels over the entire width of the river.

B. German/Luxembourg Frontier.

The Rivers Our, Sur and Moselle along the German/Luxembourg frontier are at present jointly owned by Germany and Luxembourg. The Luxembourg Government has demanded the exclusive ownership of these rivers and the establishment of international servitudes on the German bank which would permit the Luxembourg Government to rest on the German bank the installations which are necessary for the regularisation of the rivers and for the establishment of communications between the two banks.

The American, Belgian, French and Netherlands Delegations have supported this demand.

The British delegation was unable to recommend the claim and the Working Party has finally agreed upon the following proposal:—

The French occupation authorities should be authorised to conclude with the Luxembourg Government arrangements which would permit the Luxembourg Government to establish in these rivers installations necessary for the regularisation of the rivers and for the re-establishment of communications between the two banks and which would further permit them to rest these installations on the German bank.

Part IV

Taking account of the observations made in the course of the preliminary study, the Governments concerned have not maintained certain of their proposals for modifying the frontier. Other proposals, however (although the competence of the Working Party to deal with them has not been disputed) have not been supported by all Delegations. These points, which are recommended only by a majority of the Working Party, are as follows:—

A. German-Netherlands Frontier.

1.—To the south of Losser; apart from the rectification unanimously recommended by the Working Party,¶ the Belgian, French and Luxembourg Delegations consider that they can recommend the Netherlands claim for a portion of territory to the south of the River Dinkel; (N.M. 17)

2.—In the following cases the Belgian, French and Luxembourg Delegations have recommended the acceptance of the Netherlands claims. The American Delegation could also have accepted them if unanimity had been reached. The British Delegation, however, did not consider that the arguments in favour of rectification were sufficiently strong. Nevertheless, they would have been prepared to agree to the rectifications proposed provided The Netherlands Delegation could agree to the elimination of certain anomalies by three small rectifications in Germany’s favour. The Netherlands Delegation was, however, unable to agree to these arrangements since The Netherlands people could never accept cession of territory to Germany. These points are:— (a) The Netherlands Delegation requested that the frontier should be drawn along the track from frontier stone 826 to frontier stone 821 (N.M. 20);

(b) The Netherlands Delegation requested that the frontier should be drawn in a straight line between frontier stones 719 and 725 (N.M. 22);

(c) The Netherlands Delegation requested that from frontier stone 578 the frontier should run along the south side of the Reichswald to the track junction north of frontier stone 571, thence to frontier stone 570 and thence on the eastern side of the road to frontier stone 568 (N.M. 31);

(d) The Netherlands Delegation requested that the frontier should run along the north side of the track 300 metres north of frontier stone 478 in a straight line to frontier stone 476 (N.M. 37);

(e) The Netherlands Delegation requested that the frontier should run in a straight line from frontier stone 476 to frontier stone 464 (N.M. 38);

(f) The Netherlands Delegation requested that west of frontier stone 452 the frontier should follow the north-western side of the track to frontier stone 448 (N.M. 40);

(g) The Netherlands Delegation requested that the two small pockets on the east and west sides of frontier stone 363 should be eliminated, as also the two small pockets to either side of frontier stone 370 and that between frontier stones 376 and 373 the frontier should run on the south side of the Rothen stream (N.M. 43).

3.—In the following cases the Belgian, French and Luxembourg Delegations have supported The Netherlands claims. The American Delegation could also have accepted them if unanimity had been reached. The British Delegation however is unable to recommend these claims:— (a) In the area of Emmerich The Netherlands Delegation claimed that the area between the present frontier and the autobahn under construction, including the autobahn itself, should pass under Netherlands Sovereignty from frontier stone 702 to the point south of Gendringen where the autobahn at present passes through Netherlands territory. (N.M. C)**

(b) The Netherlands Delegation requested that in the area of Venlo the frontier should run in a straight line from frontier stone 457 to frontier stone 454. (N.M. 39)

(c) In the area of Melick and Herkenboch The Netherlands Delegation desired the incorporation into The Netherlands of the triangle of German territory to the south of the spit of Netherlands territory which penetrates into Germany in this area. (N.M. 42)

(d) In the area of Niederbusch The Netherlands Delegation proposed a frontier line which would include Niederbusch in Netherlands territory and which would thence follow the natural division between the cultivated area and the heath-land as far as frontier stone 257. (N.M. 47 and 48)

(e) The Netherlands Delegation proposed that the salient of Lenders from about frontier stone 209 to frontier stone 197 should be eliminated (N.M. 52a)

B. French-German Frontier.

The French Delegation proposed that part of the forest of Mundat (to the north-west of Wissembourg) should be re-attached to French territory.

The American, Belgian, Luxembourg and Netherlands Delegations have supported this recommendation but the British Delegation has been unable to recommend it.††

Part V

The American and British Delegations considered that the following proposals for rectifications to the western frontier of Germany could not be dealt with by the Working Party since it is impossible to regard them as “minor” rectifications.

A. German-Netherlands Frontier—Bentheim Bocht.

The Netherlands Government has proposed the elimination of the Bentheim Bocht by incorporating this territory in The Netherlands.

The Belgian, French and Luxembourg Delegations have recognised that this proposal can be discussed by the Working Party and have supported it.

The British Delegation has been unable to consider this claim as of a minor nature because of the size of the area, its population and its economic value.

The American Delegation has been unable to accept the claim because of the importance to the German economy of the oil-field of Emmlicheim.‡‡

B. German-Luxembourg Frontier—The Our Dam.

The Luxembourg Government has demanded the cession by Germany of the area necessary for carrying out the plan for constructing dams on the Our and its tributary, the Irsen.

The Belgian, French and Netherlands Delegations have considered that this proposal can be discussed and recommended.

The American and British Delegations on the other hand contested the competence of the Working Party in this matter. In their view it is a question of a frontier modification over too great an area and based on economic considerations of such importance that they exceed the competence of the Working Party.

These two Delegations have emphasised that their attitude implies no judgement on the merits of the Luxembourg project and that a pronouncement on the possibility of its future execution is a matter for consideration elsewhere.

C. French-German Frontier—Kehl.

The French Government has demanded the attachment of Kehl to France. This attachment could be effected either by annexation or by a long-term international servitude.

The Belgian, Luxembourg and Netherlands Delegations have pronounced themselves in favour of this demand.

The American and British Delegations expressed the opinion that the French claim for Kehl is based on economic considerations which do not fall within the competence of the Working Party and that this question has moreover a major political aspect; for this reason it is their view that the Working Party is unable to consider the claim.

Part VI

limits of the saar

The Working Party unanimously recommends to the approval of the Six Governments the delimitation of the Saar territory as established by the ordinance of the French Commander-in-Chief in Germany, dated 6th June, 1947 including the following three modifications proposed by the French Delegation:—

incorporation in the territory of the Saar of:— (i) the triangular road junction between Dunzweiler on the one hand and Lautenbach and Höchen on the other;

(ii) the commune of Waldmohr;

(iii) the commune of Kirrberg.

1 The source text was transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 1177, September 13, from Paris, not printed. One of the signed originals of the Report had been taken to Washington by messenger earlier. The remaining footnotes in this document all appear in the source text. In an undated paper entitled “Comments on the Report of the Working Party on Provisional Adjustments of the Western Frontier of Germany,” not printed, David Harris made the following recommendations with respect to the Report. In connection with Part I of the Report, Harris urged the establishment of a delimitation commission, or commissions charged with working out on the spot the exact location of the frontiers. Harris recommended that the Department of State approve all the cessions of territory proposed in Part II of the Report, and he also found no reason to take issue with special arrangements proposed in Part III of the Report. Harris felt that the claims referred to in Part IV and rejected by the Working Group could be endorsed by the Department. In connection with the claims considered in Part V of the Report, Harris suggested that the Department might find it desirable to attempt to meet the Netherlands’ legitimate grievance regarding the Bentheim Bocht, but he recommended that the Department continue to reject the French claim to Kehl. Finally, Harris recommended acceptance of the Saar frontier as described in Part VI of the Report. (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 119, File—Western Frontiers, Reports) Harris also commented in some detail on the Report and the work of the Working Party in a letter of October 17 to Howard Trivers, Assistant Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–448).

* N.M. 1=Netherlands Memorandum of 22nd July, 1948, Part II, Claim No. 1. [Footnote in the source text.]

† See also Part IV, A 1. [Footnote in the source text.]

‡ This covers part of The Netherlands claim in the area of Elten. The western part of this claim is the object of the suggestion in Part III A 2 and the eastern part is dealt with in Part IV A 3 (a). [Footnote in the source text.]

§ This covers part of the French claim for Schweigen and the forest of Mundat—See also Part IV B. [Footnote in the source text.]

║ Netherlands Memorandum, I C. See also Part II A, No. 9 and Part IV A, 3 (a). [Footnote in the source text.]

¶ See IIA, No. 5. [Footnote in the source text.]

** See also Part II, point 9, and Part III A.2. [Footnote in the source text.]

†† See also II D. [Footnote in the source text.]

‡‡ Owing to the importance attached by the Netherlands Delegation to this claim, the minor rectifications in this area were not studied in detail. (N.M. 7–13) [Footnote in the source text.]

Memorandum by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) 862.014/10–2848

[Document 414]

Memorandum by the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay)1

secret Berlin, October 11, 1948.

You may recall that several days ago I sent you the report of the Working Party on the Western German Frontier,2 which concluded its discussions in Paris on 1 September 1948. In the meantime, I have received a telegram3 from the State Department requesting the transmission of any views which you and I may have relative to the recommendations of the Working Party for provisional territorial adjustments.

For your convenience, I attach a memorandum prepared in the Office of Political Affairs summarizing the proposed changes and giving a brief analysis of their economic importance. The adjustments approved by the Working Party are of minor economic consequence to Germany, with one possible exception. The larger claims, such as that of the Netherlands Government to the Bentheimerbocht, the larger Luxembourg claims, and the French claim to the port of Kehl, were not approved by the Working Party. Inasmuch as the frontier adjustments recommended are of minimum economic importance, my inclination is to concur with the exception of the Saar case.

In the report of the Working Party, the reasons for the adjustments recommended are not set forth in detail. This is probably because of the original terms of reference for the Working Party which stated that it “shall only examine and report on those proposals which involve no appreciable loss to the German economy and which, being of a minor character only, can be regarded as desirable to eliminate local anomalies and improve communications”. This being the case, the general assumption can be made that all of the adjustments agreed to by the American representative were approved on this basis. For example, most of the changes approved in the Netherlands-German border usually embraced very small territorial areas and were usually concerned with straightening out the frontier line or changing control of a road. On the Belgian-German frontier, minor rectifications involved the straightening of the border, the control of certain roads and the control of certain railroad facilities from Germany to Belgium. The changes approved involved the transfer of only 40 square kilometers. Only one Luxembourg-German border change, involving the transfer of 8.3 square kilometers of forest, was approved. On the Franco-German border, the approved adjustments would transfer one small village from Germany to France where most of the inhabitants are employed on the French side.

With respect to the enlarged Saar territory, the Working Party unanimously recommended the approval of the delimitation of the Saar territory as established by the Ordinance of the French Commander-in-Chief of 6 June 1947. Three minor modifications, providing for the incorporation into the Saar territory of two communes and one triangular road junction, were also approved. This latter claim is of minor consequence, but the territory attached unilaterally to the Saar in 1947 is another matter. The Saar comprised in 1946 approximately 1,925 square kilometers and 865,000 inhabitants. The changes in June 1947 added about 627 square kilometers and 63,683 inhabitants. In area, this represents an increase of approximately one-third. USPolAd does not possess information which indicates in detail the French justification for the transfer of this territory. I recall that at Moscow in 1947, where certain informal conversations were held with the French, it was claimed that, the reasons for enlarging the Saar were (a) to give it a common frontier with Luxembourg and eliminate the German neck, (b) to make the Saar more self-sufficient agriculturally as the region was primarily agricultural, (c) that a large part of the population of the newly incorporated region was employed in the Saar coal mines and (d) that it would bring within the Saar a railroad line which served primarily the Saar territory. I am not informed whether other arguments were advanced by the French when the Working Party met in Paris. In view of the area involved in this proposed transfer, I am not inclined to concur as it seems to me to go beyond the terms of reference of the Working Party cited in the preceding paragraph.

With respect to the proposal contained in Part I, paragraph 1, for a Delimitation Commission to determine the exact line of the frontier, the State Department is inclined to believe that this Commission should be composed of representatives of the Military Governments of the U.S., the U.K., and France, together with a representative of the country concerned in each instance. The State Department points out that such composition of the Commission would be preferable to a Commission having representation of Military Government only of the Zone involved in each boundary case, which would mean, for example, that on French claims there would be exclusively French representation on the Commission.

In arranging for American representation on the Delimitation Commission, it would be agreeable to the State Department to have the U.S. representatives either from OMGUS or USPolAd.

The maps illustrating the boundary changes discussed by the Commission are likewise attached.4

Robert Murphy

[Annex]

Memorandum Prepared by the Civil Affairs Division, Office of Military Government (U.S.)

[Extract]

secret [Berlin,] 19 October 1948.

West German Boundary Changes

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8. In summary, this Division a. Concurs with the Political Adviser’s inclination to refuse acceptance of the enlarged Saar of June 1947, as going beyond the terms of the Working Party.

b. Concurs with the Political Adviser’s recommendation that the Delimitation Commission be composed of representatives of all three Military Governments.

c. Is ready to provide a qualified United States representative on this Commission, unless he is provided by the Office of Political Affairs.

d. Believes that, since the original Working Party did not set forth the reasons for its decisions in detail and there is, therefore, no record indicating the compelling necessity, under a strict interpretation of its terms of reference, for the 29 minor changes accepted by the Working Party, these changes either should not be concurred in by this headquarters or that the concurrence should be withheld pending a re-investigation on the scene.

9. In connection with d, it is suggested that one possible solution would be to appoint the proposed Delimitation Commission under terms of reference that do not bind it or this headquarters to acceptance of the report of the Working Party, but with instructions to delimit boundary changes, if at all, on the basis of the original London instructions.

10. The above recommendations have been coordinated with Dr. Litchfield, who is at present in Frankfurt. Dr. Litchfield wishes to draw particular attention to the undesirability of introducing 29, even minor, border modifications at the present stage of the Bonn discussions5 and of the negotiations on the Occupation Statute.6

For the Division Director:
L. E. de Neufville
Consultant to the Director

1 The source text was transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 1542, October 28, from Berlin, not printed.

2  Ante, p. 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413].

3 Telegram 1701, October 7, to Berlin, not printed (862.014/9–1348).

4 The maps under reference here were not attached to the source text.

5 The reference here is to meetings of the West German Parliamentary Council at Bonn; for documentation regarding these meetings, see pp. 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 252] ff.

6 For documentation regarding the preparation of an Occupation Statute, see pp. 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373] ff.

Memorandum Prepared by the Department of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–448

[Document 415]

Memorandum Prepared by the Department of State 1

1. The United States Government approves the recommendations for the provisional readjustment of the western frontier of Germany contained in Part II of the Report of the Six-Power Working Party done in Paris, September 1, 1948.2

2. The United States Government approves the special arrangements recommended by the Working Party in Part III of the Report.

3. The United States Government is obliged to reserve its position with respect to the recommendation of the Working Party in Part VI concerning approval of the delimitation of the Saar territory as established by the ordinance of the French Commander-in-Chief of June 6, 1947. In so far as the Saar territory as thus delimited has been increased in area almost one-third over the original Saar territory with the addition thereby of over sixty thousand inhabitants, the United States Government believes that the decision requires a more detailed study than the Working Party was enabled to carry out within the time allotted to it. It is therefore believed that the decision should be left to the eventual peace settlement pending which the United States Government in accordance with its general policy must reserve its position.

The United States Government does not object, however, to the continuation, pending a peace settlement, of the present administrative boundaries of the Saar territory, with the three minor modifications recommended in the Working Party’s Report.

4. The United States Government approves the recommendations contained in paragraph 1 of Part I of the Working Party’s Report, that a delimitation commission be established to determine the exact line of the provisional frontier according to the indications given in the Report, and taking into account the various local interests at issue. In order to take account properly of the various local interests at issue, it is believed desirable that the delimitation commission or commissions be instructed to permit the local German authorities to express their views with regard to matters at issue in each case.

It is suggested that the delimitation commission or commissions be composed of representatives of the Military Governments of France, the United Kingdom, and the United States together with representatives of the claimant governments concerned in each instance.

With respect to paragraph 2 of Part I, it is believed that the delimitation commission or commissions should be charged with the formulation of more adequate and precise provisions to cover administrative problems in connection with the provisional modification of the frontier and with the resettlement of persons who leave the affected areas to reside in Germany.

Washington, December 31, 1948.

1 Identical copies of this memorandum were transmitted by the Acting Secretary of State to the United Kingdom, French, Belgian, and Netherlands Ambassadors and Luxembourg Minister on December 31, 1948.

2  Ante, p. 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]. All the other governments concerned had already formally communicated to the United States their approval of the Report of the Working Party. France (in a note of November 29), the Netherlands (in a note of December 14), and Luxembourg (in a note of December 23) had reserved their positions on territorial claims not satisfied by the recommendations of the Working Party. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2948, 12–1448, and 12–2348, respectively)

H. Protection of foreign investments in GermanyH. Protection of foreign investments in Germany

[416] Editorial Note

Editorial Note [Document 416]

Editorial Note

In accordance with agreed document TRI/18 (Final), May 31 of the London Conference on Germany (page 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]) included as Annex E to the Final Report of the Conference, June 1 (page 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]) a six-power Intergovernmental Working Party met in Paris between October 25 and November 11, 1948 to discuss the safeguarding of foreign interests in Western Germany. Assistant Secretary of State Willard L. Thorp was the United States representative at these meetings, and Covey T. Oliver served as his alternate. The other principal representatives at these meetings were as follows: France—Hervé Alphand and François de Panafieu; United Kingdom—Sir Henry Gregory; Netherlands—M. Kohnstamm; Belgium—Fernand Seynaeve; Luxembourg—Lionel Albert Wehrer. Documentation on the preparations for, and the transactions of, these meetings is included in Department of State file 362.005. Other related documentation is included in file 740.00119 Control (Germany). Minutes of the fourteen numbered meetings of the working party are included in CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 122.

The “Report and Recommendations of the Intergovernmental Working Group on the Protection of Foreign Interests in Germany” was approved on November 26 by the representatives of the governments participating in the meetings. Copies of the Report and Recommendations were transmitted to the Department of State as enclosures to despatch 1473, December 16, from Paris, not printed (362.005/12–1648). Under cover of a note dated January 12, 1949, the French Embassy submitted to the Department a certified copy of the Report and Recommendations which conformed with the original deposited with the French Ministry for Foreign Affairs (362.005/1–1249). In a review appearing in issue No. 180, December 6, 1948, of the Department of State classified weekly publication Current Economic Developments, the most important recommendations of the Intergovernmental Working Party on Foreign Investments were described as follows: “Removal of Controls and Resumption of Ownership Rights It was agreed that UN property owners should resume to the fullest extent possible the control of their property and property rights in Germany, subject only to compelling requirements with regard to the over-all economic position in Germany. The desire of the Military Governors that UN owners should quickly take control of this property was noted. It is recommended that foreign owners should not be subject to any restrictions not applicable to property owners in general as far as management, appointment of personnel and use and disposal of funds and property in Germany is concerned. It is recognized that special regulations may have to be applied on acquisition of new or increased interests in critical industries or where undue concentration of economic power might result and to transfers of property in Germany between persons both of whom are resident outside Germany; but these should be as liberal as possible. The Group recommends that goods in Germany belonging to UN nationals manufactured for them in Germany under prepaid contracts, sent into Germany for processing, or in transit through that country, all as of the time of the capitulation, should be exportable by the owner without his having to pay for them again in dollars, as is presently insisted upon by OMGUS.

“War Damage and Equalization of Burdens Recognizing that the amount of war damage compensation must await a peace treaty, it is recommended that foreign interests in Germany should participate before then on the same basis as German interests in any compensation provided by German or Military Government legislation. The power to determine the extent to which special levies or equalization of burdens taxes should apply to UN property should be reserved to the Military Governors. It was agreed that UN property should not be subject to taxes levied expressly for the specific purpose of meeting charges arising out of the war. With reference to the present situation in Germany, the problematical character of equalization of burdens tax legislation was noted, as was the possibility that the Germans might include both war losses and currency reform losses among the burdens to be equalized. Should this be the case, the Group was of the opinion that the tax and the corresponding lien should be only provisionally imposed on the property in Germany of non-German nationals and corporations and of corporations organized under the laws of Germany but wholly owned by such non-German nationals. While the Intergovernmental Group recognizes the discrimination which has occurred through blocking bank accounts of UN nationals and the consequent effect of monetary reform, it believes this problem must await the peace settlement for treatment. A bizonal ordinance that plant and equipment may be removed under Land orders from one concern to another to equalize reparation effects should not be applied to UN-owned concerns except where of paramount necessity and in all cases adequate compensation should be paid.

“Public Ownership and Deconcentration The Group’s fundamental recommendation of public ownership and land reform follows the US Directive to General Clay: the Military Governors should not permit such measures to become effective regarding foreign interests until satisfied that suitable provisions have been made for prompt, adequate and effective compensation. Should nationalization (i.e., by a German central government) of German heavy industries or natural resources be involved, the Group recommends prior consultations between the six governments concerned pursuant to Annex A, Paragraph 4 of the Report of the London Talks on Germany. All delegations but the UK agreed upon the desirability of international adjudication or arbitration of disputed compensation claims not settled by the exhaustion of the remedies provided in Germany. In accepting the general principle that foreign interests could be taken into public ownership if provision were made for compensation, the French delegation declared that its position on the question of the ultimate ownership of the coal, iron and steel industries of the Ruhr was not thereby prejudiced.

“Various fears and objections to the deconcentration laws were met by a recommendation that the UN interests be permitted to present or to comment upon reorganization plans and that these plans as finally adopted should provide for the UN shareholders in the dissolved corporation to be given a priority (i.e., pre-emptive rights) to holdings in the new companies comparable in value to their old holdings.

“Mines, Iron and Steel Military Governors should invite UN stockholders in companies organized under the trusteeship plan to submit requests for participation on an equitable basis in the new companies formed and the Military Governors should study the possibility of carrying out corporate reorganizations under the trusteeship plan in a way to prevent forced reduction in over-all percentage of UN ownership in the industries which remain in private ownership. These recommendations also apply in carrying out the deconcentration of I. G. Farben. Account should be taken of the desirability of reestablishing, to the extent possible under the regulations governing allocation of German coal, deliveries of coal to UN owners from their mines in Germany as they took place before the Nazi regime. The Intergovernmental Group recommended an examination as soon as possible by experts of the Aachen coal mines to make recommendations as to whether a higher price than that for Ruhr coal should be permitted, as was the case prior to 1934. UN ownership interests in the Ruhr-Aachen coal field should not be jeopardized by Laender claims for advances required as a result of the coal pricing policy up to August, 1948, and this should be considered also in connection with UN interests in the iron and steel producing industry.

“Monetary Reform Under the monetary reform, a UN creditor presently has the option of accepting payment of a reichsmark debt in deutschmarks at the 10-to-1 rate or of refusing to accept payment and keep whatever rights he has in suspense. A number of the countries complained that their nationals had no way of knowing which course they should follow, as it was clear that the final determination of the extent to which foreign creditors should be satisfied would depend on the peace treaty. To eliminate this situation, it is recommended that foreign creditors should be given the right to accept the deutschmark payment without waiving their rights in a final settlement and that those who have already refused payment shall be permitted to withdraw their refusals. France and the Benelux countries made a determined effort to modify the effect of the currency reform laws insofar as they applied to reduce as 10-to-1 the deposits in Germany of their nationals forced to deposit in German banks during the war. They also sought to have externally held reichsmarks brought into Germany for conversion into deutschmarks and to have some pre-treaty redress for forced investments in German public securities. All members of the Group finally agreed that the foregoing questions could not be finally settled prior to a peace treaty; France and Benelux thought that all of them should be further studied before a peace treaty; the US thought only the externally held reichsmark matter might be so studied; and the UK delegation thought that all of them except the forced investments question might be earlier studied. No delegation dissented from the view that the obligations under discussion were claims against the whole Third Reich, but France and the Benelux countries emphasized the prejudice to Allied nationals caused by delay in reaching final settlement.

“Maintenance of Contractual Relationships In line with the general position written into the satellite peace treaties, it is recommended that the status of original contracts remain unaltered, with occurrence of war not relieving a debtor from the obligation to pay his debts in accordance with the terms of the original contract. It is also recommended that the Military Governors study the matter of periods of prescription and limitation of rights of action since, during the war, many persons were unable to comply within the time limit to the necessary legal formalities to keep their claims alive. These problems should be studied with a view to safeguarding rights still current or reinstating those which expired during the war. The rights of foreign creditors should continue to exist until proper payment has been met in the case of debts expressed in foreign currency where before and during the war, the Konversionskasse received or required payments in reichsmarks but did not make out-payments in foreign exchange. In the future a foreign creditor should be allowed to accept payment for these debts in deutschmarks if it is offered. Because of complexities arising out of the disintegration or zonal separation of certain German debtors, such as the Potash Syndicate, it is recommended that the views of interested creditor organizations should be invited with a view to making proposals for the Military Governors to consider. Because of US opposition no recommendation was made on obligations written with a ‘gold mark’ clause, but the various positions taken were set forth in the Group’s report.

“Most-Favored-Nation Treatment It is recommended that foreign countries and their nationals shall enjoy national and most-favored-nation treatment in all matters relating to commerce. As regards establishments and the conduct of business, the Group recommends the most-favored-nation principle and that the Military Governors be directed to eliminate as rapidly as consistent with problems of internal administration, shortages of facilities and the needs of the Occupation, any existing discrimination against foreign interests in this regard. Review was asked for a, JEIA instruction allegedly discriminating against non-German shipping and forwarding companies. The Group ratified the statement on reciprocity for Germany in Annex E of the Report of the London Talks on Germany.

“Miscellaneous In view of the fact that German authorities are becoming less and less subject to the direct control of the Military Governors and particularly in view of Germany’s long history of unsatisfactory treatment of foreign property and concerns in Germany, it is recommended that the terms of any Occupation Statute reserve to the Military Governors the powers necessary to secure the safeguarding of UN interests in Germany and the maintenance of the principle of non-discrimination.

“A study of the problem involved in reestablishment of rights under prewar commercial treaties should be made, A study should be made now of the claims of UN nationals against German social insurance organizations. Consideration should be given to steps to prevent double taxation. The Military Governors should take steps to ensure protection in Germany of the industrial, literary and artistic rights belonging to foreign nationals. It is recommended that, for a period of two years, UN insurers should be permitted to resume business in Germany without being required to reconstitute guarantee reserves which disappeared during the war. It is further recommended that the governments should keep under continuous review the question of ensuring non-discrimination and safeguarding foreign interests in Germany and that they consider the calling of further intergovernmental meetings for the study of matters of principle if requested by any of the governments represented.”

III. Other efforts to achieve economic rehabilitation and control in the western zones of occupation of GermanyIII. Other efforts to achieve economic rehabilitation and control in the western zones of occupation of Germany

Contents

A. Reparations and restitution policy; the problem of prohibitions and limitations on German industrial productionA. Reparations and restitution policy;1 the problem of prohibitions and limitations on German industrial production

1 For previous documentation on this topic, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 1104 ff.

[417] The Civil Affairs Division of the Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay)

[Washington,] 9 January 1948.

740.00119 EW/1–1548: Telegram

[418] The British Embassy to the Department of State

January 12, 1948.

740.00119 EW/1–1248

[419] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

Berlin, 13 January 1948.

740.00119 EW/1–1548: Telegram

[420] Policy Paper Prepared by the Department of State

[Washington,] January 15, 1948.

740.00119 EW/1–1548

[421] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] January 19, 1948.

740.00119 EW/1–1948

[422] Memorandum Prepared by the Department of State

[Washington,] January 20, 1948.

740.00119 EW/1–1248

[423] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] January 23, 1948.

811.002/1–2348

[424] Memorandum by the Secretary of Commerce (Harriman) to the President

[Washington,] January 23, 1948.

811.002/1–2348

[425] Editorial Note

[426] Memorandum Prepared by the Department of State

[Washington,] February 12, 1948.

740.00119 EW/2–1248

[427] Memorandum by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] February 13, 1948.

740.00119 EW/2–1348

[428] Memorandum by the Special Adviser on Reparations (Pauley) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] February 14, 1948.

740.00119 EW/2–1448

[429] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

[Washington,] February 14, 1948.

740.00119 EW/2–1448

[430] Recommendations by the Secretary of State to the President and the Cabinet

[Washington,] February 16, 1948.

740.00119 EW/2–1748

[431] Statement by the Secretary of State to the Cabinet

Washington, February 16, 1948.

740.00119 EW/2–1748

[432] Memorandum by Frank G. Wisner, Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas

[Washington,] February 16, 1948.

740.00119 EW/2–1648

[433] Memorandum of Conversation, by Frank G. Wisner, Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas

[Washington,] February 17, 1948.

740.00119 EW/2–1748

[434] Memorandum Prepared by the Department of State

[Washington,] February 17, 1948.

740.00119 EW/2–1748

[435] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, February 17, 1948—7 p. m.

862.60/2–1748: Telegram

[436] Resolution by the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency

[Brussels,] February 18, 1948.

740.00119 EW/2–2048

[437] Editorial Note

[438] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Inverchapel)

Washington , March 12, 1948.

740.00119 EW/3–1248

[439] Memorandum of Conversation, by Frank G. Wisner, Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas

[Washington,] March 22, 1948.

740.00119 EW/3–2248

[440] The Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Secretary of Commerce (Harriman)

Washington, March 25, 1948.

740.00119 EW/3–2548

[441] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, April 3, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 EW/4–348: Telegram

[442] The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

[Washington,] April 3, 1948.

USPolAd Germany Files: 400.a Reparations: Telegram

[443] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 3, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 EW/4–348: Telegram

[444] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

Berlin, April 4, 1948—6:27 p. m.

USPolAd Germany Files: 400.a Reparations: Telegram

[445] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, April 10, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 EW/4–1048: Telegram

[446] The Department of State to the French Embassy

Washington, April 13, 1948.

740.00119 EW/3–2548

[447] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, April 14, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 EW/4–1448: Telegram

[448] Editorial Note

[449] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 30, 1948.

862.60/4–3048

[450] The United States Delegate to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency (Dorr) to the Secretary of State

Brussels, May 22, 1948—noon.

740.00119 EW/5–2248: Telegram

[451] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, June 2, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 EW/6–248: Telegram

[452] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

[Washington,] June 3, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–348

[453] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, June 4, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 EW/6–448: Telegram

[454] The Secretary of State to the United States Delegate to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency (Dorr)

Washington, June 6, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 EW/5–2248: Telegram

[455] The Secretary of State to Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg

Washington, June 7, 1948.

740.00119 EW/6–748

[456] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 7, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 EW/6–648: Telegram

[457] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, June 9, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 EW/6–948: Telegram

[458] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 12, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 EW/6–1248: Telegram

[459] Editorial Note

[460] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, June 16, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 EW/6–1648: Telegram

[461] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, June 18, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 EW/6–1848: Telegram

[462] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 18, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 EW/6–1848: Telegram

[463] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 26, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 EW/6–1148: Telegram

[464] The Head of the German General Economic Department of the British Foreign Office (Haviland) to the Counselor of the Embassy in the United Kingdom (Keith)

London, 10th July, 1948.

740.00119 EW/7–1448

[465] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] July 1, 1948.

740.00119 EW/7–148

[466] Final Report of the Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations

Washington, July 1948.

CFM Flies: Lot M–88: Box 2234: File–Cabinet Technical Mission Report

[467] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

[Washington,] July 26, 1948.

740.00119 EW/7–2648

[468] The Cabinet Committee on Reparations to the President

Washington, August 9, 1948.

740.00119 EW/8–1648

[469] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

[Washington,] August 16, 1948.

740.00119 EW/8–1648

[470] Directive to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay)

Washington, [undated.]

740.00119 EW/8–2048

[471] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, August 26, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 EW/8–2648: Telegram

[472] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Under Secretary of the Army (Draper)

[Berlin, August 28, 1948.]

740.00119 EW/8–2848: Telegram

[473] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, September 1, 1948—noon.

740.00119 EW/9–148: Telegram

[474] Editorial Note

[475] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, September 3, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 EW/9–248: Telegram

[476] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 7, 1948.

740.00119 EW/9–748

[477] The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Bevin) to the Secretary of State

[London, September 7, 1948.]

840.50 Recovery/9–748

[478] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Baden Baden, September 13, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 EW/9–1348: Telegram

[479] The Secretary of State to the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Bevin)

Washington, September 16, 1948.

840.50 Recovery/9–748

[480] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

Washington, September 24, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 EW/9–2448: Telegram

[481] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Paris,] September 28, 1948.

740.00119 EW/9–2848

[482] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

Washington, September 29, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 EW/9–2848: Telegram

[483] The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Bevin) to the Secretary of State

Paris, 1st October, 1948.

740.00119 EW/10–148

[484] Editorial Note

[485] The Administrator of the Economic Cooperation Administration (Hoffman) to the Acting Secretary of State

Washington, October 11, 1948.

740.00119 EW/10–1148

[486] Memorandum of Conversation, by James P. Hendrick, Special Assistant, Office of the Deputy Administrator, Economic Cooperation Administration

[Washington ?, undated.]

CFM Flies: Lot M–88: Box 2234: File–Reparation Plant Review

[487] Memorandum of Conversation, by James P. Hendrick, Special Assistant, Office of the Deputy Administrator, Economic Cooperation Administration

[Washington,] October 16, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 2234: File–Reparation Plant Review

[488] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State, at Paris

London, October 13, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 EW/10–1348: Telegram

[489] The President of the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency (Rueff) to the Secretary of State

[Brussels,] 14 October, 1948.

740.00119 EW/10–1548

[490] Editorial Note

[491] The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Bevin) to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas)

London, 16 October, 1948.

London Embassy Files: 1948: File–850 Reparations

[492] Editorial Note

[493] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, October 29, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 EW/10–2948: Telegram

[494] Notes on a Meeting Between the United States and British Military Governors for Germany and the Ministers President of the United States and British Zones of Occupation of Germany, Frankfurt, October 29, 1948

[Frankfurt ?,] 1 November 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–348

[495] Editorial Note

[496] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Frankfurt, November 17, 1948—1 p.m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1748: Telegram

[497] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, November 26, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 EW/11–2248: Telegram

[498] The Under Secretary of State (Lovett) to the President of the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency (Rueff)

Washington, November 29, 1948.

740.00119 EW/10–1548

[499] The Acting Secretary of State to the Administrator of the Economic Cooperation Administration (Hoffman)

Washington, December 3, 1948.

862.6511/12–348

[500] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington, 4 December, 1948.

840.50 Recovery/12–448

[501] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 7, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 EW/12–748: Telegram

[502] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 8, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 EW/12–848: Telegram

[503] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 8, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 EW/12–848: Telegram

[504] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 10, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 EW/12–1048: Telegram

[505] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

Washington, December 10, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 EW/12–1048: Telegram

[506] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

London, December 11, 1948—4:20 p. m.

London Embassy Files: 800 Germany: Telegram

[507] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 13, 1948—11 a. m.

740.00119 EW/12–1348: Telegram

[508] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 15, 1948—1 p. m.

740.00119 EW/12–1548: Telegram

[509] Editorial Note

[510] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

Berlin, 20 December 1948.

740.00119 EW/12–2848: Telegram

The Civil Affairs Division of the Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) 740.00119 EW/1–1548: Telegram

[Document 417]

The Civil Affairs Division of the Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay)

secret [Washington,] 9 January 1948.

Warx 93723. From CSCAD cite PL.

1. As you are aware, in Senate debate 19 Dec Vandenberg was able to obtain withdrawal of rider to supplemental Appropriation Act which would have prevented use of appropriation for compensation of pers engaged in dismantling non-mil plants in Bizone by promising his committee would undertake to review entire question German reparations in connection hearings on ERP.2 Hearings began yesterday (8 Jan).

2. Adoption definitive US policies on future reparations deliveries awaits progress these hearings, further discussions with British and consideration in US cabinet.

3. Meantime you should continue practice of making no deliveries to Soviet Union except for any tag ends of deliveries which were never suspended and are now being completed pursuant advance deliveries and war plants equip programs. There should be no public statement or statement to Soviets on this practice pending adoption definitive US policy. Reasons for secrecy are delicate negotations with British and desire if possible avoid any Soviet reprisals pending definitive policy.

4. Anticipated Secy State recommendations to Cabinet are that: A. Reparations program as whole be strongly defended and that dismantling for and deliveries to IARA countries be suspended pending Congressional inquiry only if adm is persuaded after full conference with Congressional leaders that indispensable to Congressional support for ERP.

B. Deliveries to Soviet Union be suspended indefinitely except perhaps tag ends referred to Para 3 above.

C. Deliveries to all IARA countries be continued.

D. Agreement be sought with British and French to suspend deliveries to USSR from western zones but no economic pressure be exerted if to do so is against their judgment.

5. In foregoing connections your comments are urgently desired re fol points. A. Advisability of announcing as US decision that all deliveries to USSR are suspended, but that when Soviet reciprocal deliveries have paid in full for past plant deliveries from US zone, US will consider resuming deliveries to USSR of 15% of plants to be removed from US zone provided (1) USSR indicates its willingness to continue reciprocal deliveries for full value this 15% and (2) USSR agrees that none of commodities delivered by it in return for plants shall be drawn from economy of Eastern zone of Germany without eff compensation in other goods or svs.

B. Estimate of effect of cessation of reparations deliveries to Soviets upon pos western powers Berlin.

C. Estimate of probable effect of suspension on quadripartite allocation procedures.

D. Desirability of stopping tag ends of deliveries referred to Para 3 above.

6. British pos as fols: They have indicated quite definitely that they do not wish to join with US in cessation of deliveries to Soviets and that they regard themselves as obligated to continue such dismantling and deliveries. Most comprehensive expression British pos set forth in aide-mémoire delivered by British Ambassador to State Dept on 27 Dec 47, pointing out fol harmful effects of cessation: (1) It would give Soviets excuse to increase difficulties of pos western powers in Berlin; (2) It would cause Soviets to halt reciprocal deliveries of urgently needed commodities such as wheat, potash, timber etc, thus causing difficulties with IARA powers who would be deprived of part of their share of reparations; (3) It would further discourage trade between eastern and western Europe and (4) it would intensify opposition of Communists in western zones to dismantling program. According to more recent communication from British Ambassador to State Dept, British lay great stress on argument that to cut off reparations to Soviets would give them excuse for launching further attack on allied pos in Berlin.
British have been advised of probably Congressional dissatisfaction with their attitude especially in view of financial burden assumed by US under recent Bizonal agreement and requests for further economic assistance to British under ERP. Although British so far have not indicated that they would be willing modify their views in light of these difficulties, State Dept will discuss matter further with them and with French in effort to persuade them to US point of view.

7. Info supplied by you in connection House resolution 3653 much appreciated. It may be necessary ask you for further analysis re possibility particular plants produce certain items world short sup. British and French Embassies’ Wash have been approached with suggestion it is in interest their Govt’s to see that desired info produced for their zones. Any further cooperation you can give this regard will be appreciated.

2 After consultation with officers of the Department of State, Senator Arthur Vandenberg asserted in a Senate speech on December 19, 1947, that the United States was seeking adequate arrangements with the United Kingdom regarding any further shipment to the Soviet Union of dismantled industrial plants from the Western zones of occupation of Germany. The Department of State issued a statement that same day confirming Senator Vandenberg’s assertion. Senator Vandenberg’s speech came during a Senate debate on an appropriations bill for occupied areas that included an amendment, introduced by Senator Styles Bridges, which would have banned the use of appropriated funds for the compensation of personnel “engaged in dismantling non-military plants in bi-zonal areas of occupation of Germany”. Senator Vandenberg assured the Senate that the subject of dismantling German industrial plants would be thoroughly explored when the Senate Foreign Relations Committee began hearings on January 7, 1948 on the European Recovery Program. Following Senator Vandenberg’s speech, Senator Bridges withdrew his restrictive amendment, and the appropriations measure was approved.

3 On December 18, 1947, the House of Representatives adopted House Resolution 365. The Resolution requested the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense to transmit to the House of Representatives at the earliest practicable moment certain information regarding the removal of industrial plants from Germany by way of reparation. Regarding the Department of State’s response to this request, see the editorial note, p. 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 77].

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00119 EW/1–1248

[Document 418]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Reciprocal Deliveries

In the view of His Majesty’s Government it cannot rightly be suggested that the Russians have failed hitherto to meet their obligations in connection with reciprocal deliveries. Until September, 1947, delay was due to the length of the discussions in Berlin as to the basis of calculating the Russian obligation and as to the other terms under which deliveries should be made. Certain fundamental differences still in fact remain. But in September last the Russians offered to begin deliveries on a provisional basis, without prejudice to the principles which should govern deliveries in the future. The Russians named the commodities they were prepared to supply, and for three months thereafter they pressed for a decision. The Western Zone Commanders had to consult I.A.R.A., and a reply rejecting the synthetic rubber which the Russians had offered was not received until the latter part of November. It was not until the middle of December that the matter was settled and the Russians’ offer definitely accepted, delivery periods, quantities, and consignment instructions above being finally agreed. The Russians proposed to complete deliveries of the first instalment within sixty days from 20th December. As a result of a last minute administrative hitch, to which the late decision of the Western Powers no doubt contributed, the Russians asked for one month’s postponement. Deliveries will now begin towards the end of January. We understand that the Control Commission in Berlin is satisfied as to the good faith of the Russians in this matter, and the British Element inform us that this postponement is not, in their opinion, a tactical delay.

The commodities which have been accepted for the first instalment are as follows: Wheat 10,000 tons

Petroleum 3,000 tons

Diesel Oil 5,000 tons

Pitprops 15,000 cubic metres

Uncut Timber 25,000 cubic metres

These have been allocated by I.A.R.A. to the United States, United Kingdom, Belgium, the Netherlands, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Greece, Egypt and India. Each of the three Zone Commanders in Western Germany will receive consignments of these commodities for onward despatch to the recipient nations in accordance with the I.A.R.A. allocations. We propose to leave the United Kingdom share of Wheat (1,709 tons), Petroleum (900 tons) and Diesel Oil (1,332 tons) in the British Zone.

January 12, 1948.

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army 740.00119 EW/1–1548: Telegram

[Document 419]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

secret
priority Berlin, 13 January 1948.

CC 2855. Personal from Clay. Dept of Army for CSCAD. Reference WX 93723.1 My comments are as follows:

Reference Paragraph 5A:

The United States has already announced that no further deliveries to USSR are to be made until other agreements of Potsdam become effective, except for advance deliveries and strictly war plants. Therefore, further announcement is unnecessary unless we propose to discontinue deliveries of war plants, which I do not understand to be the intent of your message. I see nothing to gain by stating such suspension will be reconsidered when USSR has paid in reciprocal deliveries. Delay in payment of reciprocal deliveries was not Soviet fault but resulted in long delay in getting requirements from IARA. Soviets are living up to their commitments. Moreover, they have five years in which to pay with reciprocal deliveries for the plants which they have received.

There might be some public value in stating suspension is based in part on unwillingness of USSR to agree that none of the reciprocal deliveries would come from economy of eastern zone of Germany. However, in fact, this does not make sense as it is certainly in the overall interests of western Germany and of IARA to obtain as much as possible of the “reparations” from eastern zone of Germany which would otherwise go to USSR. There would be no effective means of policing compliance with your proposed stipulation regarding effective compensation.

With reference to your Paragraph 5B, I do not believe that cessation of reparations deliveries to Soviet would have any real bearing on position of western powers in Berlin. If USSR has decided it will fight to drive us from Berlin, then we will be driven from Berlin. If we have decided that we will not be driven from Berlin except by force, then we will remain in Berlin regardless of appeasement on the one hand or annoyances on the other. The reality of our position in Berlin depends upon our determination to stay in Berlin unless we are driven out by acts of war.

Reference Paragraph 5C:

If in fact further deliveries under the new level of industry are stopped in the American Zone, I do not see how quadripartite allocations could continue if British and French positions still involve deliveries to USSR. We would be making a gesture only, as relatively few plants are involved in American Zone and in consenting to allocations we would in fact be giving stamp of approval to British and French deliveries. On the other hand, if we voted against allocations we would be exercising veto power which would stop quadripartite action.

Reference Paragraph 5D:

I believe that it would be most undesirable to interrupt completion of advanced and war plant deliveries. Most of the plants are gone and the remainder would be of very little value to anyone else and, moreover, they are part of a commitment which we have made in full knowledge of the failure of USSR to carry out other terms of Potsdam Agreement. There is really no change in the conditions which existed at time we agreed to these deliveries. Moreover, we have accepted some payment in reciprocal deliveries under the contractual arrangement provided for payment for a part of these deliveries.

My views are still as previously expressed: (a) To complete the delivery of the advance reparations plants and of the strictly war plants already allocated, and to continue the allocation and delivery of the strictly war plants now ready for declaration, (these will be from other zones) including both IARA and USSR. To this I believe we are truly committed, and that a Soviet protest would have justification. I believe that we should proceed to declare and to allocate the remaining plants above the presently established bizonal level of industry, stating in the Quadripartite Control Council at time of allocation that we do not propose to make delivery until other agreements made at Potsdam have become effective. We would then proceed to deliver to IARA but to place items allocated to USSR in storage. Obviously, few deliveries could be made prior to any possible action by Congress which might require the suspension of deliveries. However, it seems most important to obtain at least British, and if possible French, agreement to such a program. Otherwise, unilateral action on our part would have little meaning and while the gesture against USSR would receive public approval, it would be a most unfortunate break in the three power front.

[ Clay ]

1  Ante, p. 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417].

Policy Paper Prepared by the Department of State 740.00119 EW/1–1548

[Document 420]

Policy Paper Prepared by the Department of State 1

secret [Washington,] January 15, 1948.

Proposed Recommendations by the Secretary of State to the Cabinet on German Reparations

The Secretary of State recommends the following decisions to be taken by the Administration with respect to the program of removing German plants as reparation: 1. That this Government suspend indefinitely all deliveries of plants to the Soviet Union (and Poland) from the U.S. Zone of Germany, except for the final portions of certain plants the delivery of which was never suspended and is now being completed pursuant to the advance deliveries and war plants equipment programs. Announcement would be made only after further discussions with the British and with the French, if at all, and the final decision would depend upon whether or not UK and French agreement is obtainable.

2. If such announcement is made, it would declare that deliveries on account of the 10% uncompensated Soviet share are indefinitely suspended pending achievement of quadripartite agreement on economic unification of Germany; but that notwithstanding failure to achieve such agreement, the United States will consider the terms under which it might resume deliveries of the 15% for which the Soviet Union is required by the Potsdam Protocol2 to make compensating deliveries in commodities if the Soviet Union promptly satisfies its obligations now due in this regard.

3. That the plant removals program based on the August 1947 Bizonal Level of Industry3 be maintained and deliveries continued to all the countries signatories of the Paris Agreement on Reparation.4

4. That the Department of State continue negotiations with the British and initiate negotiations with the French seeking common agreement to suspend deliveries to the USSR from all the Western Zones of Germany, pointing out the relationship between such common agreement and Congressional consideration of the European Recovery Program.

5. That before any public announcement of the foregoing decisions the Secretary of State confer with Senator Vandenberg and Representatives Eaton and Herter (or their respective Committees) and a) Inform them that pending public governmental decision General Clay has been instructed to make no further deliveries from the U.S. Zone to the Soviet Union except for the final portions of certain plants the delivery of which was never suspended and is now being completed pursuant to the advance deliveries and war plants equipment programs, and that pending further discussions with the British it is not desired to make any announcement which might prejudice the situation in Berlin or the commencement of reciprocal deliveries by the Soviet Union.

b) Seek to persuade them that the dismantling program generally should continue during the consideration of the reparations program by the Congress.

c) If unsuccessful in b), and if, and only if, it appears indispensable to Congressional support for the European Recovery Program, agree that dismantling generally be temporarily suspended pending such Congressional consideration, except for such plants as have been so far dismantled already as substantially to impair their further usefulness in Germany.

[If any suggestions are made to bring economic pressure on the United Kingdom and France designed to require them to suspend deliveries to the USSR against their own judgments of their respective situations, such should be firmly opposed.]5

1 The Secretary of State circulated copies of this paper at the Cabinet meeting on January 16, 1948. Members of the Cabinet undertook to study the paper and discuss it at the next Cabinet meeting.

2 Regarding the decisions reached at the conference of heads of government at Berlin (Potsdam), July 17–August 2, 1945, see Part IV of the Report on the Conference, Foreign Relations, The Conference of Berlin (The Potsdam Conference), 1945, vol. ii, p. 1505.

3 For the text of the Revised Plan for the Level of Industry in the United States–United Kingdom Zones of Occupation in Germany, signed in London on August 27 and released to the press on August 29, 1947, see Germany 1947–1949, pp. 358–362, Department of State Bulletin, September 7, 1947, pp. 468–472, Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, pp. 626–632, or Ruhm von Oppen, Documents on Germany, pp. 239–245. For documentation on the preparation of this Revised Plan, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 977 ff.

4 The reference here is to the Agreement on Reparations from Germany, on the Establishment of an Inter-Allied Reparation Agency and on the Restitution of Monetary Gold, signed in Paris on December 21, 1945; for the text, see Department of State, Treaties and Other International Acts Series No. 1655. For documentation on the negotiations leading to the conclusion of the Paris agreement, see Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. iii, pp. 1169 ff.

5 Brackets appear in the source text.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/1–1948

[Document 421]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] January 19, 1948.

Participants: The Secretary

The British Ambassador, Lord Inverchapel

Mr. Loy Henderson, NEA

Mr. John Hickerson, EUR

The British Ambassador came in to see me by appointment made at his request this afternoon. In the course of a conversation covering several topics the Ambassador raised the question of the resumption of German reparations deliveries.

I informed the Ambassador that this question is now being considered by the United States Cabinet but thait I hoped that after the next Cabinet meeting and early consultation with our Congressional leaders, to be in a position to tell him definitively what our policy will be in this matter.

I told the Ambassador that our present thinking was that we should be prepared to deliver to the Soviet Union reparations in return for deliveries by the Soviet Union up to the 15 percent figure agreed on at Potsdam but that in view of the Soviet violations of the Potsdam Agreement we would encounter great Congressional opposition to delivering the other 10 percent. I stated that our difficulties will be intensified if the British Government resumes deliveries to the Soviet Union. I pointed out that the appropriation bill for Bizonia will be under consideration in Congress in the next few days and in this bill the United States will provide over $600,000,000 of the financing while the United Kingdom will furnish about $70,000,000.1 said that this new allocation of financial responsibility may well encounter increased opposition if the British Government resumes reparations deliveries to the Soviet Union and the United States Government decides not to do so. I added that, as the Ambassador is aware, the question of resumption of plant deliveries to the Soviet Union from the United States Zone in Germany is being examined by Congressional committees from the standpoint of its effect on the European Recovery Program.

In any event, I told the Ambassador that I would let him know what our final decision is as soon as it is possible for me to do so.

Memorandum Prepared by the Department of State 740.00119 EW/1–1248

[Document 422]

Memorandum Prepared by the Department of State 1

secret [Washington,] January 20, 1948.

Subject: The Position of the Administration with Respect to Dismantling of German Plants as Reparation.

The Problem:

To determine Administration policy on the following points: 1. Whether the plant removals program should be temporarily suspended, in whole or in part, during the period of Congressional enquiry into the program.

2. Whether the dismantling program for the US/UK Zones represented by the list of 682 plants published on October 16, 1947,2 should continue to be re-examined and possibly revised in connection with the European Recovery Program.

3. Whether deliveries of German plants to the USSR should be indefinitely suspended in view of the Soviet attitude at London on the German problem.

4. Whether, if deliveries to the USSR are indefinitely suspended, deliveries to the Soviet satellites members of IARA should also be halted.

5. Whether to bring economic pressure on the UK and France designed to force them to join with the US in acting under (2), (3) and (4) above.

Discussion of the Problem: 1. House Resolution 365, and the Senate debate on the Bridges Rider (Congressional Record, December 19, 1947, pp. 11893–11816) [11680–11692],3 demonstrate that important elements in the Congress are hostile to the program of plant removals as reparation from Germany because: (a) removals are regarded as economically “senseless”; (b) removals interfere with the resumption of German production, essential to European recovery; (c) agreements regarding reparation have not been approved by the Congress; (d) the program is based on the “Morgenthau Plan”;4 (e) Western Germany should not be unduly weakened industrially in view of the present world situation: (f) the Soviet Union should not benefit further from plant deliveries from Western Germany. Senator Vandenberg in marshalling Senate opinion against the Bridges Rider stated his opposition and that of the Department of State to further deliveries to the Soviet Union. This statement has not removed all hostility to the plant removals program. The intentions of both Houses are to examine the Programs in detail in connection with the ERP hearings.

Certain elements in the Congress have gone farther and taken the position that all dismantling should be suspended pending Congressional enquiries regarding the plant removals program (see final question asked by HR 365). Senator Vandenberg has intimated in debate his belief that dismantling operations were in fact being slowed down. The Secretary of the Army in a confidential letter to Senator Vandenberg on this point expressed General Clay’s view that it would be extremely unwise to defer dismantling in the US Zone during the proposed Congressional investigations, pointing out that a serious internal political problem would be created in Germany if dismantling should subsequently be resumed after such a suspension. The letter added that in November, 1947, General Clay gave instructions that the dismantling of all plants on the new list should proceed as quickly as possible. The Department concurs in General Clay’s views and in addition foresees serious political reactions on the part of the IARA nations in the event of such an interim suspension. Moreover, since Congressional consideration may take place over several months, suspension of dismantling for such an uncertain length of time would substantially hamper the economic planning of the potential recipients and reduce the value of the plants to them. These points were made briefly by the Secretary of State on January 8, and by the Secretary of the Army on January 14 and 15, 1948, in testimony before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations.5

2. Heretofore, spokesmen for the Administration have defended the plant removals program based on the August, 1947 Level of Industry on the grounds: a. The plants to be removed under the Revised Bizonal Level of Industry represent industrial capacity which in major part was created for the support of German aggression and which cannot be utilized iii Germany during; the next four or five years, because of shortages of fuel, raw materials and manpower, whereas they could be put to good use during the same period if removed to other countries;

b. The amount of manpower, materials and transport required for the execution of the plant removals program has a negligible effect upon the present German economy;

c. The United States is committed by the Paris Agreement on Reparation to provide for a plant removals program based on the delivery of capacity in excess of that determined by some defensible level of industry.

d. The removal of plants as reparation is the best solution, all factors considered, for meeting the demands of devastated countries for reparation in a definitive manner, in a short time, at no cost to the United States, and without repeating the errors of the reparation settlement which followed World War I.

In addition to the foregoing arguments, it will be possible to make other arguments in favor of the plant removals program, some of which have already been touched upon in Congressional debates and hearings: a. There is considerable evidence, which can be marshalled, that the dismantling, removal and re-establishment of industrial plants is not “economically senseless”.

b. The moral right of the victims of German aggression to reparation, to the extent economically feasible, is incontestible. To a degree far greater than is justified by its strictly material effects, the dismantling program is, to devastated European countries the symbol of an attitude toward Germany and their future security, the abandonment of which would cause friendly European countries the greatest concern.

c. To get the plants marked for removal under the Revised Level of Industry into production in Germany during the period of the ERP would require allocation to Germany of food, fuel and raw materials greater than presently contemplated and lend plausibility to charges that the United States favors Germany over other participating countries. It will be possible to demonstrate in the course of the ERP presentation that the Revised Level of Industry leaves Germany with ample industrial capacity to achieve self-support and to make the maximum contribution to European economic recovery compatible with an equitable distribution of available food, fuel and raw materials.

3. The U.S. acting independently cannot seriously affect the future of plant reparations from Germany; such action would be little more than a political gesture. All but 146 of approximately 772 plants yet to be removed from western Germany are in the British and French Zones. If the U.S. participates in quadripartite allocation between the Soviet Union and the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency, it will be possible for full deliveries of the Soviet share to be made from the other zones. If the U.S. refuses to participate, it will in effect seek to coerce the British and French by the exercise of a veto and break down the quadripartite reparations machinery. The British have very definitely expressed their opposition to the suspension of deliveries to the Soviet Union. (See British Aide-Mémoire of December 27, 1947, attached as Tab A.6 ) There is reason to believe that the French are of the same view.

This Government has continued delivery to the Soviet Union of plants on the advance list, which was agreed in 1945 before the first level of industry agreement, and of the general purpose equipment from war plants, which are independent of the level of industry. Under these programs there remain to be delivered to the Soviet Union from the U.S. Zone only the “tag-ends” of a ship-building plant (an advance delivery) and of the equipment of two war plants. There are plants of these categories in the British and French Zones, however, which have not yet been allocated, and the United States must decide whether to participate in such allocations by the Allied Control Authority.

Soviet violations of the Potsdam Agreement have removed any obligation on the part of the Western Powers to implement those provisions wholly favorable to the USSR. To continue deliveries from the West would represent deliveries of equipment to which the USSR is probably no longer entitled under the terms of the Potsdam Agreement in view of its excessive removals of capital equipment and the taking of reparation in the form of current production from the Eastern Zone of Germany.

Notwithstanding these considerations, it may be desirable to leave a way open to continue to make at least that portion of deliveries to the Soviet Union for which the Soviet Union is required to compensate by deliveries of commodities.* It may be that this could be done by announcing, preferably at the time of suspension of deliveries to the Soviet Union, that the US would consider the terms under which it might resume compensated deliveries if the Soviet Union promptly satisfied its obligations now due in this regard. It is contemplated that those terms would include (a) indication by the Soviet Union of willingness to continue making reciprocal deliveries up to the full value of 15% of the total equipment to be removed from the Western Zones, and (b) agreement that none of the commodities delivered by it in return for plants should be drawn from the economy of the Eastern Zone of Germany without effective compensation by the USSR in other goods or services.

There is no assurance, however, that the Soviet Union would continue any reciprocal deliveries under the above proposal, and it is possible that refusal by the Soviet Union would mean a net loss for Western Europe in the recovery period. A study prepared by a member of the U.S. Delegation to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency (Tab B7 ) indicates that the value of capital reparations remaining to be delivered to the Soviet Union from the Western zones is approximately RM 150,000,000 (1938), and that the value of all reciprocal deliveries is approximately the same. Thus if deliveries to the Soviet Union from the Western zones are stopped, the USSR could very well make no reciprocal deliveries and purport to justify its action by calling them compensation for capital removals denied to the USSR. As an immediate matter, the commodities deliverable by the USSR are needed much worse in Western Europe than the capital equipment, and would tend directly to relieve the financial burden upon the United States under the European Recovery Program.

4. To suspend deliveries to the three Soviet satellites which are members of the IARA would be a breach of the Paris Agreement on Reparation, which was signed by the United States as an executive agreement, and would reopen the question of Germany’s reparation obligations to the IARA nations. It would also open the door to insistence that this violation of the agreement be submitted to the International Court of Justice.

5. There is discernible in the Congress a tendency to resort to economic pressure on the UK and France to force them to act in accordance with US policy on the suspension of dismantling and reparations deliveries. The material results of continued deliveries by the British and French are not significant enough to justify such pressure if those countries consider that the desired action would present grave questions for their internal political situations or their foreign relations. Such pressure is incompatible with general US policy and with the basic purpose of the ERP to maintain the participating countries as sovereign, independent entities.

General Clay has recommended that quadripartite allocations be continued, that the delivery of plants on the advance list and general purpose equipment from war plants be continued, and that in concert with the British and French all other deliveries to the Soviet Union be indefinitely suspended and the equipment placed in storage. The continuance of allocations and of the advance and war-plants deliveries would make it technically possible to avoid any breakdown of the allocations machinery of the Allied Control Authority, and would provide another bargaining point in an effort to obtain British and French agreement to the suspension of deliveries to the USSR from the general list.

1 This memorandum appears to have been prepared in the office of Assistant Secretary of State Saltzman. The source text indicates that this is a revision of a memorandum of January 12. The differences between this and the earlier version are not indicated, but a draft memorandum from Assistant Secretary of State Saltzman to Under Secretary of State Lovett, dated January 22, not printed, states that the principal substantive changes in this revision were made in the first two paragraphs of point 3 and in the last paragraph of point 5. Saltzman’s memorandum also indicates that the January 12 version of the memorandum was read by Secretary of State Marshall at the Cabinet meeting of January 16. (EUR Files, Lot 55 D 374, File—Reparations G 400)

2 The list under reference was transmitted to the Secretary General of the I.A.R.A. under cover of a letter of October 14, 1947, from the chief reparations officers in the American and British zones of occupation, Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 1126.

3 Regarding House Resolution 365, see the editorial note, p. 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425]. Regarding the Senate debate on the Bridges amendment, see footnote 1 to telegram Warx 93723, January 9, to Berlin, p. 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417].

4 Documentation on the plan for the post-war treatment of Germany proposed by the then Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau, Jr. in August and September 1944 is printed in Foreign Relations, The Conference at Quebec, 1944, pp. 86 ff.

5 For the record of the testimony under reference, see European Recovery Program: Hearings before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 80th Cong., 2nd sess., on United States Assistance to European Economic Recovery, Part I (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1948), pp. 1, 444, and 467.

6 The “Tab” is not printed here; for the text of the British aide-mémoire, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 1137.

* Under the Potsdam Protocol the USSR was to receive 10% of the total value of removals from the three Western Zones without any countervailing deliveries and another 15% for which the USSR was to pay within five years by reciprocal deliveries of commodities. Those reciprocal deliveries are reparation items apportionable among the other reparation recipients (except Poland). No deliveries have yet been made: they are scheduled to begin soon. [Footnote in the source text.]

7 The study under reference here, prepared by the United States Deputy Delegate to the I.A.R.A., Alexander Daspit, and dated December 31, 1947, is not printed (740.00119 EW/12–3147).

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State 811.002/1–2348

[Document 423]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

[Extract]

secret [Washington,] January 23, 1948.

Notes on Cabinet Meeting, Friday, January 23, 1948, 10 A. M.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I referred again to the matter of dismantling of the plants for reparations, which was not completed at the previous meeting. Secretary Royall and I recommended the approval of the general outline for procedure covered in the memorandum of January 15.1 Secretaries Harriman and Krug opposed any dismantling whatsoever on grounds that appeared to be almost identical with those expressed in the Congressional questioning of Secretary Royall and which contained numerous inaccuracies in information. Secretary Royall carried the brunt of the discussion, which was thrown over to next week because of the shortage of time. I emphasized particularly that the matter should be taken up promptly with the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and there was general agreement that this should be done.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Robert A. Lovett

1  Ante, p. 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420].

Memorandum by the Secretary of Commerce (Harriman) to the President 811.002/1–2348

[Document 424]

Memorandum by the Secretary of Commerce (Harriman) to the President 1

secret [Washington,] January 23, 1948.

I set forth below my reaction to the “Proposed Recommendations by the Secretary of State to the Cabinet on German Reparations” dated January 15.2

1. I am gravely concerned over Proposal 3 that “the plant removals program based on the August 1947 Bizonal Level of Industry be maintained and deliveries continued to all the countries signatories of the Paris Agreement on Reparation”. (a) I am not satisfied that the program of plant removals will permit Germany to attain self-support as rapidly as possible and thus relieve the burden on the American people.

(b) I do not believe that sufficient consideration has been given to the part necessary to be played by Germany as a producer and consumer in the recovery program for Western Europe.

(c) Members of the Congress have shown concern over the removal program, and unless the decision is reviewed it will be a constant source of difficulty in the maintenance of cooperative relationships with the Congress on the European Recovery Program and related foreign economic policies.

(d) The cost of removal of many of the plants is a very large proportion of the recoverable value. At the present time this cost is a burden on the available German labor, material and transportation, which in the last analysis falls on us.

(e) I fully recognize the desire of our Western Allies to obtain reparations from Germany and the political difficulties that are involved in any decision on this question. On the other hand, I feel that in connection with the European Recovery Program we now have an opportunity to offset reparations against the aid we will be extending, a large part of which will be grants-in-aid.

I suggest that a complete review be made of all aspects of plant removals by a small competent group uncommitted by previous decisions.

2. I am not familiar with the amount of material left undelivered to the Soviet Union under Proposal 1. I feel that we should suspend shipments of all equipment of war material plants which I understand are involved in this program. Considering the present attitude of the Soviet Government, I do not see how we are justified in sending any additional material which strengthens its direct military potential.

3. I question the advisability of reopening negotiations as contemplated in the second part of Proposal 2, namely, the delivery of 15 percent in return for commodities. The decision on Proposal 3 will of course affect the amount available. On the other hand, I am so much impressed with the cost to us of the removal of plants that I question whether we will obtain sufficient value in commodities to justify continuation of such a program. I am inclined to believe that it would be cheaper to buy whatever we can extract from Eastern Germany and pay for this from current production or otherwise.

1 The source text is a copy which Secretary Harriman gave to Acting Secretary Lovett, presumably at the Cabinet meeting of January 23. The source text is included in the files as an attachment to Lovett’s memorandum, supra.

2  Ante, p. 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420].

Editorial Note [Document 425]

Editorial Note

On December 18, 1947 the House of Representatives adopted House Resolution 365 of the Eightieth Congress. The Resolution, which was forwarded to the Department of State on December 19, requested the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense to transmit to the House of Representatives at the earliest practicable moment certain information, specified in eleven questions set out in the text of the Resolution, regarding the removal of industrial plants from Germany by way of reparation. Under cover of a letter to the Speaker of the House of Representatives, dated January 24, 1948, Under Secretary of State Lovett transmitted a paper setting forth the information requested by the Resolution. The paper included both the eleven questions contained in the Resolution and the Department’s answers thereto. Accompanying the Department’s paper were the following attachments: (1) a list of plants declared available for reparation from the American and British zones of occupation of Germany, prepared by the Department of Commerce and dated January 12, 1948; (2) a list of plants available for reparation from the French zone of occupation of Germany; (3) a table defining the character and capacity of non-war plants already removed from the American zone of occupation as of January 1, 1948; (4) a table defining the character and capacity of non-war plants scheduled for removal from the American zone of occupation as of January 1, 1948; (5) the text of the Revised Level of Industry Plan of the American-British zones of occupation of Germany, August 29, 1947; (6) a statement by General Clay regarding the dismantling program. The text of Under Secretary Lovett’s letter of January 24, the paper setting forth the information requested in House Resolution 365, and the six attachments thereto are included in the files under 740.00119 EW/1–2448. The Under Secretary’s letter and attached paper are printed in the Department of State Bulletin, February 8, 1948, page 185, and in Germany 1947–1949, page 413.

On February 4, 1948 Secretary of State Marshall addressed to Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg, in his capacity as Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, a letter concerning the status of the German reparation and dismantlement program. Enclosed with the Secretary’s letter was a memorandum prepared in the Department of State and dated February 2, 1948, entitled “German Reparation Program”, summarizing certain information previously made available to Congress on the subject of reparation and dismantlement and adding a number of additional points in support of the program which might not have been adequately brought to the attention of Congress. Copies of the Secretary’s letter and enclosed Department memorandum were also sent to the Chairmen of the Appropriations Committee of the Senate and the Foreign Affairs and Appropriations Committees of the House of Representatives. For the texts of the letter and enclosed memorandum, see Department of State Bulletin, February 22, 1948, page 238, and Germany 1947–1949, page 374.

Memorandum Prepared by the Department of State 740.00119 EW/2–1248

[Document 426]

Memorandum Prepared by the Department of State 1

secret [Washington,] February 12, 1948.

Cabinet Decision on German Reparations

Although the position of this Government with respect to dismantling generally and with respect to deliveries to the east was first raised in the Cabinet on the fifteenth of January,2 no decision has been reached. Decision is now urgently required by reason of the increasing concern about the program in the Congress and among the public, and the fact that the future of reparations deliveries is one of the items on the agenda for the impending conference with the French and British in London on Western Germany.3

Strictly speaking, the problem of reparation deliveries to the Soviet Union relates only to the 10 per cent of the total equipment to be made available from the western zones. The 15 per cent of such equipment is subject to exchange with the Soviet Union for commodities. Under the Potsdam Agreement there were to be two years for the delivery of industrial equipment, but five years for delivery of the commodities. Accordingly, while substantial deliveries of equipment have been made to the Soviet Union, the delivery of commodities in return has only just commenced. The result is an approximate balance (about RM 150 million) in the 1938 monetary value of the equipment yet to be delivered to the Soviet Union from western zones, and the commodities yet to be delivered by the Soviet Union. Notwithstanding that the issue relates properly only to the 10 per cent, it is considered quite certain that if the 10 per cent were denied Soviet Russia would refuse to make any further deliveries of commodities in exchange for the 15 per cent.

The reparations problem is a dilemma in which there are serious disadvantages to each of the alternative courses of action.

1. As you know, the British have set forth their strong view that deliveries should be continued to the Soviet Union, giving the following major reasons: (a) they regard themselves as bound by the Potsdam agreement to carry out a political commitment of great importance; (b) they see no economic grounds, from the standpoint either of increases in the Soviet military potential or of German and European recovery, which are of sufficient weight to justify reconsideration of this political commitment; (c) they consider the commodities to be delivered by the U.S.S.R. in exchange for capital equipment as of great importance to Western Europe, and believe their delivery would tend to stimulate trade between Eastern and Western Europe in general; and (d) they consider that cessation of deliveries to the U.S.S.R. would exacerbate relations in Berlin, and in general, with no compensating gain. The French position is believed to be similar to the British and in addition is complicated by internal political considerations.

2. For the United States to terminate deliveries unilaterally from the US Zone and the British and French to continue deliveries would have a number of unfortunate consequences. It would be an empty political gesture on the part of the United States because it would deny to the Soviet Union an amount of equipment which would probably not exceed one million dollars at 1938 prices. If the United States refused to participate in quadripartite allocations, it would destroy the existing reparations machinery and leave no agreed procedures for allocations to the IARA countries. It would invite reprisals by the Soviet Union which might be much more serious than the deprivation to the Soviet Union involved.

3. A split with the British and French over reparations would mean a serious break in the Three-Power front in Germany which the US is doing its best to maintain and which the Soviets have every interest in weakening. It is of the utmost importance that the closest possible common policy be followed by the three Western Powers. This will serve to represent a unified western approach to Germany, which will have a salutary effect on the German population in resisting Soviet encroachments. In the fulfillment of ERP, and especially in solving western Germany’s economic problems, the US will be obliged to count heavily upon the economic cooperation of its partners. The Three-Power front is furthermore a great tactical advantage in dealing with the Soviets in the Allied Control Authority. So far a fair identity of views has been maintained as against Soviet aims in Germany and it would be most unfortunate if a serious difference over reparations should jeopardize the prospect of increasing effectiveness offered by a development of the common western approach.

4. Whether deliveries are halted unilaterally by the United States, or a decision is made to continue them, it is of the greatest importance that the Administration accepts the full responsibility for the decision before the Congress and not place the responsibility upon the British and French. The implication, which is already contained in some of the statements submitted to the Congress, that this Government wants to stop deliveries but the British and French will not agree, is an invitation to the Congress to place conditions upon grants to the recipients of aid under the ERP which would be exceedingly unfortunate politically.

5. It follows that from a purely foreign policy point of view the most sensible course would be for this Government to continue deliveries to the Soviet Union. The two strongest objections are, first, that by reason of the reparations that the Soviet Union has already exacted from Germany it is not entitled to further deliveries, and, second, that by so doing the governments of Western Europe are gratuitously strengthening the military potential of the Soviet Union. However, in view of the situation with respect to reciprocal deliveries described above, it would be to the economic advantage of the Western European countries to receive badly needed commodities in exchange for delivery to the Soviet Union of excess capital equipment from Germany. Also, the increase in Soviet war potential involved is not significant. The equipment yet to be delivered to the Soviet Union from the other Western zones is worth something under $40,000,000 at 1938 prices and the 10 per cent to which the Soviet Union may in a sense be considered not entitled is thus worth at most $15,000,000. It includes no special purpose equipment for the production of finished war materials.

1 Copies of this memorandum were transmitted to the President and to the other members of the Cabinet on February 12. The memorandum appears to have been considered by the Cabinet at the meeting on February 13; see the memorandum by the Secretary of State, infra.

2 The reference here is presumably to the Cabinet meeting of January 16; see the Policy Paper Prepared by the Department of State, January 15, and footnote 1 thereto, p. 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420].

3 For documentation on the preparations for the London Conference on Germany, see pp. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1] ff.

Memorandum by the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/2–1348

[Document 427]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] February 13, 1948.

At the Cabinet meeting today we took up the question of reparations returns. The President was willing to go along with our proposal. Harriman, Krug and Anderson all opposed it. Forrestal also opposed it as regards steel.

Anderson particularly felt that in our letter to Vandenberg,1 Harriman’s memorandum2 had been completely ignored.

All were rather confused by the analysis3 distributed to the Cabinet, as I also was.

Krug referred to what he called the “mumbo-jumbo” of the portion of the letter to Vandenberg referring to “deliveries being in balance.”

I suggested to the President that we drop the matter this morning and take it up again at luncheon on Monday.4

G. C. M[arshall]

1 The reference here is to the Secretary of State’s letter of February 4 to Senator Vandenberg; see the editorial note, p. 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425].

2  Ante, p. 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424].

3 The reference here is presumably to the Department of State memorandum of February 12, supra.

4 February 16.

Memorandum by the Special Adviser on Reparations (Pauley) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/2–1448

[Document 428]

Memorandum by the Special Adviser on Reparations (Pauley) to the Secretary of State 1

[Washington,] February 14, 1948.

Subject: Final Comments on Separations Program and Policy, Japan and Germany

At the recent London Conference of Foreign Ministers, the United States officially restated its position as being unalterably opposed to German reparations out of current production. We have re-examined our reparation views, first formulated in 1944 and 1945, and have again determined that the most practicable form of reparation is capital equipment—in a quantity that will not interfere with the progressive rehabilitation of the German economy nor with the attainment by Germany of a self-supporting economy at the earliest possible date.

Our original insistence on a capital removals program was based upon the conviction that such reparations were the most practicable kind, contributing to German industrial disarmament and aiding the victims of aggression, but without constituting an insupportable burden on Germany. Moreover, capital removals would not require that in the end the Allies pay for the reparations, as was the case after the last war. In the case of facility and equipment for the exclusive production of war material, it was generally agreed that these should be either removed as reparations or destroyed. There could be no justification for retaining them in Germany.

In view of our original advocacy of this program, the United States bears a large degree of responsibility for it. Inasmuch as we have aspired to the role of advocate for the nations of Western Europe, we cannot disregard their interests in the capital removals program. Any reduction in this program below the present levels would inevitably result in demands for reparations compensation in some other manner. We are, in any event, committed to a capital removals program by international agreement (Paris Agreement of 1946). It is demonstrable that the removal of capital equipment in excess of the agreed level of industry will not actually weaken the German economy, since there is neither the need nor the resources for full utilization of existing industrial capacity in Germany. Between 1935 and 1944, there occurred in Germany a vast overexpansion of plant capacity, to a degree possible only in a nation making war preparations and seeking to achieve economic autarchy in anticipation of military requirements. The removal for reparations of some of this excess capacity will in many cases eliminate the drain on the economy resulting from the use of raw materials, transport and power in relatively uneconomic production.

In view of the commitment of the United States to occupy Germany for an indefinite period of time, every effort must be made to establish the German economy on as practical a footing as possible on a long-range basis. Over a 20-year period, German economic recovery will probably have better prospects of substantial success if excesses of uneconomic plant capacity are removed than otherwise.

The economic potential of all Western Europe will be increased by the transfer of some German capacity to areas where the equipment could be more fully utilized in relation to raw materials, power and transport. Such utilization, moreover, could begin immediately upon emplacement of the equipment in new locations. The Western European nations, because of the progressive expansion of their production, their more stable monetary and administrative organizations, their equal and in some cases superior access to raw material and transport, and their greater power resources, are in a position to use this equipment now. It would have the immediate effect of further increasing their economic strength. This is a vital objective of both our economic and political policy in Europe.

While it is true that a portion of the German capital removals is scheduled for Albania, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia, the three nations of eastern Europe covered under the IARA agreement, their share is only 10.5% of the total removals. The benefits to the Soviet dominated nations, and inferentially to the Soviet Union, of this amount of equipment will not weigh in the balance against the advantages to the western nations of the much greater removals scheduled for their benefit. As already stated, reparations deliveries to the, Eastern European nations are a commitment under the terms of the IARA agreement. There might well be moral, legal or diplomatic reasons for abrogating these commitments to the Eastern European nations, however, the Western European nations should not be penalized by such action.

Moreover, it should be noted that the chief recipient of removals to date has been the USSR. This has been due to the time element involved in sub-allocations to the other European nations through IARA. The most recently available data (as of November 1, 1947) indicate that some 70% of the tonnage and 50% of the reichsmark value of shipments from the US Zone have been delivered to Russia. To penalize the western nations for the administrative difficulties inherent in reallocations by IARA would not only be unethical but prejudicial to our interests in promoting European recovery.

In regard to Japan,2 the case for immediate action in carrying out the reparations program is even more urgent than in the case of Germany. Our international commitments on reparations deliveries from Japan are unconditional. We have agreed, without reservation, to the removal from Japan of capital equipment in war-supporting industries excess to Japan’s peacetime needs. We have directed, through SCAP, the interim removal of certain percentages of equipment in various industrial categories, and have directed the distribution of this equipment to the nations which suffered most from Japanese aggression. We have agreed, in the Far Eastern Commission, to certain classifications of prohibited and restricted industries. Other agreements have been reached in the FEC establishing the immediate availability as reparations of capital equipment in various industrial categories.

Yet, in fact for one reason or another, the directives issued to SCAP have not been carried out. A few small reparations deliveries have been made in recent weeks. The recent deliveries have been the first in more than two years of occupation. Proposals have been received and entertained in some branches of the government to abandon entirely the reparations program or to modify it drastically. It has been suggested that FEC directives be disregarded, and that the occupation authorities be given new unilateral directives designed to abandon all reparations. Those who have studied most thoroughly the problem know there can be no justification for such a course of action. It should be resisted and rejected.

The charges may one day be made that the United States has not lived up to its obligations as the occupying power, and has used its position to further selfish ends. That is exactly the charge we have made against Soviet Russia in Germany. The only justifications for abandoning or drastically reducing the reparations removals program are to promote the economic recovery of Japan and to minimize the occupation costs to the United States. In fact, neither of these economic justifications are factually supportable. Furthermore it would be unacceptable in view of our previous commitments to our Allies.

None of the principal reparations claimants can be held responsible for the present economic conditions in Japan; hence penalizing those nations for the slowness of Japanese economic recovery would subject us to justifiable attack. Only Soviet Russia, with her unilateral removals from Manchuria, can be said to have received capital equipment benefits from the war, and those at the expense of China. The Soviet Union if at all would be only a very minor recipient of capital removals from Japan proper under the currently pending program. In other words, abandonment of the reparations program would visit the greatest penalty on these countries we desire most to help.

Unless the capital removals program in Japan is immediately implemented and carried through, the demands of China and other countries for reparations out of current production … a claim which has not been extinguished by agreement as it has in Germany … will be pressed with great vigor either immediately in the Far Eastern Commission or at a later time at the Peace Conference. These claims would be a source of political embarrassment to the United States and would handicap our efforts to promote economic and political stability in the Orient. For this reason we have consistently pointed to the economic logic and benefits of the capital removals program.

In Japan, even more than in Germany, a considerable portion of the plant capacity was operable in the war period only on the basis of government subsidies, export devices, and monopolistic support. Before 1945, Japan obtained a major portion of her vital imports including soy beans, coking coal and iron ore from Manchuria, These supplies were obtained by political penetration of the area in question. These sources are lost to Japan. A considerable part of Japanese plant capacity is thus surplus to Japan’s economic requirements and powers of utilization. This equipment could very well be used in other parts of Asia to help rehabilitate them and thus to add to the economic potential of the Par East. This, in turn, will reduce demands for assistance from the United States.

On the other hand, current Japanese efforts to operate surplus equipment in order to justify its retention in Japan has and is resulting in inefficient production, dissipation of vital resources, labor shortages in essential industries, excessive production costs and increased inflationary pressures. The economies of neighboring states are so retarded industrially that some Japanese equipment can be used by them to fill immediate needs. Thermal power units, foundries, machine tools, and some steel equipment are urgently desired by China, the Philippines, and others. Some of these countries have long been making their economic plans on the basis of future reparations deliveries of capital equipment. Conversely an undertaking by the United States to rebuild Japan as the workshop of the Far East without facilitating the economic rehabilitation of neighboring countries which were victims of Japanese aggression would be a futile effort. Japan’s export markets are in the Orient. Unless the countries adjacent to Japan can buy, Japan cannot sell. Reparations in the form of capital equipment could be of major assistance in expanding the productive and hence the purchasing power of these Far Eastern countries.

Conclusion:

The reparations program can and should be used to supplement other efforts by the United States. Failure to utilize the reparations program to the maximum practical extent for these purposes will increase the burdens of American taxpayers.

In view of the anticipated tenure of American occupation in Germany, serious consideration should be given to minimizing uneconomic production and of concentrating on such production as will compete profitably in export markets on a long term basis.

The “revised” capital removals program of reparations, in its current form and magnitude, should be carried to completion as rapidly as possible in both Germany and Japan. This will forestall pressure for reparations out of current production from Japan and Germany.

E[dwin] W. P[auley]

1  Pauley submitted his resignation as Special Adviser on January 14, 1948 to become effective one month later. In a memorandum to Assistant Secretary of State Saltzman, dated February 14, 1948, Julius C. C. Edelstein, former deputy to Pauley and currently assigned to the Foreign Service Administration Division, explained that Pauley’s Final Report had been reviewed by competent officers in the Division of Occupied Areas Affairs and could be said to represent the views of the Department. There is no indication that this Report was seen by the Secretary of State.

2 Additional documentation regarding United States policy with respect to reparations from Japan, is included in volume v .

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) 740.00119 EW/2–1448

[Document 429]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

secret [Washington,] February 14, 1948.

This afternoon I had a conversation with Secretary Harriman about the dismantling program.

He said that he thought it would be desirable, if possible, to suspend dismantling activity until the necessary legislative action has been taken here to assure the European recovery plan. He felt also that it would be very desirable, until the ERP is assured, for us to continue our present procedures respecting reparations deliveries, viz. not to make any deliveries to the Soviet Union or Poland.

He believes that it is desirable to review the whole dismantling question with specific reference to the ERP, pointing out that the matter of German level of industry and reparations has never actually been formally considered with that in mind. This suggestion is in line with the recommendation which he circulated in the Cabinet in a memorandum dated January 23, 1948.1

When he was in Europe last summer he was impressed with the expense which the British were incurring in their zone in the process of dismantling. He showed me figures respecting four plants in the British zone which would indicate that the Reichsmarks cost of dismantling (not including shipping costs) was a very substantial percentage of the estimated replacement cost of the plants in 1938 and of the assumed reparations value of the plants. He is under the impression that in the American zone General Clay is accomplishing this more economically, and believes this is because we are not carrying dismantling as far in each plant as the British. In this connection he believes that with reference to the 15% capital equipment deliveries to the Soviet Union in exchange for reciprocal deliveries of commodities, we should examine carefully the dismantling costs involved to see what their effect may be in reducing the benefit which is supposed to be derived from the receipt of the commodities from the Soviet Union.

He believes that it is reasonable for us to propose to the British and French that they join us either in total suspension of deliveries to the Soviet Union and Poland or in suspension of the so-called 10% and continuation of the 15% on a current “barter” kind of basis.

Charles E. Saltzman

1  Ante, p. 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424].

Recommendations by the Secretary of State to the President and the Cabinet 740.00119 EW/2–1748

[Document 430]

Recommendations by the Secretary of State to the President and the Cabinet 1

secret [Washington,] February 16, 1948.

The Secretary of State recommends that the President and the Cabinet approve the following proposals: 1. That the Secretaries of Commerce, Interior and Agriculture nominate representatives to examine with representatives of the State and Army Departments, and in cooperation with members of the technical staffs of the interested Congressional committees, the lists of plants scheduled for dismantling in the three Western Zones (800, of which 186 are in the US Zone). The purpose of this examination would be to recommend which plants, if any, on these lists should be retained because they could if left in Germany make a substantial contribution to the world supply of critical items.

2. Subject to the possible recommendations referred to above, the Cabinet should approve the dismantling program as based upon the revised Level of Industry of August 1947.

3. Dismantling of plants in the US Zone will be continued and deliveries of plants will be made from the US Zone to the IARA nations, in accordance with our obligations under the Paris Agreement on Separation of January 24, 1946, after recommendations are received under paragraph 1 above.

4. The Secretary of State’s representative should, at the forthcoming tripartite conference in London, seek the adherence of the British and French Governments to the following course of action: a. Indefinite suspension of further deliveries to the Soviet Union and Poland; with the possible exception of deliveries which will be compensated for on a current basis (that is, disregarding the five year period for reciprocal payments provided for in the Potsdam, agreement) by reciprocal deliveries of commodities from the Soviets.

b. A prompt re-examination of the lists of plants scheduled for dismantling in their zones.

5. If satisfactory agreements with the British and French, as indicated in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) of recommendation 4, are not achieved, the Cabinet should consider further the position which the US Government should take.

1 An earlier version of this paper, as prepared by officers of the Department of State, was presented to the Secretary at a briefing session on the morning of February 16. At that time, the Secretary revised the Department draft and made the changes incorporated in the version printed here. The Secretary presented these recommendations to the President and the Cabinet at the Cabinet luncheon on February 16. The copy of this paper included in the London Embassy Files bears the following handwritten endorsement by Secretary Marshall: “President and Cabinet agreed to this—Feb. 16–48. GCM” (London Embassy Files, 1948, File–850 Reparations). Regarding the Cabinet meeting of February 16, see the memorandum of conversation by Wisner, February 17, p. 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433].

Statement by the Secretary of State to the Cabinet 740.00119 EW/2–1748

[Document 431]

Statement by the Secretary of State to the Cabinet 1

Washington, February 16, 1948.

The Department of State considers that the recommendations with regard to the German reparation and dismantling program should be approved by the Cabinet and supported before the Congress for the following principal reasons.

As I indicated in my letter of February 4 to Senator Vandenberg,2 copies of which have been furnished to the Cabinet, the Department of State believes that the type of reparation settlement which has been negotiated with so much difficulty is the quickest, cleanest and least costly that can be obtained. Apart from the fact that we are morally and legally obligated to comply with the terms of the Paris Reparation Agreement of January 24, 1946, if we abandon this settlement the entire question of reparations will be reopened and we are on notice of the fact that we would be faced with renewed demands for extensive reparation out of current production which would be the subject of long drawn-out negotiation and wrangling. Moreover, not only the Russians but the French and others who have suffered at the hands of the Germans would regard any effort on our part to further increase the German Level of Industry as confirmation of their charges that we are repeating the pattern of the last post-war period in building up Germany’s war potential.

The highest authorities of the Department of the Army, including Secretary Royall and General Clay and the latter’s technical assistants, have certified that it would not be possible under any circumstances to put into effective production the amount of German plant which is in excess of the July 1947 level of industry agreement. These Army officials have testified at great length before the Congress on this subject, and have pointed out that only with the greatest of good luck can the German plant which is scheduled to remain be brought fully into production during the period of ERP; and that German production is held back by a complex of other shortages and bottlenecks, including principally manpower, housing, fuel, transportation, and raw materials. The Army has further testified that the amount of German plant which is scheduled for removal is excess to the German peacetime economy and what is required to enable Germany to make its contribution to the economy of Europe,3 These are the conclusions of the responsible officials, and we believe that they are worthy of credence.

I shall be glad to furnish copies of a new memorandum4 which has just been prepared by the Department of State in a fresh effort to summarize all of the principal points and arguments which are involved in this very complicated matter.

1 This statement was read by the Secretary of State to the Cabinet luncheon meeting of February 16, 1948. The statement had been prepared by officers of the Department of State and was presented to the Secretary at the briefing meeting on the morning of February 16 (see the memorandum by Wisner, February 16, infra). The statement was accepted and used by the Secretary with the exception of the deletion shown in footnote 3, below. Regarding the Cabinet meeting of February 16, see the memorandum of conversation by Wisner, February 17, p. 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433].

2 See the editorial note, p. 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425].

3 In the draft of the statement presented to the Secretary of State on the morning of February 16, the following sentence appeared at this point: “The excess which is to be removed represents the portion of the amount which was added for the German war effort and which it was possible to operate only on the basis of a government subsidy.” This sentence was deleted by the Secretary of State.

4 See the Department of State memorandum of February 17, p. 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 434].

Memorandum by Frank G. Wisner, Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas 740.00119 EW/2–1648

[Document 432]

Memorandum by Frank G. Wisner, Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas 1

secret [Washington,] February 16, 1948.

Copies of the papers taken by the Secretary to the Cabinet meeting of today are attached. These papers consist of a revised list of recommendations2 to the President and the Cabinet, proposed terms of reference for a working group to re-examine the dismantling lists,3 and a new memorandum entitled “Determination of the Administration’s Position with Respect to the German Reparation Program”.4

Prior to the Secretary’s departure for the Cabinet meeting,5 he was extensively briefed by Messrs. Lovett, Douglas and the undersigned–Messrs. Douglas and Lovett having read the recommendations and terms of reference but not the supporting memorandum. In the process of studying the question the Secretary made a number of changes in the recommendations. He did not have time to read the supporting memorandum.

The Secretary also took with him a very brief statement (which he may or may not see fit to use) a copy of which is attached.6

Mr. Douglas stated to the Secretary that he is gravely concerned about the Congressional feeling on the subject of dismantling and reparations and the effect which this feeling may have upon the entire ERP program if we should take action at this time which would further arouse the Congress. He recommended that we adopt the following policy regarding dismantling and that we endeavor to obtain British and French agreement to do likewise: Stop all dismantling except with respect to plants which are already in the process of dismantling, pending a full review of the entire list in the light of the ERP. This should be done in such manner as to reassure the British, French and other Western nations that our action does not amount to a total abandonment of the reparations program.

In general Mr. Douglas feels that it would be preferable to continue the present status as regards deliveries for the next few weeks, and he expressed the belief that he would be able to convince the British and French of the wisdom of not pressing for further dismantling and reparation deliveries for the present, in the light of ERP considerations.

Frank G. Wisner

1 This memorandum was addressed to the Counselor of the Department, Charles E. Bohlen, to the office of Assistant Secretary of State Thorp, and to the Office of European Affairs.

2 For the text of the recommendations under reference here, see p. 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430].

3 The draft memorandum referred to here is not printed; for the version subsequently revised and approved by the Secretary of State on February 17, see p. 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435].

4 Not printed.

5 Regarding the Cabinet meeting of February 16, see the memorandum of conversation by Wisner, infra.

6 For the text of the statement under reference here, as revised by the Secretary of State, see p. 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431].

Memorandum of Conversation, by Frank G. Wisner, Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas 740.00119 EW/2–1748

[Document 433]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Frank G. Wisner, Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas

secret [Washington,] February 17, 1948.

The Secretary informed Mr. Wisner that at the Cabinet Meeting of February 16th,1 the Cabinet had accepted without reservation or any form of qualification the five recommendations2 which were made to them. The proposed terms of reference for the working group provided for in the first recommendation were not submitted to or considered by the Cabinet, since the Secretary wished to devote further consideration to these terms of reference. Various members of the Cabinet indicated that they were pleased by the proposal for a working group which would re-examine the plant lists, and one or more stated that they felt that this step would be very well received by the Congress.

The President stated quite firmly that he did not want any general change made in the German reparation program (presumably referring to the various Congressional and Cabinet recommendations that the entire program be abandoned). He inquired of the Secretary whether the proposals contemplated any “change in the Potsdam Agreement”. The Secretary replied by pointing out that there was a proposal to change some Potsdam provisions relating to reciprocal deliveries in that a strict quid pro quo arrangement was proposed. The President stated that this was regarded by him as a very minor modification and that he was not particularly concerned about it in view of the fact that the Russians have violated so many of the important provisions of the Agreement and the further fact that they have already accused the United States and Great Britain of every conceivable type of violation.

The Secretary told the Cabinet that the State Department had never seen Mr. Harriman’s memorandum of January 233 and that Mr. Lovett had no recollection whatever of having received this memorandum. Accordingly, the contents of this memorandum had not been available at the time the Secretary wrote his letter to Senator Vandenberg.4 Mr. Forrestal likewise stated that he had never gotten a copy of the Harriman memorandum, although Mr. Harriman was quite insistent that he had made copies available to the members of the Cabinet.

The Secretary concluded by approving the proposed terms of reference after making a few changes in the form of the memorandum.5

Frank G. Wisner

1 See also a portion of Secretary of Defense Forrestal’s account of this Cabinet luncheon in Forrestal Diaries, p. 379.

2 For the text of the recommendations under reference here, see p. 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430].

3  Ante, p. 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424].

4 Regarding the Secretary of State’s letter of February 4 to Senator Vandenberg, see the editorial note, p. 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425].

5 The memorandum under reference is printed infra.

Memorandum Prepared by the Department of State 740.00119 EW/2–1748

[Document 434]

Memorandum Prepared by the Department of State 1

secret [Washington,] February 17, 1948.

Terms of Reference for Working Group to Re-examine Plants Listed for Dismantling in the Three Western Zones of Germany 2

Together with representatives of the State and Army Departments, and in cooperation with members of the technical staffs of interested Congressional committees, 1. a To ascertain which plants on the lists of plants scheduled for dismantling in the three Western Zones of Germany are technically equipped to produce items which are in world-wide short supply because of a shortage of productive facilities.

b To prepare a list as a matter of urgency, from among such plants (par. 1a), of those which should not be dismantled pending the completion of their examination, and to transmit this list to the Departments of State and of Army. Plants having very small production capacities should not be included on the list of plants the dismantling of which is to be suspended.

2. To examine all data available in Washington with respect to these plants. Such additional information as may be deemed essential for this examination will be requested from the appropriate zonal authorities by the Departments of State and Army. If desired, the working group is authorized to visit Germany for consultation with the zonal authorities.

3. a To recommend which plants, if any, should be retained in Germany. These recommendations will depend upon whether it is feasible to bring the plants into production within the period of ERP without at the same time adversely affecting the achievement of either the coordinated reactivation of German industrial production or the production programs of the nations participating in the Committee for European Economic Cooperation.

b To make recommendations as to the appropriate types of plants which might be substituted for any plants which are recommended for retention in Germany. Actual designation of any particular plants to be substituted will be left to the zonal authorities.

1 The source text bears the typewritten notation “As Personally Amended and Approved by the Secretary 2/17/48.” A copy of this memorandum was transmitted to Ambassador Douglas in London under cover of a letter from Frank G. Wisner, February 17, 1948, not printed, which explained that the memorandum had not yet been submitted to the Cabinet, but that it was hoped that it would be accepted by representatives of the other interested Departments. The earlier draft of this memorandum was submitted to the Secretary of State on the morning of February 16, prior to the Cabinet meeting of that day (see memorandum by Wisner, February 16, p. 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]). The Secretary chose not to present the memorandum to the Cabinet in its original form.

2 Representatives of the Departments of State, Commerce, Interior, and Agriculture, constituted as the Working Group on Reparations, met for the first time on February 18 and several times thereafter during February. Some difference of opinion appears to have arisen in the Working Group at these meetings regarding the terms of reference as presented here. Some members of the Working Group apparently considered that the terms of reference should cover reconsideration of the entire reparations program. Eventually, at its meeting of March 9, the Working Group agreed on its terms of reference as presented here. Documentation is sparse in the Department of State files on these early meetings of the Working Group. Such material as is available is included in file 740.00119 EW.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 862.60/2–1748: Telegram

[Document 435]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

confidential
urgent Washington, February 17, 1948—7 p. m.

535. For Douglas and Saltzman.1

1. Cabinet yesterday approved following recommendations re dismantling program: a. Brit, French concurrence to be sought at London to continuance deliveries to Soviets only on strict barter basis. Failing such concurrence, position to be reconsidered by Cabinet.

b. Special group to be appointed by Harriman, Krug, Anderson to consider, with State and Army and in cooperation with technical staffs interested Congressional Committees, whether any plants scheduled for dismantling shld be retained for immediate production critical items. Substitutes to be sought for any plants recommended for retention. Brit, French cooperation such investigation to be sought London. Failing such cooperation, position to be reconsidered by Cabinet.

c. Reparation program except as affected by above recommendations to be continued unchanged and without delay.

2. Terms of reference2 of special group under (b) above believed so defined that its activity should produce no major change reparation program. It is hoped final decisions might be reached within 6 to 8 weeks.

3. In discussions with British and French their agreement should be sought temporary suspension dismantling any plants their zones which are designated by working group, emphasizing that this is without prejudice their right final decision re permanent retention any particular plant. Although working group may suggest categories in which substitutions might be made, zonal Commander will designate any such substitute plants. British and French should be assured that they will be kept fully advised-all stages working group’s discussions and that State and Army representatives will be in position guide these discussions as well as conduct ail necessary contacts with British and French representatives.

Marshall

1 Ambassador Douglas was the head of the United States Delegation to the forthcoming London Conference on Germany, and Assistant Secretary Saltzman was a member.

2 For the text of the terms of reference referred to here, see supra.

Resolution by the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency 740.00119 EW/2–2048

[Document 436]

Resolution by the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency 1

[Brussels,] February 18, 1948.

The Assembly of the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency,

recalling

that in accordance with the Potsdam Declaration the reparation claims of countries entitled to reparation shall be met in part from the Western Zones of Germany and that removals of industrial capital equipment from the Western Zones of Germany shall be completed by the end of 1947;

recalling

that Part IV paragraph 4 sub-paragraph (a) of the Potsdam Declaration states that the USSR shall furnish an equivalent value of food, coal, potash, zinc, timber, Clay products, petroleum products and such other commodities as may be agreed upon in exchange for 15% of surplus German industrial capital equipment of the Western Zones;

recalling

that it was decided at the meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers in Moscow during April 1947 that the final disposal of German war plants should be completed at the latest by June 1948;

recalling

that including war plants, only 249 plants or part plants have so far been made available to the Agency for distribution among its Member Governments as reparation;

recalling

that the allocation by the Agency of these plants to its Member Governments will be virtually completed by March 1948;

recalling

that although in October 1947 the Commanders-in-Chief of the United States and the United Kingdom Zones in Germany publicly announced that 682 plants in their Zones were not required for a self-sustaining German economy and would be available as reparation, and the Commander-in-Chief of the French Zone at the same time issued a provisional list of 176 plants in his Zone that would be made available as reparation, no information has been forthcoming as to when all these plants will be made available to this Agency for distribution;

noting

that such industrial capital equipment so far made available, despite the inadequacy of its amount, is making a substantial contribution to the rehabilitation of the economies of Member countries which suffered from German aggression, that experience has shown that such equipment when removed from Germany can quickly be established as a part of the productive equipment of these countries and that such equipment which is vital to the recovery of Europe can be secured, within a reasonable time and without the expenditure of dollars, only by the removal of surplus capital equipment in Germany;

resolves

to charge the President to bring the above facts to the attention of the Governments of the powers occupying Germany and to request the Governments concerned to state in the very near future when the Agency can expect (1) further allocation of surplus German industrial capital equipment for distribution among its members and (2) further reciprocal deliveries from the USSR in exchange for the industrial capital equipment which it has already received from the Western Zones of Germany.

1 The source text and a brief covering note from Jacques Rueff, President of the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency, dated February 20, 1948, were transmitted to the Department as enclosures to despatch 294, February 20, 1948, from the United States Delegation to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency at Brussels. The despatch explained that copies of this resolution, which was adopted by the IARA on February 18 by a vote of 18 to 0 (the United States abstained), were also being transmitted to the British, French, and Soviet Governments.

Editorial Note [Document 437]

Editorial Note

From February 23 to March 6, 1948, Delegations from the United States, the United Kingdom, and France, together with representatives from Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg, met for the first part of the London Conference on Germany. During the Conference, discussions took place between the American, British, and French Delegations on certain aspects of the reparation question. For documentation on this first part of the London Conference, including reports and papers regarding the reparations discussions, see Chapter I, Part B.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Inverchapel) 740.00119 EW/3–1248

[Document 438]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Inverchapel)1

confidential

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the Ambassador of Great Britain and has the honor to refer to the recent conversations in London concerning the German reparation and dismantling program.

At that time Ambassador Douglas drew the attention of his British and French colleagues to the criticisms of the German dismantling program which have been put forward in the United States Congress for several months, and to the possibility that legislation intended to severely restrict, or even entirely eliminate, dismantling might be included within general legislation for the implementation of the European Recovery Program. He pointed out that, during the period since the preparation of the lists of plants to be dismantled, the needs for particular items required for European recovery had become known in greater detail; and that the possibility therefore existed that a limited number of the plants presently listed for transfer might make a more prompt and effective contribution to that recovery if kept in Germany and put into operation there in the immediate future. The possibility of doing so would, of course, depend on the availability in Germany of adequate supplies of coal, transport, raw materials, housing, whether the plants in question are or could within a relatively short period of time be put in workable condition, and other factors and circumstances affecting German industrial production.

The Department of State understands that the British and French representatives in London agreed in principle to cooperate in a reexamination from this standpoint of the dismantling lists for the three Western Zones of Occupation in Germany. A Cabinet Sub-Committee has been appointed to undertake responsibility for this re-examination on the part of the United States Government, and has already devoted preliminary consideration to the problem.

The Sub-Committee has reached the tentative conclusion that the study could be most expeditiously carried out if the aid of the three Zone Commanders could be immediately enlisted. The Sub-Committee has felt that a fruitful approach might be to prepare a list of products in short supply which are of critical importance to European economic recovery, and to request the Zone Commanders to furnish the names of plants now scheduled for dismantling which are technically equipped for the production of such items. The Sub-Committee has prepared a preliminary list of such items, a copy of which is attached. From the list of plants submitted by the Zone Commanders, the Cabinet Sub-Committee would select those plants the dismantling of which in its opinion should be postponed pending further study, and this list would be transmitted to the Zone Commanders.

It is appreciated that a rather large number of plants presently listed for dismantling might be found by the Zone Commanders to be technically equipped for the production of the items noted on the attached list. The Department of State wishes to emphasize, however, it is expected that suspension of dismantling of a smaller number of plants would be requested and that such suspension is solely for the purpose of permitting further study. The number of plants, if any, which might, finally be recommended for permanent retention in Germany would in all probability be rather small.

The Department of State would appreciate, therefore, receiving the requested information at the earliest feasible date. In submitting the list of plants, pertinent data as to the particular category and end-products of each plant should be included. In view of considerations already made clear by the Department of State, the British Government will appreciate the desirability of bringing this matter to as early a conclusion as possible.

Washington , March 12, 1948.

[Enclosure]

Paper Prepared by the Department of State

confidential [Washington, undated.]

List of End-Products in Critical World Short Supply

Fertilizers and dyestuffs, including allied basic chemicals.

Petroleum manufacturing and refining equipment.

Petroleum pipe line equipment.

Oil field equipment, especially casings.

Mining machinery, especially mine locomotives, coal loaders, coal, cutters, underground conveyors, and conveyor belting.

Agricultural machinery and parts.

Wood-working machinery.

Agricultural hand tools.

Mechanics’ hand tools.

Carpenters’ hand tools.

Heavy forged hand tools.

Steel slabs.

Bars.

Sheets.

Plates.

Tin plate.

Large tube rounds and wide skelp.

Large diameter tubes and pipe.

Freight cars, tank cars.

Electrical generating, transforming, and rectifying equipment.

Basic copper, lead, tin, zinc and aluminum.

1 An identical note, mutatis mutandis, was addressed to the French Ambassador on March 12.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Frank G. Wisner, Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas 740.00119 EW/3–2248

[Document 439]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Frank G. Wisner, Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas

secret [Washington,] March 22, 1948.

Participants: Ambassador Douglas

Secretary Harriman

Secretary Anderson

Under Secretary Chapman

Mr. Collisson

Mr. Blaisdell

Mr. Wisner

The following is the gist of a conversation participated in by Ambassador Douglas and the other above named individuals at approximately 3:45 P. M., March 19, 1948. Messrs. Harriman, Anderson and (in the absence of Mr. Krug from Washington) Mr. Chapman, met with Mr. Douglas at his request hi order to receive from him a report of the results of his negotiations on the subject of reparations and dismantling with the British and French during the recently adjourned tripartite discussions in London.

Mr. Douglas outlined the arguments which he had used with Bevin and Massigli including the fact that there is great pressure in the Congress for the cessation of dismantling and reparations deliveries. He made it very clear that unless the British and the French are willing to agree to modifications in the program, it is almost certain that the Congress will adopt drastic legislative provisions in connection with ERP. Mr. Douglas stated that Bevin insisted that he felt bound to continue deliveries to the Soviet Union and Poland), but that he believed it would be possible by “administrative delays” to slow down and minimize these deliveries during the coming weeks. He further agreed to review each month the reparations deliveries question as far as the Russians are concerned, with the view to determining whether intervening action on their part would warrant the adoption of further and more definite restrictive measures against them. As regards the dismantling program, Mr. Bevin agreed to cooperate with us in a review of the plants in the British zone which are listed for dismantling for the purpose of determining which of these should be retained in Germany as being better able to contribute to economic recovery there than if moved elsewhere. However, he stated that this would he upon the understanding that there would be no very substantial increase in the number of plants to be retained in Germany or in the German level of industry. He was opposed to the substitution of plants for those removed from the dismantling list on the ground that the Germans have been given very specific assurances that only the plants on the list would be removed and that the remaining plants could he put into working condition forthwith.

Massigli indicated that the French would be willing to join with us in the suspension of deliveries except those to be made on a current reciprocal basis in exchange for commodities. They raised some question as to the cloud which might be cast upon the title of plants allocated to the western nations as a result of the references in the preamble of the IARA reparation agreement of January 1946 to the Potsdam agreement and quadripartite allocation machinery. However, the French indicated that they were not too worried about this technical legal aspect. As regards the dismantling program, the French agreed to cooperate with us in a review of plants in their zone which are scheduled for dismantling, but made it very clear that they would be unwilling to consent to any substantial increase in the German level of industry.

Mr. Douglas expressed the view that if the total number of plants from all zones to be removed from the dismantling list should not exceed 15 to 20 and if these should not contain too high a percentage of the larger and more important plants, the agreement of the French as well as that of the British would almost certainly be obtainable with respect to this aspect of the matter.

Mr. Harriman spoke at considerable length and with great conviction against the present reparation and dismantling program in Germany and he said that, but for the problem of international relations which he acknowledges to be serious, he would favor the abandonment of the entire program. He further stated that this represented the view of all those in the Department of Commerce who were at all familiar with the subject. More specifically, Mr. Harriman pointed to the current world shortage of steel and other heavy industrial products, stating that it seems to be most unwise to dismantle German plants capable of producing these items. It was pointed out to Mr. Harriman that according to General Clay’s statements, including his testimony before Congressional Committees, it would be impossible under any circumstances to bring into production within the next four or five years the amount of plant in excess of that scheduled for retention. Mr. Harriman said that if this were in fact the case, he would agree with General Clay that such plants as could be put to use in the Western European nations should be dismantled and removed there. However, he said that the only people who have made these estimates are the people in Germany who have been faithfully and conscientiously following bad directives and it would require an independent and objective group of engineering experts (similar to the overseas consultants group which recently rendered a report on reparations in Japan) to convince him of the accuracy of these estimates. Mr. Harriman mentioned that General Noce had recently attempted to explain the dismantling program to certain persons in the Department of Commerce and the net result of his explanation was to make them all the more convinced that the dismantling program is ill-conceived and harmful. Specifically General Noce stated that electric generating plant had been removed arid that it would be necessary to reinstate all of the amount which had been removed and perhaps more in order to obtain sufficient electric power to meet the schedule of production deemed necessary under ERP.

Mr. Harriman expressed himself as being completely opposed to any further deliveries to the IARA satellite nations, and he said that it was the duty and responsibility of the State Department to work out through diplomatic means a method whereby reparation deliveries to the satellites might be discontinued. He acknowledged that this would be a difficult undertaking and he made no recommendations as to how one should proceed beyond indicating that we should be vigilant for an opportunity to seize upon difficulties and objections which might be raised by the satellites as a basis for proposing the abandonment of the IARA agreement. As regards further deliveries to Russia, Mr. Harriman is completely opposed to delivering any of the 10% and does not particularly favor deliveries on a reciprocal basis with respect to the 15%. He thinks that the method of evaluating the plants results in artificially low estimates and he referred again to the expense of dismantling, pointing out that he had received information from British officials that the cost in their zone of dismantling and delivering actually exceeded the entire value of the plant itself. (With respect to the latter point, it was made clear to Mr. Harriman that the American method of dismantling involves only the removal of machinery and equipment and does not extend to the dismantling of the buildings, foundations and fixtures of a permanent character.)

Mr. Harriman concluded with a recommendation that the Departments of State and Army concur in a unanimous resolution of the other three interested departments to despatch a group of engineering experts to Germany at the earliest possible date. He did not favor the use of the present working group for this purpose, stating that the group does not contain individuals with a sufficient degree of technical expertise and that the investigating group should be independent of the government agencies having had previous experience with the subject.

Messrs. Anderson, Chapman and Collisson all spoke in support of the contentions made by Mr. Harriman. Specifically, Mr. Anderson favored the indefinite suspension of all uncompensated deliveries to the Soviets, the suspension of deliveries to the satellite members of IARA, and the “urgent necessity” for sending a group of independent technical experts to Germany. Mr. Collisson stated that whereas he is prepared to proceed along the lines suggested by the State Department in the working group, he feels that the existing policy is wrong. The question of allocations was discussed briefly although inconclusively. Mr. Wisner stated that in his opinion it would foe necessary to recognize that if further allocations are made now and before agreement is obtained with the British on the question of deliveries, certain deliveries to the Soviets may be expected to take place from the British zone. Mr. Douglas expressed concern as to the effect which an announced suspension of deliveries to Russia might have upon the over-all position in Berlin.

At the conclusion of the meeting Mr. Douglas indicated to Mr. Wisner that he proposed to have a further conversation with Mr. Harriman on Saturday morning or Monday.1

[ Frank G. Wisner ]

1 No records have been found of any further conversations between Ambassador Douglas and Ambassador Harriman on March 27 or March 29.

The Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Secretary of Commerce (Harriman) 740.00119 EW/3–2548

[Document 440]

The Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Secretary of Commerce (Harriman)1

Washington, March 25, 1948.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: The Department of State has reexamined the matter of the Cabinet working group on reparations in the light of the discussion held in Ambassador Douglas’ office last Friday afternoon.2 It is suggested that the value and authority of the working group’s analysis and recommendations would be greatly increased if, in line with your suggestion, a limited number of engineers and other technical personnel of outstanding qualifications were brought into its work and especially the proposed field trip to Germany. Preferably, these technicians should have some acquaintance of the German problem, and it would appear entirely appropriate to draw them from either within or outside the Government.

In order to maintain the character of the working group as established under the original Cabinet recommendations, it is recommended that the additional technical personnel should be selected by the Secretaries of Commerce, Agriculture, and the Interior, or their representatives.

In view of the urgency of this matter, it would be greatly appreciated if you would inform me at your earliest convenience whether you agree that the above suggestion would meet your objective, which is shared by the Department of State, of insuring that the investigation is carried out by an impartial and technically competent group. I feel certain that you will agree a speedy conclusion of the task of the working group is imperative.3

Sincerely yours,

Charles E. Saltzman

1 Virtually identical letters were sent to Secretary of Agriculture Clinton P. Anderson and to Secretary of the Interior Julius A. Krug.

2 Regarding the meeting of March 19 under reference here, see the memorandum of conversation by Wisner, March 22, p. 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439].

3 No answer to this letter has been found in the files of the Department of State. Agreement with the proposal set forth here was, however, apparently promptly forthcoming. On March 30, the Secretaries of Commerce, Interior, and Agriculture, in consultation with the Departments of State and Army, established a special group of advisers and consultants. The group, subsequently called the Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations, was to visit the American, British, and French zones of occupation of Germany to examine industrial plants tentatively listed for reparation which might be retained in Germany to produce items of critical world short supply under the European Recovery Program. The Technical Mission on Reparations, which originally included Norman H. Collison, Fred T. Searles, Edward Falck, Frank J. Baumis, Julius Graf, and Julius C. C. Edelstein (as Executive Secretary), assembled in Europe during the first week of April and went to London on April 7 for consultation with Ambassador Douglas and preliminary discussions with British and French experts.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 EW/4–348: Telegram

[Document 441]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret   niact Washington, April 3, 1948—7 p. m.

1160. Personal from Saltzman to Douglas. Reurtel 1339 April 3.1 Following are terms of reference of Technical Mission as agreed here subject to your comments and Clay’s. Contemplated to authorize you agree to such limitations thereof as are necessary and appropriate to obtain adequate cooperation from those governments, subject to reference of any important points to Washington.

“1. The purpose of the Technical Mission is to study plants preliminarily determined by the Cabinet working group or by the authorities of the respective zones of occupation to be technically equipped to produce critical items for European recovery which are in world-wide short supply, and to recommend which, if any, of such plants should be retained in Germany in order best to help achieve the objectives of the European Recovery Program. In arriving at its recommendations the Mission will (a) give consideration to the feasibility of promptly bringing the plants into substantial production, without at the same time adversely affecting the planned recovery either of the German economy or of the nations participating in the European Recovery Program. In so doing it shall give consideration to all factors involved including, but not limited to, the availability of and competing demands for manpower, raw materials, food, fuel, power, transportation and similar items, both in Western Germany and in other countries participating in the European Recovery Program;

(b) study and evaluate the feasibility of and time required for the reestablishment of the plants in the IARA countries which are participants in the European Recovery Program.

2. The examination of plants in the United States zone of occupation will be made under the authority and pursuant to arrangements made by the Mission with the Military Governor of the U.S. Zone of Occupation. He will be informed of these terms of reference.

3. The examination of plants in the British and French zones of occupation will be made under the authority of the respective zonal commanders, and pursuant to arrangements with the governments of the United Kingdom and of France. Arrangements with these governments will be made by Ambassador Douglas, and all negotiations with the British and French Governments which are appropriate to carry out the purposes of the Technical Mission will be conducted by Ambassador Douglas or pursuant to his direction.

4. The purposes and work of the Technical Mission will be considered secret, and no publicity will be given thereto unless the Department of State with the concurrence of the other interested departments shall so determine.”

Foregoing terms agreed by working group before your 1342 April 32 received. How do you think we should proceed to reconcile two approaches?

Although all of foregoing terms fully agreed question left open whether there should not be included as an additional item proviso that Moscow sliding scale for coal deliveries be adopted as a guiding principle. Will advise you soonest of outcome further negotiations this point. [Saltzman.]

Lovett

1 Not printed; it reported that the British Foreign Office was preparing draft terms of reference for the Cabinet Technical Mission on German Reparations which was soon to arrive in Europe to take up its work (740.00119 EW/4–348). The text of the British draft terms of reference was subsequently transmitted to the Department of State in telegram 1342, April 3, from London, not printed (740.00119 EW/4–348).

2 Not printed; see previous footnote.

The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin USPolAd Germany Files: 400.a Reparations: Telegram

[Document 442]

The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

secret
priority [Washington,] April 3, 1948.

WX–98915. From Dept of the Army from CSCAD to CINCEUR. Separations deliveries to Soviet Satellites is subj.

1. Cabinet decided 26 Mar re exports from US to Soviet Bloc to deny export licenses to items where to do so would affect production in key segments of Soviets and Satellite economies.1 Interdepartmental Committee will prepare analysis of Soviet reqmts from abroad with view to rating them in terms of strategic value to Soviet economy. Program designed to meet 3 main reqmts: (1) Not destroy east-west trade;

(2) Limit exports of significant items to Soviet Bloc;

(3) Give assurance that US will obtain strategic materials which it wants from Soviet Union.

2. Pending further instruction, apply foregoing decision as guide and suspend reparations deliveries to Soviet Satellites which in your judgment would be of strategic or critical importance in their economies. Further info re strategic items will be furnished you as developed by Interdepartmental Committee.

3. With reference to your inquiry in telecon 12 Mar2 we do not have sufficient info here to judge whether or not items remaining to be delivered fall within above policy. If items come within the above delineated policy you are authed [authorized?] to suspend deliveries.

4. Pls advise scheduled reparations deliveries from this and other plants which appear subj to suspension under these instructions with description of equip involved. State needs such info in order to correlate with problems of east-west trade relations in gen and to give info and instructions to US rep IARA.

5. No decision has been made to effect gen suspension of reparations deliveries to Satellites and it is believed that temporary gen suspension might undesirably precipitate this issue with Western European countries, when no agreement with them has been reached even on deliveries to Soviet Union. Very desirable all publicity and, to extent possible, over refusal to deliver be avoided.

6. This cable prepared before recent Berlin events.3 As you know, our entire policy on shpmts to Russia and her Satellites is now under consideration in view of these recent events. However, principles above will be followed until some other decision is reached.

1 Documentation on United States policy regarding trade with the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe is included in volume iv .

2 No record has been found in the files of the Department of State of the trans-Atlantic teletype conference under reference here.

3 The reference here is presumably to the breakdown in the functioning of the agencies of the Allied Control Authority for Germany and the measures by Soviet occupation authorities impeding rail, road, and water traffic into the Western zones of occupation of Berlin. For documentation regarding these matters, see chapter iv.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/4–348: Telegram

[Document 443]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent Berlin, April 3, 1948—2 p. m.

no distribution

774. All non-cultural restitution to USSR and satellites stopped effective yesterday. Restitutions Branch instructed hold all released property not already shipped, not to publicize this move and to stall off restitutions missions with any excuse.

List restitutions property released or shipped Hungary (re mytels 751 and 752, April 11 ) should not be publicized.

Cultural restitution and restitution to west to continue normally.

Murphy

1 Neither printed.

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army USPolAd Germany Files: 400.a Reparations: Telegram

[Document 444]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

secret
priority Berlin, April 4, 1948—6:27 p. m.

CC–3721. To Dept of the Army for CSCAD Personal for Noce from CINCEUR Signed Clay. Please examine urad WX–989151 which we do not believe provides us any practicable guide to the question of reparations and restitutions deliveries to Soviet Satellites. We are not able to determine the effect of cessation of reparations on East–West Trade but doubt if it has any significance as East–West Trades now are made on the basis of an exchange of goods mutually desired by both parties. We have absolutely no way here to determine what may be significant items. However, we must point out that reparations removals from Germany had solely the purpose of reducing Germany’s war potential and hence all items being delivered for reparations are items found to have war potential. In view of this fact, we could not continue reparations deliveries without providing war potential as, for instance, the Kugelfischer Plant which is a ball bearing plant. While you state that you do not have sufficient info to judge whether the items from this plant should or should not be delivered, it is quite clear to us that there is no more critical war potential plant than one designed to manufacture ball bearings.2

Moreover, it is impractical for us to attempt to make partial reparations deliveries and suspend deliveries in other instances as the suspension in itself would clearly indicate our intent. We do not believe that there is any answer to this question other than to decide to deliver or not to deliver. You have advised us to avoid publicity and over refusal to deliver. We have been dragging our feet for weeks and, in fact, have ceased to make any actual deliveries. While we have given no publicity to this, it is of course becoming clear to the representatives of the Satellite Powers that we are retarding delivery and we do not see how we can avoid overt refusal for a matter of more than days.

I judge from your telegram that you desire us to make some deliveries. I would appreciate specific advice if this is the case, as deliveries at the present moment have stopped for all practical purposes. However, I believe that we can apply the policy which you outline in making restitution deliveries although this does not appear in your radio. Other than cultural objects, restitutions deliveries to Satellite Powers have been stopped for all practical purposes pending further clarification of policy at home. Are we to interpret your radio as providing policy guidance for restitutions to Satellite countries also?3

[ Clay ]

1  Ante, p. 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442].

2 Material from the Kugelfischer Ball Bearing plant was scheduled for delivery to Czechoslovakia as reparations. Telegram W–99083, April 7, from the Department of the Army to General Clay in Berlin, not printed, stated that the plant clearly fell within the category whose delivery to the Soviet bloc should be suspended. The telegram added that announcement to the Czechoslovak authorities of the suspension of deliveries should be avoided by whatever means were possible. (USPolAd Germany Files, 1948, 400.a Reparations)

3 Message CC–3789, April 9, from Deputy Military Governor Hays at Berlin to the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, not printed, listed the equipment in Western Germany that had been allocated as reparations and remained to be shipped to Albania, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia. The message restated that the reparations removals from Germany had the sole purpose of reducing Germany’s war potential and hence all items being delivered for reparations were items found to have war potential. (USPolAd Germany Files, 400.a Reparations)

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/4–1048: Telegram

[Document 445]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent London, April 10, 1948—8 p. m.

1487. For Saltzman and Todd from Edelstein.1 Supplementing London’s 1474.2 Anglo-French consultations with technical mission concluded today with full agreement by British, French to facilitate work of technical mission in their respective zones. British and French collaborated in submission to us of paper annotating our list of items in critical world short supply production facilities for which we propose to examine.3 British, French agreed to inspection with no reservations. In some categories such as steel products, British stated emphatically that retained fabricating capacity was sufficient absorb all possible basic steel output until 1952. French made similar reservations with regard to dyestuffs, etc. British especially emphasized necessity our inspection of retained capacity to ascertain limits of German reactivation. Both British, French undertook to support these arguments with factual data when we arrive in Germany especially their zones. Assurances were given them that we would give due consideration to these factors as well as others.

French sought to secure our agreement to (a) eliminating in London all but minimum list of plants we proposed to inspect and (b) to defining in detail the principles on the basis of which plants listed for dismantlement would foe retained for the German economy. We declined to submit ourselves to such procedure and won final agreement to making such eliminations on the basis of facts submitted in the field.

We advised meeting that we proposed to submit interim reports to executive branch of United States Government with lists of plants eliminated from review so that United States Government would be free to take whatever action in regard to these plants it deemed advisable at governmental level. French sought consistently to secure political commitments and introduce political considerations but we successfully maintained we were fact-finding mission unempowered to make any final determinations, which would be made at governmental level upon due consideration of our reports and recommendations.

French consistently expressed aversion to any publicity but referred to Paris and British proposal for press release to be held in reserve in case story leaked.

Sessions concluded in spirit of goodwill and mutual exchanges of regard and willingness cooperate to fullest in expediting work. We emphasized our desire to complete study at earliest possible date to facilitate intergovernmental discussions on subjects which might include dismantling program. This assurance was especially satisfying to British, French.

We gave report on deletions already tentatively made from US Zone list and British list (approved lists 1 to 4) although emphasizing these were simply recommendations to executive branch of US Government which would make proper disposition of such recommendations. These lists likewise seemed reassuring to conferees.

Mission expects spend next two days in London working on data received from French and British and preparing agenda for conferences in Berlin preparatory to actual inspections. Expect depart London Monday with Baumis directly for Berlin. General Clay has promised to send plane for us.

Mission itself feels entirely satisfied with outcome of discussions and received much helpful information. Most encouraging, however, was unqualified assurances from French, British we would receive every assistance, cooperation in satisfying all possible angles of legitimate inquiry on our part.

Pass to Rawlings for Cabinet secretaries. [Edelstein.]

Douglas

1  Edelstein was serving as Executive Secretary of the Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations.

2 The telegram under reference, dated April 9, not printed, reported that tripartite American-British-French discussions had begun that morning regarding an agreed list of end products in critical world supply and such industrial plants in Western Germany, scheduled for reparation, capable of producing such products. The talks had opened in a spirit of amity and cooperation (740.00119 EW/4–948). These tripartite discussions, which were held at the British Foreign Office, were concluded on April 10. The draft minutes of these discussions and related papers are included in the files of the Department of State under 740.00119 EW/4–1348. The American Delegation at these discussions included members of the Technical Mission on Reparations together with Lawrence Wilkinson, Economic Adviser, OMGUS, and Don C. Bliss, Counselor of Economic Affairs of the American Embassy in London. The British Delegation was headed by Roger B. Stevensof the British Foreign Office, and the French Delegation was headed by M. de Frondeville of the French Foreign Ministry.

3 A copy of the American list under reference here is included as an enclosure to note of March 12 from the Secretary of State to the British Ambassador, p. 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438].

The Department of State to the French Embassy 740.00119 EW/3–2548

[Document 446]

The Department of State to the French Embassy

Aide-Mémoire

Reference is made to the French Embassy’s aides-mémoire of March 12 and March 25, 1948, and to the Department of State’s aide-mémoire of March 17, 1948, concerning the notification to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency of the charge to be made to the French reparation account in view of the change in the status of the Saar.1

The Embassy’s aides-mémoire have suggested: (a) that the letter of notification agreed upon at Berlin be modified in such a way as to be without prejudice to the question whether the reparation charge on account of the Saar should be debited to Category A or to Category B; and (b) that despatch of the letter be postponed until the results of the re-examination of the dismantling lists from the standpoint of the European Recovery Program have become known.2

Concerning point (a), the Department of State is aware of no new circumstances which have arisen since the agreement reached in Berlin on February 20, 1948, and which would require a revision of the letter. As pointed out in that letter, the charge of 70 million Reichsmarks “has been calculated to include: “(A) Industrial equipment in the Saar that would have been removed as reparations if the Saar had remained an integral part of the German economy.

“(B) Industrial equipment additionally retained in western Germany in order to maintain the German economy at the permitted level despite the loss of the Saar.”

It is evident, therefore, that, but for the economic separation of the Saar, the total volume of reparation available to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency in Category B would have been greater by an amount estimated at 70 million Reichsmarks. This being so, the Department of State remains of the opinion that the entire amount should be charged to Category B.

Concerning point (b), the Department of State considers that, inasmuch as economic separation of the Saar has already been agreed upon, the consequent notification to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency should be promptly made. The purpose of the re-examination of the dismantling lists now in process is to permit the dismantling program to be carried out as rapidly as possible, subject to the assurance that dismantling will not be detrimental to supplies of critical commodities required for the European Recovery Program. Such assurance is obviously to the best interests of all countries concerned.

In view of the fact, however, that the Assembly of the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency is now in recess until April 27, the Department of State could agree that the despatch of the letter of notification is not of immediate urgency. Should the French Embassy request such action, the Department would be willing to instruct the United States Delegate to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency to postpone despatch of the letter until the Assembly reconvenes, provided his British colleague is prepared to take similar action.

Washington, April 13, 1948.

1 None of the aide-mémoire under reference here is printed.

2 The draft letter of notification to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency under reference here was included as Appendix D to the Economic Agreement between the United States, the United Kingdom and France regarding the Saar, signed in Berlin, February 20, 1948, p. 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 EW/4–1448: Telegram

[Document 447]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, April 14, 1948—5 p. m.

1314. There follow terms of reference of technical mission on reparations as approved by Agriculture, Commerce and Interior and accepted by State and Army. This is intended to be precise text agreed by Douglas and Mission and accepted by Clay, as communicated to Dept by London’s 1494 April 11, 1500 April 12 and telephone conversation Douglas–Saltzman April 12.1

1. The task of the technical mission is to study German plants scheduled for dismantling which are technically equipped to produce critical items of world wide short supply, and to recommend which, if any, of such plants should be retained for production in Germany in order best to achieve the objectives of the European Recovery Program. In arriving at its recommendations the mission will: A. Review, in consultation with British and French representatives in London, the lists of plants scheduled for dismantling with a view to determining which plants may be equipped to produce critical items.

B. Make a technical examination of such plants with a view of determining the feasibility of bringing them into substantial production within a reasonable period of time for the benefit of European recovery.

C. Study and evaluate the feasibility of, and time required, for the reestablishment of the plants in the IARA countries which are participants in the ERP.

2. The examination of plants in each of the zones of occupation will be carried out by the mission in collaboration with the appropriate military government officials, and the commander of each zone will be requested to furnish technical consultants and to afford the mission all appropriate facilities for carrying out its task. In the US zone of occupation such examination of plants will be carried on under the authority of the military governor and pursuant to arrangements all appropriate facilities for carrying out its task. In the US zone of occupation such examination of plants will be carried on under will be carried on under the authority of the respective zonal commanders and pursuant to arrangements made by Ambassador Douglas with the Governments of the UK and France.

3. The US military governor will be kept informed of the findings of the mission even though a formal report may not have been drafted by the mission before its departure from Germany. Upon completion of its task the mission will submit to the cabinet working party a final report embodying its recommendations, of which a copy shall be furnished simultaneously to the commander of the US zone of occupation.

4. The technical mission is to be a fact-finding group whose function is to make a report to the Cabinet committee concerned. It is not empowered to conduct inter-governmental negotiations. Its findings will be considered at a US governmental level.

5. The purposes and work of the technical mission will be considered secret and no publicity will be given thereto unless the Department of State with the concurrence of other interested departments shall so determine.

Sent London as 1314, Berlin as 657, Paris as 1218. Berlin please pass to Technical Mission2 and CINCEUR.

Lovett

1 In telegram 1449, April 8, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas transmitted draft terms of reference for the Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations. This draft was a revision of the terms of reference transmitted to Ambassador Douglas in telegram 1160, April 3, to London, p. 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441]. It incorporated the views of General Clay and the Ambassador’s own suggestions made in the light of attitude of the British. (740.00119 EW/4–848) Between April 8 and 12, the draft was further perfected during consultations between Ambassador Douglas and members of the Technical Mission and in accordance with comments from the Department of State. Although the British Foreign Office was not in a position to accept or reject the terms, British views were taken into consideration. The messages and records under reference here represent the final Stage in the redrafting of the terms of reference; none printed.

2 The Technical Mission on Reparations flew from London to Berlin late on April 12.

Editorial Note [Document 448]

Editorial Note

Between April 20 and June 1 Delegations from the United States, the United Kingdom, and France and representatives from Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg met for the second and concluding part of the London Conference on Germany. Although reparations as a topic was not on the agenda of the Conference, the American, British, and French Delegations held a number of conversations about this problem during the course of the Conference. For documentation on this second part of the London Conference, see pages 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125] ff.; regarding reparations, see in particular pages 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 128], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 144], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 165], and 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172].

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Secretary of State 862.60/4–3048

[Document 449]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] April 30, 1948.

Subject: Deliveries of German Reparations to Soviet Satellites

It is believed that you should be apprised of a disagreement of policy between the State Department and Army on the above subject. Secretary Royall may have occasion to initiate discussion on it prior to completion of our work.

Subsequent to the Czechoslovak coup, General Clay suspended deliveries from the U.S. Zone of capital equipment allocated by IARA to Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and Albania. All such equipment in process of delivery is from German war plants. The United States had originally concurred in the allocation of this equipment. As grounds for his action General Clay points to the war potential of the equipment and the plants from which it has been removed.

Our initial proposal to the Department of the Army was that partial deliveries of allocated equipment be made after screening against a list of prohibited types. Under Secretary Draper protested, first that the procedure borders on the impractical; second, that denial of any types of equipment will reveal our intent; and finally that delivery of any equipment from war plants, even though non-prohibited types of equipment, would be indefensible before Congress.

Because of our commitments through IARA and of the difficulty of dealing differently with the satellite countries as against other IARA countries, with respect to a complete suspension of deliveries, the State Department policy looks to a continuation of partial deliveries. Such a policy will be consistent with the Cabinet decision to preserve the advantages of East–West trade and deny satellite countries only items of strategic or critical importance to their economies.1

We are at present reviewing detailed lists of allocated equipment available here in Washington to determine the possibility of using the proposed type of screening. We hope in so doing to convince the Army of its feasibility and to offer them a definitive pattern through which deliveries of non-prohibited equipment can be made. We further propose to negotiate with the British and French to adopt a similar policy looking to restriction of all deliveries, whether trade, restitution or reparations, to non-prohibited items of equipment.

Charles E. Saltzman

1 For documentation on United States policy regarding trade with the Soviet Union and the countries of Eastern Europe, see volume iv .

The United States Delegate to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency (Dorr) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/5–2248: Telegram

[Document 450]

The United States Delegate to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency (Dorr) to the Secretary of State 1

confidential Brussels, May 22, 1948—noon.

1055. OE from Dorr. 1. Assembly yesterday considered Yugoslav protest re stoppage deliveries from US zone (remytel 1027, May 19, repeated Berlin 49, London 992 ). Albanian delegates likewise complained of similar stoppage deliveries their governments. Yugoslavia, Albania alleged USA violating Paris Act and threatening existence IARA. Cited disastrous effect stoppage on their economies and expense maintaining inspection dismantling teams Germany as further reasons assembly should endeavor obtain prompt settlement. Czechoslovakian delegate advised shortage rail cars given by zonal authorities as explanation for interruption deliveries his government, although both Yugoslav and Albanian alleged this not real reason. Czech cited press reports that equipment from Paraxol [Kügelfischer?] Works was returned to plant while en route Czechoslovakia by rail. Asked USA consider permitting recipient countries supply own wagons for transporting reparation deliveries.

2. I repeated earlier statement (mytel 1035, May 20, repeated London 100, Berlin 513 ) that I was unprepared make full reply to foregoing, although indicated willingness make inquiries my government and communicate results to Assembly.

3. Entire matter treated like hot potato by other delegates, Belgium, supported by Greek, urged that Assembly take no final position until secretariat makes full inquiry into facts, and USA submits statement. As two previous inquiries addressed to USA zonal authorities by secretariat had produced nothing new, Rueff inclined agree further efforts by secretariat likely fruitless. During brief intermission he drafted interim resolution acceptable both sides which Assembly quickly adopted fifteen to zero. Will forward exact text Monday, but gist is as follows:4 A. Assembly notes USA [Yugoslav?], Albanian, Czech declarations and that by US A delegation.

B. Asks USDel provide requested info earliest possible date.

C. Decides keeps matter on agenda for next session.

4. Assembly then adjourned after setting June 7 as opening date next session. Department will recognize necessity preparing statement for communication to Assembly by June 7. I would appreciate opportunity comment upon proposed statement and hope Department can transmit same sufficiently in advance of June 7 to enable me do so.

Sent department 1055, repeated London 102, Berlin 54.

[ Dorr ]

1 Telegrams from and to Dorr were transmitted via the facilities of the Embassy in Brussels.

2 Not printed. It reported that the IARA Secretary General had circulated a letter from the Yugoslav delegation to the IARA, dated May 15, asking that the question of the stoppage of the delivery of reparation and restitution items from the U.S. zone of occupation of Germany to Yugoslavia he placed on the agenda of the IARA Assembly. The letter, which summarized earlier Yugoslav protests to American authorities, proposed that the IARA Assembly request the United States Government to take the necessary measures to resume reparation deliveries to Yugoslavia (740.00119 EW/5–1948). The resumption of reparation deliveries to Yugoslavia had earlier been requested in a Yugoslav Embassy note of April 19 to the Department of State, not printed (740.00119 EW/4–1948). In telegram 755, May 20, to Brussels, Dorr was instructed by the Department to make no official reply to the substance of the Yugoslav protest but to reiterate previous statements that the matter was under consideration in Washington on the basis of a formal Yugoslav communication to the State Department (740.00119 EW/5–1948).

3 Not printed.

4 The text of the resolution summarized here was transmitted to the Department in telegram 1092, May 28, from Brussels, not printed (740.00119 EW/5–2848).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/6–248: Telegram

[Document 451]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, June 2, 1948—11 p. m.

2425. For Saltzman.

I. At a meeting between the French, British and American groups held this afternoon,1 the following paper reproduces tentative draft of the identic instructions to military governors relating to revised procedures for reparations. It was agreed it should be submitted to governments and to military governors, particularly General Clay and General Robertson for comment.

“1. As a result of further discussions, through the diplomatic channel, between representatives of the Governments of the U.S., the U.K. and France, an agreed procedure for making reparations available from the three western zones has been worked out as a means of overcoming the present deadlock resulting from the fact that the quadripartite allocating machinery is presently inoperative. It will be put into operation urgently in order speedily to complete the reparations program.

“2. Action will be taken by the three commanders-in-chief of the western zones, each acting with respect to the capital equipment in his own zone, but in consultation with his two colleagues on the basis of existing reparations lists. Each will be responsible for making a division of capital equipment for reparations as between the IARA and the USSR. 75 percent in each broad industrial category declared for reparations being made available to IARA and 25 percent in each broad industrial category declared for reparations being provisionally selected and held for future delivery to the USSR. Of the 25 percent, 15 percent will be delivered to the USSR against a Soviet undertaking to supply to the western zone commanders reciprocal deliveries to an equivalent value, over an agreed period of time, corresponding to the delivery of capital equipment.

Without prejudice to action under the foregoing sentence, discussions will shortly be held among the three western occupying powers to determine whether past deliveries of the 15 percent share of capital equipment to the USSR which have not been matched by reciprocal deliveries equivalent in value from the USSR will affect the quantity and timing of future reciprocal deliveries. The disposition of the remaining 10 percent will also be the subject of further discussion between the three western powers concerned.

“3. The list of equipment to which this procedure will immediately apply is governed by the following factors: (a) A number of plants on the existing reparations lists are still under examination by the US Government with a view to their possible retention in Germany in the interests of ERP. The US Government, however, will in the very near future supply an initial list of plants which have been excluded from such examination, and additional lists of similar exclusions will be supplied from time to time and as soon as possible.

(b) The question of the application of the principle of paragraph 117 D of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1948 to the delivery of reparations equipment is under consideration. This consideration is not likely to be completed in time to be taken into account when the first division of equipment for reparations is made by the military governors. Meanwhile, the general principle of the paragraph in question is to be borne in mind.

“4. You should accordingly proceed on the basis of the list of capital equipment excluded from examination by the US Government (3(a) above), contriving as far as possible to avoid the selection for the USSR of plants which have an obvious war potential. You should report urgently, after consultation with your colleagues, as to when you think this work will be completed as regards the initial selection of plants. At an agreed date, which will have to be fixed after consultation between governments in the light of your reply, you will then proceed separately but concurrently: (I) To notify IARA of the assets made available to it for reparations in this initial selection, with a request to allocate such assets as soon as possible.

(II) To notify the Soviet commander-in-chief of the action which is being taken. The terms of this communication are now under consideration between the three governments and will be transmitted to you shortly for your consideration.

“5. You should proceed in conformity with the relevant provisions of the preceding paragraphs to make additional divisions of reparations as promptly as circumstances permit.

“6. You should quickly dismantle all equipment made available to IARA within your zone. Equipment selected for the USSR may be dismantled, or left standing at your administrative convenience, pending agreement with the Soviet commnder-in-chief as to its disposal.

“7. You should cooperate with your (US, UK and French as the case may be) colleagues in enforcing whatever priority in the allocation of materials or services may be necessary to the smooth and speedy execution of the reparations programs in the three western zones.

“8. You will be responsible for arranging delivery to the recipient countries in conformity with allocations made in due course by the International Allied Reparations Agency.

“9. You should report proposals concerted with your colleagues on the manner and timing of the presentation of the above procedures to the German people. In this connection you should know that it has been arranged that the French Foreign Minister will make an early statement in the Chamber of Deputies to the following effect:

“‘The question of reparations from Germany has been discussed through diplomatic channels among the occupying powers of the western zones and I have been given assurances by the other two, and we all agree that means will be found promptly to make capital equipment from the western zones of Germany available for reparations purposes.’”

II. You will note that this paper sets aside for further consideration certain critical questions, and that among them is the disposition of the 10 percent share of the 25 percent to be selected for the USSR. It may be that by agreeing, if we do agree, to this paper, although we will have broken the jam in regard to reparations for the IARA countries west of the Iron Curtain we will at the same time have lost or impaired our bargaining power in connection with the issues remaining to be resolved.

III. The following suggested agreement among the three governments concerned is submitted for your consideration and advice: Consideration will be given to means, compatible with the terms of the Paris Act on reparations, of applying to Albania, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia, a policy to be determined under the provisions of paragraph 3(b) of the identic instructions to military governors relating to revised procedure for reparations.

IV. You will note there has been deleted from the proposed statement which Bidault will make, the following language: “Inasmuch as the quadripartite reparations allocating machinery is now, at least temporarily, inoperative” and “during the period in which this condition exists.” This deletion was made on the advice of General Clay who considered that if the language deleted was agreed to, the Soviets might construe it to be an invitation to reassemble the quadripartite machine.

V. Wisner will arrive in Washington tomorrow and will be able to explain the above to you. I would very much appreciate your advice and comments as soon as possible.

(For Berlin only):

VI. Will General Clay also give me his comments and criticisms?

Sent Department 2425; repeated Berlin for General Clay and Murphy 168.

Douglas

1 The meeting under reference here occurred after the conclusion of the London Conference on Germany, but it included many of the representatives who had participated in the London Conference. Generals Clay and Robertson had, however, already returned to Germany.

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–348

[Document 452]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

secret [Washington,] June 3, 1948.

Secretary Draper has seen Senators Bridges and Gurney, and Secretary Royall has seen Mr. Andrews to explain the German program agreed upon in London.1 I was with Mr. Draper when he saw Senators Bridges and Gurney. Senator Bridges appeared quite favorable to the program as outlined. Senator Gurney was on the whole favorable to it, though he expressed a little concern about the gamble involved in, possible provocation of overt Soviet reaction and said that in view of our military program, it would have been desirable to postpone the program for about eight months if other circumstances had appeared to allow such postponement. I explained to him that the matter of timing had received most careful consideration and it has been our belief that the present situation should not be permitted to stand still for such a period as eight months and that the calculated risk involved was worth taking.

Secretary Draper asked me whether the President has been informed of this program and said that in the event he has not, it is Secretary Royall’s recommendation that he be informed.2

Charles E. Saltzman

1 Presumably the “agreed upon” program under reference is that described in telegram 2425, June 2, from London, supra.

2 A marginal note handwritten by Carlisle Humelsine at this paragraph reads as follows: “President notified and approved”.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/6–448: Telegram

[Document 453]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, June 4, 1948—7 p. m.

2470. For Saltzman. 1. I have General Clay’s comments on reparations as reported in Embtel 2425, June 2.1 He feels that there is no need for that part of paragraph nine which refers to the presentation of above procedures to the German people. The Germans have been told that reparations must be carried through and that there is no need for any further explanation to them.

2. General Clay also feels that there is no merit in stating that discussions will be held to determine whether past deliveries of the 15 percent share, etc., as the Soviets are up to date on their reciprocal deliveries since the modification of Potsdam in respect to the time period in which they are to make deliveries to the west, and that it would be “rubbing it in” to require them to match deliveries made from the western zones to the Soviet Zone prior to the negotiations of the recent agreement.

3. Finally, General Clay feels that it would be preferable for the three military governors to act jointly rather than, as is contemplated in Section I, paragraph two, in consultation.

4. General Clay will make no issue of these points but will express his views on them through the Army Department.2

5. My own views on General Clay’s comments are as follows: A. As to presentation to the German people, his comments should, it seems to me, be controlling.

B. As to his second comment I agree with him. Inasmuch as under Potsdam the Soviets have five years in which to make reciprocal deliveries to the west, and inasmuch as it is only under the terms of the recent agreement that they are required to match deliveries from the west to the east made subsequent to the date of the agreement, it would seem to me to be pressing for it too far for too little advantage now to require them to make deliveries for which they were not previously obligated.

C. As to General Clay’s comments on consultation, it seems to me that he is correct. If the selection of capital equipment for reparations is made jointly by the three Commanders-in-Chief instead of individually after consultation (a) we will be assured of a more uniform policy as among the zones and (b) will not have lost to the same extent what we otherwise would have lost, our bargaining power in connection with the remaining reparation issues which would still be subject to negotiations.

Sent Department 2470, repeated to Berlin for General Clay 171.

Douglas

1  Ante, p. 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 451].

2 The text of General Clay’s telegram to Under Secretary of the Army Draper was transmitted in telegram 1299, June 4, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 EW/6–448).

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegate to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency (Dorr) 740.00119 EW/5–2248: Telegram

[Document 454]

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegate to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency (Dorr)

secret
urgent Washington, June 6, 1948—9 p. m.

867. For Dorr. Reurtels 1125,1 1092,2 10553 following message sent by Army to General Clay:4

“Re TT 9558, 2 Jun.5

Following has been agreed re resumption reparation deliveries from US Zone to Albania, Czecho, and Yugo: 1. State instructing Dorr to inform IARA representatives these countries individually that necessary administrative arrangements being made in Germany by you to expedite reparation deliveries to them and that representatives their Govts there should get in touch with you regarding details these arrangements. Dorr also being instructed to refuse Assembly discussion on basis matter already taken up with countries concerned. Dorr to advise you when he has acted at Brussels

2. Because of necessity explanation in IARA if deliveries further withheld resumption delivery of clearly general purpose equipment should begin immediately.

3. It is understood that you will immediately cause any necessary recheck to be made of all equipment in the US Zone which has been allocated to these three countries in order to take all reasonable precautions that all equipment especially adapted to the production of war materials is destroyed and that only general purpose equipment is delivered to them. Your suggestion that you approach Robertson for similar recheck is excellent. Very much hope he will agree.”6

Please consider paragraph one above as instructions to you and advise Department and USPolAd re your discussions with Albanian, Czeeho, and Yugo delegates and report any collateral developments.7

Marshall

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed, but see footnote 4 to telegram 1055, May 22, from Brussels, p. 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450].

3  Ante, p. 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450].

4 The message quoted here was sent as telegram W–8312, June 7, from the Department of the Army to General Clay at Berlin.

5 The reference here is to the record of a trans-Atlantic teletype conference between General Clay and Under Secretary of the Army Draper in the course of which General Clay agreed to resume deliveries of IARA allocated equipment to the satellites on the basis of numbered paragraph 3 of this telegram.

6 In telegram CC–4618, June 9, from Berlin to the Department of the Army, not printed, General Clay reported that reparation deliveries to the satellites would be resumed in 2 or 3 days. He also reported that the British had agreed to make shipments on the basis of the policy outlined in numbered paragraph 3. (USPolAd Germany Files, 400.a Reparations)

7 Following informal statements to the Yugoslav, Czechoslovak, and Albanian delegates to the IARA by U.S. Delegate Dorr, the satellite delegates announced to the IARA Assembly on June 8 that the United States had cleared up the delivery matter to their satisfaction, and the Yugoslav protest was removed from the Assembly agenda. See telegram 1181, June 8, from Brussels, not printed. (740.00119 EW/6–848)

The Secretary of State to Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg 740.00119 EW/6–748

[Document 455]

The Secretary of State to Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg 1

secret Washington, June 7, 1948.

My Dear Senator Vandenberg : I refer to my letter to you of February 4, 1948,2 and the memorandum attached thereto concerning the German Reparations Program.

During recent weeks, as you know, discussions regarding numerous problems common to the occupying powers of the three western zones of Germany have been held at London. While these discussions were in progress the delegates also considered as a separate matter the present status of the German reparations dismantling program and deliveries to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency countries. Recommendations to the three governments along the lines indicated below have been agreed. Subject to final comments by General Clay, not yet received, it is planned to accept these recommendations on the part of this Government.

First, in view of the inactivity of the Allied Control Authority in Berlin, the commanders of the three western zones, acting after joint consultation, will declare a substantial number of plants available to IARA for distribution.

Second, the zone commanders will exclude from lists of plants declared available those plants which are still under examination by the United States Government with a view to their possible retention in Germany in the interest of the European Recovery Program.

Third, plants and equipment in each broad industrial category, approximating the share of the USSR under the Potsdam protocol, will be provisionally selected and held for possible future delivery to the USSR. Plants and equipment which are thus reserved will be screened to avoid as far as possible the inclusion of items which have an obvious war potential, pending further consideration of the exclusion of items which would be denied under the principle of paragraph 117 D of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1948. It is contemplated that the part of the Soviet share to be delivered to the USSR on a reciprocal basis will only be delivered if the Soviet undertakes and executes an agreed program of reciprocal deliveries of equivalent value. The remainder will be the subject of further discussions.

Fourth, with regard to plants and equipment which may be made available in the future to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency, consideration will be given to means, compatible with the Paris Agreement on Reparations, of avoiding allocation of equipment to the satellite members of IARA (Albania, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia), which allocation would be denied under the principle of paragraph 117 D of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1948.

In connection with the preceding paragraph, the delivery of industrial equipment which has already been allocated by the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency to Albania, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia has recently been carefully reviewed by the State and Army Departments, in the light of the international commitments of the United States, the policy of this Government with respect to economic relations with eastern Europe, and the security interests of the United States. In consequence General Clay has been instructed3 to complete deliveries of the equipment, which amounts to approximately 30,000 tons, in the United States Zone previously allocated to these countries. These deliveries will be subject, however, to a recheck by him to take alt reasonable precautions that all equipment especially adapted to the production of war materials is destroyed and that only general purpose equipment is delivered.

In view of the great delicacy of some of the above matters affecting the interests of other powers, I request that the contents of this letter be considered secret for the present.

Secretary Royall has authorized me to express his concurrence in this letter. After clearing informally with your office, I should like to send a copy of this letter to the Chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.

Faithfully yours,

G. C. Marshall

1 In a memorandum dated June 4, not printed, the substance of which was discussed with Under Secretary of State Lovett, Assistant Secretary of State Saltzman observed that Secretary of the Army Royall insisted that Congressional leaders be informed before any instructions were sent regarding the approval of the London program on reparations (telegram 2425, June 2, from London, p. 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 451]) and the resumption of restitution deliveries to the Eastern European satellites. Saltzman further observed that the matter was of the utmost urgency inasmuch as the IARA Assembly would shortly convene to consider a Yugoslav protest against the suspension of restitution deliveries. A letter to Senator Vandenberg had been prepared, copies of which would be given to other interested Congressional committees. (740.00119 EW/6–448)

2 See the editorial note, p. 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425].

3 See the text of message W–8312, June 7. to General Clay as repeated in telegram 867, June 6, to Brussels, supra.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 EW/6–648: Telegram

[Document 456]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret
niact Washington, June 7, 1948—9 p. m.

2123. For Douglas from Saltzman. Referring your 2425,1 2470,2 2488,3 2489,4 and Berlin’s 222 to you,5 Dept has considered comments of Generals Clay and Robertson and yourself concerning text of proposed instructions to military governors transmitted urtel 2425 June 2 and’ approves this text subject to (a) the separate agreement by British and French to the statement contained para III your cable, (b) willingness on part British and French to adopt agreed minute to effect that the consultation referred to in Para 2 of instructions is understood to include consultation not only for purpose of establishing uniform’ procedures but also to ensure full accord as between the three military commanders prior to final action on part of each with respect to-selection of equipment for notification to IARA and for Soviet set-aside in each zone. The purpose of this agreed minute is to retain our bargaining power to fullest extent possible without at same time providing for establishment of a formal tripartite machinery. For the reasons stated in Secdels 1575,6 15767 and 15788 Dept is anxious to avoid the implications inherent in the establishment of a formal 3-power procedure in substitution for the quadripartite allocating machinery. (c) Deletion last three sentences para 2 and insertion word “possible” before words “future delivery” in last sentence then remaining in para 2. Dept infers from Wisner’s report of your recent conversations with Bevin there is no reasonable prospect of persuading Brit to accept now our views re the 10% of the Soviet share. Therefore since Brit propose reserve question Soviet 10% deliveries, believe appropriate question entire Soviet share be reserved. Reservation of 15% will thus improve US bargaining position.

Dept agrees General Clay’s position (a) that presentation of reparations matter, if any, to German people should be governed by views of the military governors and (b) that no further discussion is warranted re past deliveries of 15% capital equipment not matched by reciprocal deliveries. However, this point so involved with disposition future deliveries of 15% that it cannot be resolved, separately. Suggest therefore withhold concession on this point, for added bargaining power, until future discussions on the entire 25% share.

Do you believe it would be appropriate to return to discussion of Soviet share after Brit have had opportunity to evaluate Soviet reaction to results London talks on Germany?

The list of plants transmitted by SecDel 15779 should be speedily given to Brit and Fr as constituting initial list referred to by para 3 (a) of instructions to military governors. Initial list should also include plants from Fr Zone and hence Fr should be asked to prepare immediately a limited list of plants from their zone which would include primarily war plants and plants which do not produce items in critical world short supply. This list should then be submitted to Dept urgently for clearance with Cabinet sub-committee, after which all three military governors could make plants available to IARA, at approximately the same time. Please advise Dept whether you prefer to give Brit and Fr SecDel 1577 list and ask Fr for their list or that Dept should act through Embassies here.

Sent London as 2123; repeated to USPolAd, Berlin as 1002; repeated to Brussels for Dorr as 873. [Saltzman.]

Marshall

1  Ante, p. 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 451].

2  Ante, p. 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453].

3 Not printed.

4 Not printed.

5 Same as telegram 1299, June 4, from Berlin, not printed, but see footnote 2 to telegram 2470, June 4, from London, p. 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453].

6 Not printed, but see footnote 4 to telegram 1987; Delsec 1722, May 7, from London, p. 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147].

7 Telegram 1746, May 13, p. 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156].

8 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 2163, Delsec 1741, May 19, from London, p. 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 165].

9 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/6–948: Telegram

[Document 457]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent niact London, June 9, 1948—9 p. m.

2557. For Saltzman from Douglas. Deptel 2123, June 7.1

1. Discussed with Strang this morning question of reparations, and suggested to him that the matter of delivery of 25 percent share of reparations to Soviet be the subject of discussion after we have a better opportunity to evaluate the Soviet response to results of London talks on Germany. Strang told me he thought there was little chance that Bevin would agree to this suggestion, but that he would put the matter to him. Subsequently, Strang informed me that Bevin found this unacceptable.

2. Stevens of the Foreign Office called on me at the request of Strang, who was otherwise engaged. I explained to Stevens that were we to agree to the paper as reported in Deptel 2425, June 2,2 we would be in a vulnerable position, and that we were, therefore, very reluctant to accept it in its present form.

3. I asked Stevens (being unable to see Bevin on the subject) whether discussion of the disposition of the 10 percent share of Soviet reparations would be held with a view to arriving at a mutually satisfactory agreement. He replied that although he could not give a commitment, he was quite certain that Bevin certainly contemplated an objective review of the subject for the purpose of arriving at a mutally satisfactory arrangement. (This confirms earlier impression I gained from Bevin.) Without making any concessions, I suggested, after discussion with and modification from Stevens, without any pride of authorship, the following agreed minutes under paragraph 2 of the paper reported in Deptel 2425, June 2: (a) “By consultation is meant that within the framework of these instructions, and in particular as regards paragraph XIV of this document, the commanders-in-chief shall be in agreement as to procedures for notification to the Soviet and IARA countries. It shall also be applied to the selection of equipment pending agreement on the question referred to in 3. (b) of this document.

(b) “It is agreed that no action shall be taken in regard to retroactive reciprocal deliveries or the disposition of the remaining 10 percent until agreement on these two matters has been had; provided that if, at the expiration of six months, no agreement has been negotiated, each commander-in-chief may in respect of these two matters act independently.”3

4. You will note that our position on the entire paper is reserved and that in respect of 3. (b) above no concession has been made on retroactive reciprocal deliveries. It is my judgment, however, that if the British agree to this minute, we should drop the question of retroactive reciprocal deliveries for reasons which General Clay has stated and in which I concur.

5. The effect of the agreed minute 3. (b) above is: (a) To place a premium on arriving at an agreement, and,

(b) If no agreement is arrived at, to make impossible the delivery of the 10 percent share for a period of six months, and thereafter to leave the matter to the discretion of each military governor acting in behalf of his government. Thus, the British are left in a naked position for six months, and we are left in an equally naked position thereafter in the event no mutually satisfactory arrangement is made.

6. I strongly suggest that the idea reflected in the agreed minute in 3. (b) above be agreed to: (a) Because I believe it is the best we can obtain from the British, if indeed they will agree to it, and of this I am not certain; and

(b) Because it will permit a speedy settlement which is urgent; first, because of the support it will give to Bidault in the forthcoming debate in the Chamber Friday; secondly, because there have been many leaks with widespread publicity on the subject of reparations; and thirdly, because unless we dispose of the matter promptly, the Soviet may ask for a reconvening of the ACA, in which event the allocation of capital equipment for the IARA countries would again be postponed; and

(c) Because it puts aside an issue which if not resolved in the near future by negotiation may be resolved within the six-months period by the compulsion of events.

7. In looking over the first sentence of paragraph XIX, the British suggest the following: “You should consult with your colleagues as to any special steps for presenting the above procedure to the German people, and if these are deemed necessary, agree upon the required steps.”

8. Will telephone you about 6 p. m. your time tonight.

9. For General Clay: Will telephone you in the morning for your comments.

Sent Department as 2557; repeated Berlin for Clay and Murphy as 186.

Douglas

1  Supra.

2  Ante, p. 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 451].

3 The draft interpretative minute quoted here was revised during subsequent discussions between Douglas, Strang, and Massigli and their advisers. For the final agreed version of this minute, see Part II of the Instructions to the United States, United Kingdom, and French Military Governors for Germany, p. 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 464].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 EW/6–1248: Telegram

[Document 458]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret
us urgent Washington, June 12, 1948—9 p. m.

2213. For Douglas from Saltzman. Following is present status efforts obtain release plants from consideration Technical Mission and Cabinet Working Group on Reparations: 1. Not withstanding all arguments brought bear on technical mission smallest figure we have been able obtain as still under consideration for retention Germany is 326 whole plants and 13 part plants. Deducting this from 914 total plants listed in 3 zones, 575 whole and 13 part plants remain for allocation and delivery. Of these, 292, according figures here, have already been allocated. Result therefore is in vicinity of 283 whole and 13 part plants now freed for allocation by tech mission subject to para 2 below. This latter figure includes plants notified you Deptel 1577.1 Mission has promised supply June 15 identifying serial numbers of plants involved.

2. Consent of release these plants has required approval 3 Cabinet Officers concerned. That has been obtained except that Secretaries Krug and Sawyer have conditioned their approval upon complete approval by Harriman of above stated findings of mission. Request you phone Harriman Paris urgently, explain (a) urgency causing tech mission to make interim report at request of Dept and Army (b) necessity of prompt availability plants for allocation (c) Mission’s recommendation release above quantities plants from further consideration, and obtain his approval to immediate allocation plants cleared by technical mission as not being further considered for retention Germany. Above figures of approx 283 whole and 13 part plants may be considered firm when Harriman’s approval obtained.

3. Discussion with members technical mission indicated there is serious possibility that final recommendations by technical mission may be retention Germany of close to 326 whole and 13 part plants. This means there will be no substantial further list available June 21 or whenever final report made, and there will be serious policy issue within this Govt before final recommendations of this Govt to Brit and French re plants to be retained Germany can be made. We suggest you use this information in your discretion, and in any event avoid indicating to Brit and French substantial further list can be made available soon, perhaps ever. We understand difficulties presented by these facts and are doing our utmost here.

4. Instructions to Clay set forth urtel 24252 as amended urtel 25833 and telephone conversation June 104 will be sent by Army as soon as you confirm approval by French Govt. List of plants and part plants will be sent at same time if available and Harriman’s approval obtained. [Saltzman.]

Marshall

1 Not printed.

2 June 2, p. 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 451].

3 Not printed.

4 No record has been found of the conversation under reference.

Editorial Note [Document 459]

Editorial Note

In his telegram 2629, June 14, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas reported that he and Strang and Massigli had reached agreement on the instructions to be sent to the Military Governors in Germany regarding the revised reparations procedures (740.00119 EW/6–1448). In telegram 2239, June 15, to London, not printed, Assistant Secretary of State Saltzman transmitted to Ambassador Douglas the complete text of a telegram sent that day to General Clay. Part I of the telegram consisted of the text of the agreed instructions to the three Military Governors, and Part II consisted of the agreed interpretative minute thereon. Part III of the telegram listed all those plants in the three Western Zones of Occupation of Germany which had been cleared by the Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations for reparations deliveries. The list included both plants which already had been allocated and those which had not yet been allocated (740.00119 EW/6–1548). Acting on instructions from the Department, Ambassador Douglas on June 18 transmitted to Strang and Massigli the lists of plants set forth in June 15 telegram of instructions to General Clay. In subsequent discussions among United States, British, and French representatives some modifications were made in the Instructions to the three Military Governors. For the final agreed version of these Instructions, see page 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 464].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/6–1648: Telegram

[Document 460]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, June 16, 1948—2 p. m.

2645. I have this morning received a letter dated June 15 from Bevin which reads as follows:

“We have now completed our agreed parallel instructions to the three military governors on a revised reparations procedure,1 leaving responsibility to the individual military governors, but providing for close consultation among them. We have done this without having received from the US Government any up-to-date initial list of plants ‘freed’ by the US Cabinet Committee. I therefore feel that I must record the UK position on this subject. What I have to say does not affect the terms of our instructions to the military governors, though it has an important bearing on their execution; and it only repeats what I believe is understood between us already as a result of oral exchanges on the subject.

“The object of the new reparations procedure is to effect the resumption of deliveries to the IARA countries of the bulk of the remaining capital plants on the reparations list under the Anglo-American level of industry plan and in the French zone. In this connection we have agreed on provisional arrangements for dealing with the Soviet share.2 It is, you will appreciate, of the essence of the scheme, as regards both deliveries to IARA and notifications to the Soviet, that there should come forward within a brief period an adequate volume of plants, both by numbers and value, ‘freed’ from examination by the US Cabinet Committee. It has been our understanding, ever since the Technical Mission passed through London on April 9, that the number of plants recommended for retention would be quite small, that no action based on the recommendations of the Cabinet Committee would be taken except by inter-governmental agreement, and that, while we were prepared to favour in principle the retention in Germany of a limited number of plants which might best serve the interests of ERP by remaining there, we should wish to see the size of the list before committing ourselves to the retention of any specific plants. You will realize that our concern over this question was related to the effects of the retention of plants both upon the level of industry plan with its security implications, and upon our reparations policy generally. We also made it clear during the Technical Mission’s visit that we should want to assure ourselves that the possibility of fully utilizing existing capacity in Germany had been taken into account before accepting any recommendations about removals from the reparations list.

“At that time it was confidently expected that the work of the committee would be completed in a matter of weeks (mid-May was mentioned at one stage), and until very recently we have always hoped that the results of its survey would be known before our new policy was put into effect. In this way it would have been possible to take the situation resulting from the work of the committee more explicitly into account in the framing of that policy. As circumstances have compelled us to deal with these questions in the opposite order, I feel bound to make clear our understanding of the position. Stated briefly it is that it will only be possible to carry out the policy which we have now agreed if a very high proportion of the total list of plants (over 900 in all) is ‘freed’ from the Cabinet Committee’s review within a few weeks and if early opportunity is given for quick inter-governmental decisions as to the disposition of the remainder. In my view we shall not be able to go through with our policy unless this is done, in which case the position would have to be reconsidered. May I therefore ask you to do your best to see that these requirements are met?”

The above may be useful to you in talking with members of the Cabinet Committee since it is a clear exposition of the British position.

Sent Department as 2645; repeated Berlin (for Clay and Murphy) as 210; repeated Paris (for Caffery) as 289.

Douglas

1 Regarding the instructions under reference here, see the editorial note, supra.

2  In telegram 2680, June 17, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas reported having received the following letter from Strang, dated June 17, clarifying this sentence: “It has occurred to me that you might like to have some informal amplification of the passage in the Secretary of State’s letter to you of June 15 which refers in passing to the Soviet share of reparations. What he had in mind in referring to provisional arrangements in that sentence was that the arrangements were provisional while we are attempting to arrive at a more permanent arrangement. You will appreciate that the reference to this suggestion was very much abbreviated because it was incidental to the main subject of the letter.” (740.00119 EW/6–1748)

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/6–1848: Telegram

[Document 461]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent London, June 18, 1948—6 p. m.

2696. For Saltzman from Douglas.

1. At a meeting this morning with Strang and Massigli, I informed them of the list of plants released for selection by the military governors on account of reparations1 and told them that we hoped that an additional list would be available after the Technical Mission’s report had been made; that if the Technical Mission retained too large a number, a delay would necessarily ensue. This they took with understanding, and were grateful for the list which was submitted.

2. They both strongly expressed the view, which I endorse heartily, that the first division from the list of plants available for selection should be made as promptly as possible—certainly before the 30th of this month. They feel that this is important: (a) Because it is necessary, in any event, that the procedure be gotten under way; and

(b) Because on the first of July, according to their understanding, the Soviet assume the chair of the ACC, and might, if no action has been taken by US in regard to reparations prior to that time, call a meeting of the Council for the purpose, among others, of dealing with reparations.

Sent Department as 2696; repeated Berlin for Murphy and Clay as 216.

Douglas

1 The lists under reference were transmitted in telegram 2239, June 15, to London, not printed; see the editorial note, p. 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 EW/6–1848: Telegram

[Document 462]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret
us urgent Washington, June 18, 1948—7 p. m.

2300. For Douglas from Wisner.

1. Statement to Strang and Massigli para 1 urtel 26961 rptd Berlin as 216 just right. Similar statement made to Brit and Fr here.

2. Concur para 2 urtel 2696.

3. Proposed statement to press urtel 26982 is satisfactory and if necessary will be used here.

4. Fr. stated here today that Bidault would be seriously embarrassed in chamber if he could not make statement that plants would be available June 21 upon report Tech Mission. Fr Emb Wash explaining to Paris that list 575 plants transmitted by you today, that we hope more will be available on twenty-first or soon thereafter, but that there might then be delay while report considered in this Govt. Re further statement by Bidault, we informed Fr Emb that we understood would be no communiqué and that if Fr found necessary they should raise subject again at London. We have in mind objections by Clay and Brit reported urtels 2606,3 2611 June 12.4 Hope that in view transmittal list and statement urtel 2698 question will not be raised.

Sent London as 2300; Berlin as 1071. [Wisner.]

Marshall

1  Supra.

2 Not printed; it reported that Douglas, Strang, and Massigli had prepared a brief statement to the press regarding the current discussions on reparations. It was considered that such a statement might have to be made in view of the interest created by Bidault’s reference to the reparations negotiations during the French National Assembly debate over the London Conference recommendations. (740.00119 EW/6–1848)

3 Not printed; in it, Ambassador Douglas reported General Clay’s view that an official public statement on reparations would be unwise and would only add to the current confusion, uncertainty, and unfriendly reaction in Germany to the London Conference on Germany. Douglas also suggested that there be no official statement on reparations (740.00119 EW/6–1248).

4 Not printed; in it, Ambassador Douglas reported having been informed by Strang that several portions of an Associated Press despatch of June 10 on reparations were untrue. Strang further stated that no responsible British official had issued information regarding reparations, nor would any statement be issued to correct misinformation appearing in the press (740.00119 EW/6–1248).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 EW/6–1148: Telegram

[Document 463]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent Washington, June 26, 1948—2 p. m.

2425. For Douglas. Fol is paraphrase cable from Clay to Army 25 June “Instructions to resume reparations require early notification to Soviet military adm. Robertson advised me 24 June his instructions require notification prior 30 June. He is asking these instructions be rescinded as he feels strongly such notification in present tense situation should be deferred until situation clarifies. French have also pressed for early action. However doubt very much if Koenig will press for immediate notification under present conditions. Therefore concur with Robertson. Unless I receive contrary instructions will agree meet Brit views when received from Brit Govt, which am sure will permit us discretion re timing of notification”. Army with Dept concurrence authorized Clay proceed as recommended. Since Clay quoted as proposing make Soviet notification concurrent with IARA notification (Berlin’s 1344 June 11 repeated London as 236; Paris as 2341 ) assume Clay desires also defer IARA notification. Army requesting Clay’s comments re soonest resumption IARA notifications even though Soviet notification deferred.

Sent London as 2425 for Douglas; repeated USPolAd Berlin as 1117; repeated Brussels as 983 for Dorr; repeated Paris as 2323 for Caffery.

Marshall

1  Not printed. It transmitted a message from General Clay to Ambassador Douglas commenting upon suggested language for the notification to Soviet authorities in Germany of the new reparations policy in the Western zones. Clay’s message read in part as follows: “I do not think that the language is as important as the timing. I personally feel that the timing should await the completion of the allocation and that the Soviet Commander in Chief should not be notified of the proposed action until he can be furnished with the list of the plants which are held for future allocation and delivery to him. This should be timed concurrently with the notification to IARA. Events of next several days could well influence the message which the three military governors will determine to be advisable at the time the notification is made.” (740.00119 EW/6–1148)

The Head of the German General Economic Department of the British Foreign Office (Haviland) to the Counselor of the Embassy in the United Kingdom (Keith) 740.00119 EW/7–1448

[Document 464]

The Head of the German General Economic Department of the British Foreign Office (Haviland) to the Counselor of the Embassy in the United Kingdom (Keith)1

secret London, 10th July, 1948.

CJ.3010/93/182

Dear Keith : I attach for your records a copy of the instruction with regard to the resumption of a revised reparations procedure which our Governments agreed for issue to the three Military Governors concerned.

2. We subsequently agreed that these instructions should be modified to take account of the then situation in Berlin, and that the Military Governors should be instructed:— (i) The list of plants selected on behalf of IARA should be notified to the Agency forthwith, but that no reference should be made in this communication to our proposed method of disposing of the Soviet share.

(ii) No public announcement of any kind should be made at present with regard to the revised reparations procedure.

(iii) The letter of notification to the Soviet Commander-in-Chief should not be dispatched.

(iv) If the Soviet Commander in Chief were to make enquiries about the making available of equipment to I.A.R.A., or the disposal of the Soviet share, or lodge a formal protest with regard to our action, he should be told that no equipment can be made available to the U.S.S.R. until arrangements have been made for the free flow of traffic between the Western Zones and Berlin and the Eastern Zone.

3. We later agreed that in answer to enquiries by the Press or others as to how we proposed to deal with the share of reparations to which the U.S.S.R. is entitled under the Potsdam Agreement we should reply as follows:— “No equipment can be made available to the U.S.S.R. until arrangements have been made for the free flow of traffic between the Western Zones and Berlin. As soon as satisfactory arrangements have been agreed we shall be prepared to discuss the question of making equipment available to the U.S.S.R.”

4. We have since informed you that we were answering other Press enquiries in the following manner:— (a) What authority is allocating equipment as reparations?

The need for making equipment available and thus progressing with the reparations programme has been urgent. In consequence it has been decided that the British Zone Commander shall informally make equipment scheduled for reparations, under the Anglo-American Level of Industry Plan, available to I.A.R.A.

(b) How many plants are being made available and what is their value? (Figures applicable to British Zone only.)

Notified to I.A.R.A. for allocation.

(If asked we will give details of particular plants affected.)

73 whole or part plants valued at 97.3 million Reichsmarks (1938).

(c) Will further equipment be made available as reparations?

Yes, as soon as possible.

(d) What action is being taken by the French and United States Zone Commanders?

They are acting in a similar informal manner, but we have no details of the number of plants being made available by them or of their value.

5. I should be glad of your confirmation that the above sets out correctly the understanding of your Government with regard to our agreements.2

Yours sincerely,

D. L. Haviland

[Enclosure]

Instructions From the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, and France to Their Military Governors in Germany 3

secret June, 1948.

Subject: Resumption of Reparations

Part I. Following instructions with respect to resumption of reparations have been approved by the Governments of the United States, United Kingdom and France and constitute instructions to you from your Government: 1. In further discussions through the diplomatic channel between representatives of the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom and France, an agreed procedure for making reparations available from the three Western Zones has been worked out as a means of overcoming the present deadlock resulting from the fact that the quadripartite allocating machinery is presently inoperative. It will be put into operation urgently in order speedily to complete the reparations programme.

2. Action will be taken by the three Commanders-in-Chief of the Western Zones, each acting with respect to the capital equipment in his own Zone, but in consultation with his two colleagues on the basis of existing reparations lists (but see paragraph 3 below). Each will be responsible for making a division of capital equipment for reparations as between the Inter-Allied Reparations Agency and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 75% in each broad industrial category declared for reparations being made available to the Inter-Allied Reparations Agency and 25% in each broad industrial category being provisionally selected and held for future delivery to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Of the 25%, 15% will be-delivered to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics against a Soviet undertaking to supply to the Western Zone Commanders reciprocal deliveries to an equivalent value over an agreed period of time corresponding to the delivery of capital equipment. Without prejudice to action under the foregoing sentence, discussions will shortly be held among the three Western Occupying Powers to determine whether past deliveries of the 15% share of capital equipment to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics which have not been matched by reciprocal deliveries equivalent in value from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics will affect the quantity and timing of future reciprocal deliveries. The disposition of the remaining 10% will also be the subject of further discussion between the three Western Powers concerned.

3. The list of equipment to which this procedure will immediately apply is governed by the following factors: (a) A number of plants on the existing reparations lists are still under examination by the United States Government with a view to their possible retention in Germany in the interests of the European Recovery Programme. The United States Government, however, will in the very near future supply an initial list of plants which have been excluded from such examination and additional lists of similar exclusions will be supplied from time to time and as soon as possible.

(b) The question of the application of the principle of paragraph 117D of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1948 to the delivery of equipment for reparations is under consideration. This consideration is not likely to be completed in time to be taken into account when the first division of equipment is made by the Military Governors. Meanwhile, the general principle of the paragraph in question is to be borne in mind.

4. You should accordingly proceed on the basis of the list of capital equipment excluded from examination by the United States Government (3(a) above), contriving as far as possible to avoid the selection for the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics of plants which have an obvious war potential. You should report urgently, after consultation with your colleagues, as to when you think this work will be completed as regards the initial selection of plants. At an agreed date, which will have to be fixed after consultation between Governments in the light of your reply, you will then proceed separately but concurrently: (i) To notify the Inter Allied Reparations Agency of the assets made available to it for reparations in this initial selection, with a request to allocate such assets as soon as possible.

(ii) To notify the Soviet Commander in Chief of the action which is being taken. The terms of this communication are now under consideration between the three Governments and will be transmitted to you shortly for your consideration.

5. You should proceed in conformity with the relevant provisions of the preceding paragraphs to make additional divisions of reparations as promptly as circumstances permit.

6. You should quickly dismantle all equipment made available to the Inter Allied Reparations Agency within your Zone. Equipment selected for the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics may be dismantled or left standing at your administrative convenience pending agreement with the Soviet Commander in Chief as to its disposal.

7. You should cooperate with your (United States, United Kingdom or French as the case may be) colleagues in enforcing whatever priority in the allocation of materials or services may be necessary to the smooth and speedy execution of the reparations programmes in the three Western Zones.

8. You will be responsible for arranging delivery to the recipient countries in conformity with the allocations made in due course by the Inter-Allied Reparations Agency.

9. You should consult with your colleagues as to any special steps for presenting the above procedure to the German people and, if these are deemed necessary, agree upon the required steps.

Part II. Following is text of agreed explanatory minute concerning paragraph 2 of above instructions. Although not included among your instructions, it is an integral part of the understanding between the three Governments concerned: 1. By consultation is meant that, within the framework of these instructions and in particular as regards paragraph 4, the Military Governors shall be in agreement as to uniform procedures for notification to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Inter Allied Reparations Agency. Pending agreement on the question referred to in paragraph 3(b), the above interpretation shall also be applied to the selection of equipment for the Inter Allied Reparations Agency and for the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, prior to final action by each of the three Military Governors. Nothing in the foregoing shall be construed as meaning that consultation between the three Military Governors shall not be required after agreement has been had on the question referred to in the said paragraph 3(b).

2. It is agreed that no action shall be taken in regard to the two matters referred to in the last two sentences of paragraph 2 of Part I until agreement on these two matters has been reached; provided that, if, at the expiration of six months, no agreement has been negotiated, each Military Governor may in respect of these two matters act independently.

1 This note was transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 1557, July 14, from London, not printed.

2 In a letter to Haviland dated July 14, not printed, Keith confirmed that the contents of Haviland’s letter were in accord with the understanding of the United States Government. A copy of Keith’s letter was also sent as an enclosure to despatch 1557.

3 Regarding the original formulation of these agreed instructions, see the editorial note, p. 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459].

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/7–148

[Document 465]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Secretary of State 1

top secret [Washington,] July 1, 1948.

The Problem

To determine what action should be taken with reference to the preliminary draft report of the Technical Mission on Reparations.2

Discussion

A preliminary draft of the Technical Mission’s report signed by all the members of the Mission has been made available to the Departments of State, Army, Interior, Commerce, and Agriculture and to the Economic Cooperation Administration. Mr. Krug stated to Mr. Lovett at the Cabinet meeting on June 253 that this draft report had been examined by himself and the Secretary of Commerce and that they considered that it should now go to the President in its present form. Mr. Lovett subsequently informed Mr. Krug, however, that the Department of State did not agree that the report was acceptable and desired an opportunity to discuss it with the Cabinet members concerned and the Economic Cooperation Administrator.4 Accordingly, with your approval, a conference has been scheduled after the Cabinet meeting on Friday, July 2, 1948, with the following to be in attendance: Secretaries Marshall, Krug, Sawyer, Brannan and Royall and Administrator Hoffman.

You will recall that on February 16, 1948, you recommended to the President and his Cabinet that the dismantling program, as based upon the revised level of industry of August, 1947 be approved, subject to a re-examination of the lists of plants scheduled for removal, to determine which plants, if any, should be retained because they could, if left in Germany, make a substantial contribution to the world supply of critical items (Tab A).5 The President and the Cabinet members present approved your recommendations. Subsequently, the five Cabinet members concerned appointed representatives on a Working Committee to carry out this re-examination, and its terms of reference were agreed upon (Tab B).6

It was later considered desirable to form a Technical Mission to conduct a field investigation in Germany, and this Mission was given terms of reference which were in line with purpose stated in your February 16 proposal to the Cabinet (Tab C).7 You will note that these terms of reference confined the scope of the examination to plants which were technically equipped to produce critical items in worldwide short supply. These terms of reference were discussed with British and French representatives in London who were advised that, subject to the limited re-examination required thereunder, the United States would support the completion of the reparation removal program as represented by the then existing plant lists.

Prior to the departure of the Technical Mission from Washington, the Departments concerned agreed upon a list of items which were considered to be in critical world-wide short supply. This list was discussed by the Technical Mission with British and French representatives in London, and the Zone Commanders subsequently furnished to the Technical Mission lists of plants in their respective zones which were technically equipped to produce these items, under the presumption that the Mission’s study would be confined to these plants.

The draft report of the Technical Mission recommends the retention of 316 whole plants and 15 part plants representing more than one-third of all the plants which have been removed or were listed for removal. Most of the plants recommended for removal are war plants from which only general purpose equipment is made available and plants which have already been allocated.

If accepted, these recommendations would have the effect of nullifying the February 16th decision of the President and the Cabinet which gave general approval to the program and would require a major revision of the Bizonal Level of Industry Agreement announced in August 1947 by the US, and UK Zone Commanders. It will be recalled that the United States approved this agreement after lengthy discussions arising from the protests of the French Government.

It is not believed possible to obtain the agreement of the British and French Governments to retain anything approaching 329 plants and part plants. Ambassador Douglas has stated that he does not believe that he can negotiate an agreement to retain more than 60 plants. The British and French Governments have also informed the US that they do not regard the recent agreements at London on other phases of the reparations program as binding upon them if the retention of a large number of plants is sought by the US (Tabs D and E).8

Recommendations 1. It is recommended that you take the position at the conference on Friday that the Technical Mission’s draft report is unacceptable in its present form.9 In addition to the considerations outlined above, the following reasons may be stated: a. The draft report is completely general in character. It does not even make a reference to the Mission’s Terms of Reference nor does it mention the list of critical items which was to have been the basis for the Mission’s work. The reasons why particular plants are recommended for retention are not stated and it is thus impossible to analyse the recommendations in detail. No factual basis is provided for discussion with the British and French Governments. It should be noted that 300 of the 316 whole plants recommended for attention [retention] are located in the British and French Zones.

b. The draft report recommends the retention of all the existing basic steel-making capacity of Western Germany. Steel capacity is the principal element in the German level of industry, maintenance of which is basic to the Ruhr agreement which in turn is an essential element in the entire series of agreements reached in London. Acceptance of the Technical Mission recommendation by this Government would constitute repudiation of the position we took in order to obtain these agreements and would seriously threaten the whole structure of the agreements.

c. The draft report contains statements and conclusions which are in direct contradiction to the official and considered judgments of the United States and United Kingdom military governors, without citing any evidence in support of the mission’s position. Clearly General Clay must be given an opportunity to comment upon these aspects before any governmental approval is given to the report (General Draper has taken a copy of the draft report to General Clay, whose comments are presently being awaited).

d. The draft report contains several clearly erroneous statements. For example (page 23–24), it is stated that “if steel producing facilities are to be removed from Germany and re-established in a recipient country, it would follow that iron ore * and coal will have to be exported from Germany to this recipient country because of the critical world-wide short supply of those raw materials.” Germany would have no supplies of iron ore for export, and has traditionally required imports of such ores.

e. Plants appear to be listed for retention in contradiction to the stated conclusions of the draft report. Although it is stated (page 8) “where the facilities of a specific plant have been officially submitted to either ACA or IARA for subsequent allocation as reparation, such action was accepted by the technical mission as final”, the first plant listed for retention in the US Zone is the Kügelfischer plant, which has been officially allocated by ACA, subsequently subdivided by IARA, and has been almost completely removed. Forty-five plants or part plants with residual values below 50,000 RM are listed for retention, although the draft report (page 9) states that plants below 50,000 RM residual value would in general be excluded from consideration. Twelve of the 16 plants recommended for retention in the US Zone are reported to be 100% dismantled, whereas the report states (page 7–8) that the mission recognizes the impracticality of giving further consideration to plants which have been certified as either wholly or in greater part dismantled.

2. It is further recommended that you seek the agreement of the other Cabinet Secretaries concerned and, the Administrator to refer the draft report to the Cabinet Working Committee, to which a representative of the Administrator should be added. The instructions to the Cabinet Working Committee should be along the following lines: a. To discuss with the members of the Technical Mission the draft report and the factual data upon which it was prepared.

b. To consider the final report of the Technical Mission and then to prepare a Working Committee report with a view to recommending to the Cabinet Members concerned what position on this matter should be taken by the Executive Branch of the Government with respect to both the Congress and the other Governments concerned. In preparation of this report the Committee will give effect to pertinent considerations not within the items of reference of the Technical Mission and using information from its report and files to the extent that it bears on the problem.

c. To document as thoroughly as possible on a plant-by-plant basis and in accordance with the purpose of the re-examination as stated in the Cabinet decision, a list of plants which will be recommended to the British and French Governments for retention in their zones, and for governmental decision as to plants to be retained in the US Zone.

3. In view of the extreme difficulty with which we obtained French ratification of the recent London agreements, any publicity given the draft report of the Technical Mission could be expected to stop the execution of the agreements and would introduce an element of discord at a very critical time in light of the Berlin situation. The report’s contents therefore should not be made known to anyone who is not officially concerned with its consideration in the Executive Branch of the Government.

Charles E. Saltzman

1 There is no indication on the source text nor any other evidence to confirm that the Secretary received or made use of this memorandum. The ribbon copy cannot he found in the Department files. Attachments to the memorandum are not printed.

2 The draft of the Final Report of the Cabinet Mission on Reparations under reference here, not printed, was virtually identical with the later definitive text printed infra.

3 No record has been found in the Department files of the Cabinet meeting of June 25.

4 In a letter to Secretary of the Interior Krug dated June 28, not printed, a copy of which was sent to the Department of State, Secretary of the Army Royall also expressed dissatisfaction with portions of the Report of the Technical Mission and asked that a meeting be held soon to discuss the problem (740.00119 EW/6–2948).

5 For the text of the recommendations under reference here, see p. 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430].

6 For the text of the terms of reference of the Working Group (Working Committee), see p. 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432].

7 Tab C consisted of the text of the terms of reference of the Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations; they are quoted in telegram 1314, April 14, to London, p. 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447].

8 Tab D was the text of Foreign Secretary Bevin’s letter of June 15 as transmitted in telegram 2645, June 16, from London, p. 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]. Tab E was an excerpt from a memorandum of a conversation between Department officials and representatives of the French Embassy on June 18. The gist of that conversation was reported upon in telegram 2300, June 18, to London, p. 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462].

9 No record has been found of the July 2 conference on reparations.

* Underscoring added [Footnote in source text. Here set in italic].

Final Report of the Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations CFM Flies: Lot M–88: Box 2234: File–Cabinet Technical Mission Report

[Document 466]

Final Report of the Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations

[Extracts]

secret Washington, July 1948.

Final Report on Dismantlement of Industrial Plants Located in the Three Western Zones of Occupation of Germany

[This Report was submitted to the Secretaries of the Interior, Agriculture, and Commerce under cover of a brief, undated transmittal letter signed by the members of the Cabinet Technical Mission: Norman H. Collisson, Chairman, Frank J. Baumis, Julius E. Graf, and Edward Falck. A copy of the Report was transmitted to Secretary of State Marshall under cover of a brief letter of July 22 from the Secretary of the Interior, not printed (740.00119 EW/7–2248).

In the source text, the Report consisted of 33 typewritten pages and an Appendix (not printed) consisting of 71 pages of tables.]

introduction

The President appointed the Secretaries of the Departments of Interior, Agriculture and Commerce as a committee to re-examine, with relation to the European Recovery Program, the scheduled dismantlement of German industrial plants for reparations.1 This committee thereafter appointed a four-man Technical Mission, composed of industrialists and engineers, for the purpose of making a survey and study of the industrial plants located in the three western zones of occupation of Germany which might be technically equipped to produce critical items in world-wide short supply, and to recommend which, if any, of such plants should be retained for production in Germany in order best to achieve the objectives of the European Recovery Program.

The Technical Mission made a careful study of the technical and economic factors affecting the program of dismantlement, including an examination of the voluminous material, data and statistics compiled by the various governmental departments, and in addition thereto, devoted some six weeks to travel in Europe and to field inspections of German industrial facilities during the months of April and May 1948.

The civil and military authorities in the three zones made available to the Mission the mass of data and statistics related to the reparations problem. The findings and reports of other committees on this same subject as well as other related subjects were utilized by the Mission. Each of the military governments of the three western zones prepared, at the request of the Mission, a considerable volume of original data dealing with this problem.

It is recognized that factors and considerations other than those of a technical and economic nature are pertinent to the reparations problem. These other factors, such as political and security considerations, were regarded by the Mission as being outside of the terms of its reference and were, therefore, not taken into account in arriving at the recommendations and conclusions contained in this report.

status of dismantlement

An evaluation of the reparations program required a preliminary review of the status and extent of dismantlement as it existed in April 1948, and an understanding of the “level of industry” concept, which was a basic consideration in the formulation of the present reparations program.

In March 1946 the four occupying powers, acting through the Allied Control Authority, adopted a Plan for Reparations and the Level of Post-War German Economy. The stated “objectives of the plan were to eliminate German war potentials, to provide reparations and yet to leave within Germany the necessary plants and equipment to permit the rebuilding of a viable and peaceful economy.”la

Throughout the following year it became increasingly apparent that under the restrictions of this original level of industry Germany could not contribute her indispensable part to the economic rehabilitation of Europe as a whole. Thereupon, as of August 1947, the Occupation Government authorities of the United Kingdom and the United States zones adopted an upward revision of the existing levels of industry. Under this revision specific production levels were set for each of the major industrial classifications, and plants whose output was determined to be surplus to those levels were declared available for dismantlement and reparations by the bizonal authorities.

A brief resume of the April 1948 status of dismantlement in each of the three western zones follows:

U.S. Zone of Occupation

Here dismantlement has proceeded at a rapid rate. On a basis of manhour requirements, the occupying officials estimate that as of April 1, 1948, approximately 81 per cent of the work of dismantlement had been completed. The Technical Mission, however, found in numerous instances that the term “complete dismantlement” as used in this zone meant only that the equipment item had been detached, raised from the foundation, electrical and hydraulic connections severed, and the equipment coated with a preservative oil. Under such a dismantlement procedure the productive output of the plant is stopped immediately and potential production is lost thereafter.

No plants or equipment, other than “War Plants,” have been declared available as reparations to the Allied Control Authority since June 1946. However, shipments of plants submitted to ACA prior to that date are currently going forward.

U.K. Zone of Occupation

Because of the concentration of industry in this area, the dismantlement and shipment of plants declared to be surplus has not approached the state of completion found in the U.S. zone. On a basis of estimates supplied by the zonal authorities, approximately 7 per cent of the total number of plants listed for dismantlement have been completely dismantled and in some 250 additional plants dismantlement has reached varying percentages of completion. It is estimated that from an overall standpoint the dismantlement in this zone approximates something less than 33 per cent. The U.K. zonal authorities permit a plant scheduled for dismantlement to continue in production until orders on hand have been completed.

French Zone of Occupation

The number of plants scheduled for dismantlement in this zone is appreciably greater than the number listed for dismantlement in the U.S. zone, but approximates only 50 per cent of the number of plants scheduled for dismantlement in the U.K. zone. On the basis of the data submitted by the zonal authorities, approximately 30 per cent of the program has been completed. Plants scheduled for dismantlement are permitted to continue in production until such time as dismantlement is actually started.

Under the Potsdam Agreement, 25 per cent of the plants determined to be surplus and available for reparations in Western Germany were to be allocated to the USSR. In return for this allocation of capital items to the USSR, the Soviet was required to make return shipments “in agreed installments within five years of the date thereof”2 of certain specific commodities to the value of 60 per cent of the capital shipments made to Russia. As of April 26, 1948, capital industrial equipment has been shipped to the USSR from the three western zones of Germany valued at RM 70,979,300. In return, as of the same date, the USSR had delivered commodities valued at RM 4,831,546.

basic assumptions

The program of plant dismantlement had been under way for nearly three years and it became necessary for the Mission to accept certain factors without further and independent investigation. The following assumptions am, therefore, pertinent to the conclusions and recommendations of the Mission.

War Plants

“War Plants” are defined as those capable of manufacturing war materials, including, but not limited to, arms, ammunition and implements of war, as well as all types of aircraft, specific war chemicals and gases. The Mission recognizes that in time of national emergency every plant might be characterized as a “war plant;” that the line of demarcation between war plants and peace-time plants is, in fact, a broad and poorly defined division line; and that any technical group might come to somewhat varying conclusions with respect to those plants now defined as “war plants.” Nevertheless, the Mission accepted as conclusive the listing of specific plants by the zonal authorities under the category of “war plants.”

Prohibited Industries

Documents furnished to the Mission by the zonal authorities included a listing of industries which were prohibited by the “Plan for Reparations and the Level of German Post-War Economy of March 1946.”3 The Mission has accepted these designations. However, an exception4 provided that facilities for the production of synthetic gasoline and oil, synthetic ammonia and synthetic rubber and ball and taper roller bearings are to be retained to meet domestic requirements in Germany until the necessary imports are available and can be paid for. The Mission has, therefore, examined prohibited facilities in the light of this exemption.

Restricted Industries

In the data supplied by the occupational authorities of the western zones of Germany, all plants scheduled for dismantlement and not included in the above described categories of “War Plants” and “Prohibited Industries” are classified as “Restricted Industries.” The Mission understands that by this latter classification is meant those plants whose production is considered surplus to the established level of industry provided in that specific zone or zones.

Progress of Dismantlement

The zonal authorities at the request of the Mission supplied data as to the status of dismantlement with respect to each of the plants under consideration. The Mission recognized the impracticability of further consideration with respect to the possible retention of an individual industrial plant whose physical dismantlement had been certified as either wholly or in greater part completed.

Allocations to Allied Control Authority and Inter-Allied Reparations Agency

The Technical Mission requested and subsequently received from each of the zonal authorities specific information as to the action, if any, taken by ACA or IARA with respect to each individual plant on the dismantlement list for each of the zones of occupation. Where the facilities of a specific plant had been officially submitted to either ACA or IARA for subsequent allocation as reparations such action was accepted by the Mission as final.

Relation of German Production to the Post-War Recovery of Western Europe

The Technical Mission recognizes as a fundamental consideration the necessity for increased production in Germany and the primary importance of such increased production to European recovery. The Mission recognizes and accepts that “the whole economy of Europe is inter-linked with German economy through the exchange of raw materials and manufactured goods. The productivity of Europe can not be restored without the restoration of Germany as a contributor to that productivity”.5

Facilities of Negligible Value

The zonal authorities supplied data reflecting the estimated residual value of equipment in each of the plants scheduled for dismantlement. It was recognized that in the solution of a problem of the magnitude of the dismantlement program, facilities or equipment having a negligible value would have little effect on the economic recovery of Europe. The Mission defined a plant of negligible value as one having a residual value of RM 50,000 or less.6 The Mission did not, however, accept this as a hard and fast definition, recognizing that in specific instances the critical world short supply of the end product to be derived from this equipment would override its lack of monetary value.

recommendations

The Technical Mission makes the following recommendations with respect to the dismantlement program in the western zones of Germany. For convenience and clarity these recommendations have been segregated so as to apply individually to each of the three western zones.

U.S. Zone of Occupation

The Technical Mission makes the following recommendations and comments with reference to the 186 plants currently scheduled for dismantlement in the U.S. Zone: 1. The Mission recommends that 15 of these plants7 be retained for production in Germany in order best to achieve the objectives of the European Recovery Program.

2. The Mission recommends that 1 plant8 be retained in Germany for the reasons set forth under “Conclusions” of this report.

3. The Mission makes no recommendation for the retention in Germany of 169 plants,9 classified as “War Plants”, “Prohibited Industries”, “Plants which have either been allocated or over 80 per cent dismantled”, and 1 plant10 which is not required to be retained in Germany in order best to achieve the objectives of the European Recovery Program.

UK Zone of Occupation

The Technical Mission makes the following recommendations and comments with reference to 495 plants currently scheduled for dismantlement in the UK Zone: 1. The Mission recommends that 165 of these plants11 be retained for production in Germany in order best to achieve the objectives of the European Recovery Program.

2. The Mission recommends that 11 plants12 be retained in Germany for reasons set forth in the “Conclusions” of this report.

3. The Mission makes no recommendation for the retention in Germany of 296 plants,13 classified as “War Plants”, “Prohibited Industries”, “Plants which have been either allocated or over 80 per cent dismantled”, “Plants with a residual equipment value of RM 50,000 or less”, and 23 plants14 which the Mission has determined are not required to be retained in Germany in order best to serve the objectives of the European Recovery Program.

French Zone of Occupation

The Technical Mission makes the following recommendations and comments with reference to the 233 plants currently scheduled for dismantlement in the French Zone: 1. The Mission recommends that 88 complete plants15 be retained for production in Germany in order best to achieve the objectives of the European Recovery Program.

2. The Mission also recommends the retention of 2 part plants16 for the same reasons.

3. The Mission recommends acceptance of the voluntary offer made by the French authorities that an additional 35 complete plants17 and 14 part plants18 be retained in Germany.

4. The Mission makes no recommendations for the retention in Germany of 81 plants,19 classified as “War Plants”, “Prohibited Industries”, “Plants which have been either allocated or over 80 per cent dismantled”, “Plants with a residual equipment value of RM 50,000 or less”, 14 part plants20 and 14 plants21 which the Mission had determined are not required to be retained in Germany in order best to achieve the objectives of the European Recovery Program.

General Recommendations

1. The Mission considered the Foreign Assistance Act of 1948 and the requirements of the countries participating in the European Recovery Program under that Act. The retained industrial capacity would contribute to the economic stabilization of Germany and thus effectively serve the purpose of European recovery. It is recommended that this report, as approved, be made available to the Administrator for Economic Cooperation and the Secretary of State in order that the bilateral and multilateral agreements, required by Section 115 (f) of Public Law 472, will provide: “that such capital equipment as is scheduled for removal as reparations from the three western zones of Germany be retained in Germany if such retention will most effectively serve the purposes of the European Recovery Program.”22

2. This report is classified as “Secret” in accordance with the terms of reference of the Technical Mission. Downgrading to “Not Classified” is recommended.

summary of recommendations

A recapitulation of the above recommendations and comments indicates that of the total of 914 plants currently listed for dismantlement in the combined western zones of Germany, the Mission recommends the retention of 315 whole plants,23 and 16 part plants,24 as sources for the manufacture of critical items in world wide short supply.

The Mission has determined that of the 914 plants, 34 plants25 are not required from a technical standpoint to be retained in Germany in order best to achieve the objectives of the European Recovery Program.

The Mission has made no recommendations for the retention in Germany of 549 plants,26 classified as “War Plants”, “Prohibited Industries”, “Plants which are either allocated or over 80 per cent dismantled”, “Plants with a Negligible Value of RM 50,000 or Less”, and 15 part plants.27

Detailed listing of the specific plants in the three zones will be found under appropriate headings in the Appendix hereto.

[Here follows a section, comprising fourteen pages in the source text, entitled “Fundamental Considerations”.]

implementation

The Mission recognizes that technical considerations alone are not controlling in the decision as to the plants which should be removed from the dismantlement list. The Mission again emphasizes that political and security considerations are outside of the terms of its reference.32

The Mission recommends the retention of 323 plants in the three zones of Germany. In the majority of cases, the factors influencing the decisions were evaluated on the basis of categories. Obviously, the reasons for such retentions are much more compelling in some cases than in others. The Mission, therefore, concludes that a classification of the 323 plants recommended for retention would assist in reaching a final determination. In list 8, Appendix, the Mission groups these 323 plants into the following classifications: Class A.33 Plants, the product of which the Mission considers vital to the European Recovery Program and upon which the evidence for retention is conclusive from the technical point of view.

Class B.34 Plants whose end product categories justify inclusion in Class A above, but concerning which additional technical information on an individual plant basis may be desirable.

Class C.35 Plants whose retention would have less effect on the European Recovery Program. This listing contains, for example, plants having a relatively low residual equipment value; plants whose end products are not as critically in world short supply; and plants whose productive reestablishment in Germany is dependent upon variables and, hence, less certain.

To assist in the implementation of this report the Mission makes the following recommendations: 1. Plants not recommended for retention be submitted to the Department of State for appropriate action.

2. The Economic Cooperation Administrator, through the Secretary of State, obtain agreements for immediate suspension of dismantlement and allocation of all plants which are recommended for retention.

3. The Economic Cooperation Administrator shall make, upon request, an independent investigation with respect to any of the plants recommended for retention which investigation shall include, but not be limited to, the following factors: (a) Examine data submitted with the application of the recipient country, if any.

(b) Conduct a survey of the plant in its present location, developing all necessary information concerning facilities, power supply, labor and raw materials availabilities, transportation, etc.

(c) Examine the order boards of the plant to establish the specific industries which were normally supplied by the plant under consideration.

(d) Consult the zonal authorities and the Department of State on the subject of international agreements, military security and other non-economic factors as they relate to the plant under consideration.

(e) Examine evidence submitted or independently developed as to the possibility of productive reestablishment of the plant in its present location.

(f) Make an independent survey of the possibility of prompt re-establishment of the plant in the recipient country, taking into consideration the availability of manpower, raw materials, electric power, transportation, factory sites, and the demand for the end product.

(g) Investigate the practicability of cannibalization of the plant facilities, evaluating the costs involved in complete dismantlement as compared with the costs involved in cannibalization, and the relative effectiveness of both programs.

4. Upon the completion of the investigation outlined above, the Economic Cooperation Administrator will (a) request the Secretary of State to obtain the agreement of those countries concerned, in order that the plants and capital equipment the retention of which, in the opinion of the Administrator, will “most effectively serve the purposes of the European Recovery Program” be retained in Germany permanently;

(b) submit the remainder of the plants, if any, promptly to the Department of State for appropriate action.

Upon the Administrator’s request the Mission will furnish such pertinent data as it may have concerning the plants recommended for retention.

conclusions

On the basis of the facts and the available data, the Technical Mission concludes that the dismantlement of plants in Germany as currently scheduled does not “… most effectively serve the purposes of the European Recovery Program”.36 The technical and economic considerations involved argue against a continuation of the dismantlement schedule. The Technical Mission urges that consideration be given to the recommendations contained herein to the end that there be a prompt and final determination of this problem.

With particular respect to steel plants in the United States and the United Kingdom Zones, the Mission has indicated those plants which it affirmatively recommends for retention in Germany.37 Separately indicated are 11 steel plants38 in the UK Zone and 1 steel plant39 in the U.S. Zone which, even under optimum conditions, could not be placed into production within a reasonable period of time. On the other hand, the Mission does not believe that the physical dismantlement and removal of these plants to other countries as reparable facilities will serve any really useful purpose. The size, weight and character of the facilities are such as to make the cost of their dismantlement, transportation and re-erection excessive and their net salvageable gain, therefore, small. It is urged that these facilities be considered in the light of their “cannibalization” value. Individual items of equipment may thus be utilized for repairs, replacements and additions in other plants of the same general type.

The Mission expresses its appreciation for the material contribution of the members of the staff composed of Julius C. C. Edelstein, Department of State; Thomas Hibben, Department of Commerce; Robert Myers, Bureau of Labor Statistics; Thomas Rawlings, Department of Agriculture; O. L. Billingsley; Paul F. Griffin and the secretarial staff.

1 Recommendations of the Secretary of State to the President and Cabinet, dated 2/16/48. [All the footnotes in this document appear in the source text.]

la Report of Bipartite Board, Approved August 26, 1947.

2 Paragraph 6, Section IV (6) from communiqué published at the end of the Potsdam Conference (2nd August 1945).

3 Inter-Allied Reparation Agency; First report of the Secretary General for the year 1946, page 23.

4 Page 24 of same report noted under Footnote 3.

5 The President’s Economic Mission to Germany and Austria. Report No. 3—Herbert Hoover (1947).

6 1938 RM value (approximately $15,000).

7 List No. 2, Appendix.

8 List No. 2, Appendix (also see page 29, this report).

9 List No. 1, Appendix.

10 List No. 1, Appendix.

11 List No. 4, Appendix.

12 List No.4, Appendix (also see page 29, this report).

13 List No. 3, Appendix.

14 List No. 3, Appendix.

15 List No. 6, Appendix.

16 List No. 6, Appendix.

17 List No. 7, Appendix.

18 List No. 7, Appendix.

19 List No. 5, Appendix.

20 List No. 5, Appendix.

21 List No. 5, Appendix.

22 Section 115 (f), Public Law 472; 80th Congress.

23 List Nos. 2, 4, 6 and 7, Appendix.

24 List Nos. 6 and 7, Appendix.

25 List Nos. 1, 3 and 5, Appendix.

26 List Nos. 1, 3 and 5, Appendix.

27 List No. 5, Appendix.

32 See page 2 of this report.

33 See List No. 8, Appendix.

34 See List No. 8, Appendix.

35 See List No. 8, Appendix.

36 Section 115 (f), Public Law 472, 80th Congress.

37 Lists No. 2 and 4, Appendix.

38 List No. 4, Appendix.

39 List No. 2, Appendix.

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) 740.00119 EW/7–2648

[Document 467]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

secret [Washington,] July 26, 1948.

Subject: Report of the Technical Mission on Reparations

The attached letter received from Secretary Krug 1 transmitted to the Department the final report of the Technical Mission. The report itself has been retained in this office for study.

In substance the final report is identical with the draft report in that it recommends for retention in Germany 316 whole plants and 15 part plants, quantities which are identical with those recommended in the draft report. In spite of repeated requests none of the deficiencies pointed out by State and Army has been corrected. No effort has been made to conform to the terms of reference of the Mission.

The principal difference is the inclusion of a new appendix listing plants recommended for retention in accordance with three priority categories (a) “Vital,” (b) “Important” and (c) “Unimportant.” These categories include respectively 131 whole plants, 5 part plants; 92 whole plants, 4 part plants; and 91 whole plants, 9 part plants.

The second important difference is the inclusion of several recommendations as to procedure which, if adopted, would nullify the decision of the Secretaries at the meeting of July 2nd by taking formal study and recommendation on the entire subject away from the Ad Hoc Committee (representing the five Secretaries, and including an ECA observer) and vesting it in the ECA Administrator who would presumably request the advice of Army and State. We are informed confidentially that action toward this end has been initiated by Secretary Krug who is endeavoring to obtain concurrence of Secretaries Sawyer and Brannan to direct transmission of the report to the President by the three Secretaries.2

Considering the unsatisfactory nature of the report, the first objective of State and Army will be to establish a basis, preferably working through the Ad Hoc Committee, whereby plants in the b and c categories may be released for allocation at the earliest possible date together with any plants that can be immediately justified for removal from the a list.

In view of the Sokolsky article,3 attached hereto as Tab A, the Executive Branch may shortly be confronted with requests for the Technical Mission report from other parts of the Government. We propose that initially such requests be met with a statement that the final report has been received only very recently and that since its substance involves negotiation with the British and French, it requires review in light of pertinent considerations not covered in the report.

It is desirable to avoid release of the report outside the Executive Branch of the Government, at least until it has been thoroughly evaluated in light of political, security and other relevant factors. There is some doubt that its release can be avoided indefinitely, however, since periodic progress reports by the Technical Mission to interested Congressional committees have offered to make the report available. If it should become desirable to release the report, it is necessary that justification be established by then for reducing the list of plants to be retained to a number suitable for initial discussion with the British and French and that a statement indicating its deficiencies be prepared to accompany the report. To gain the necessary time for this action, consideration is being given to preparation of a progress report which will give the Congressional committees the status of the Technical Mission report, outline the steps required for further action and state that final recommendation in the matter will be made after review of all pertinent factors by an interdepartmental committee.

There is an obvious danger that critics may make capital of the reparations issue during the election campaign. It is suggested therefore that consideration be given to informing Mr. Dulles at the appropriate time of the international implications in the situation, bearing in mind the security precautions which we have urged strongly on all Cabinet members having access to the report.

Charles E. Saltzman

1 Secretary Krug’s letter, dated July 22, is not printed. It contained no substantive comment regarding the Report of the Cabinet Technical Mission.

2  At or immediately following the Cabinet meeting of July 2, the Secretaries of State, Interior, Commerce, Agriculture, and Army (the Cabinet Committee on Reparations) apparently agreed to designate their representatives to constitute an Ad Hoc Committee on Reparations. The task of this Ad Hoc Committee, which was also to include an observer from the Economic Cooperation Administration, appears to have been a review of the Report of the Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations. After several inconclusive meetings, the Ad Hoc Committee decided on July 30 to recommend that the Cabinet Committee on Reparations submit the Report of the Technical Mission to the President together with a letter setting forth a recommended course of action in dealing with the dismantling question. The final text of the Cabinet Committee’s letter to the President, dated August 9, is printed infra.

The information set forth here is derived from materials included in file 740.00119 EW for July and August 1948. No record has been found of the Cabinet or post-Cabinet meeting of July 2. Handwritten notes of some of the meetings of the Ad Hoc Committee are included in CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 2234, File—Reparation Plant Review, July.

3 Under reference here is a newspaper article by columnist George Sokolsky, which appeared on July 17, suggesting that officials in the government were attempting to suppress the Report of the Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations.

The Cabinet Committee on Reparations to the President 740.00119 EW/8–1648

[Document 468]

The Cabinet Committee on Reparations to the President 1

secret Washington, August 9, 1948.

Dear Mr. President: On February 16, 1948, prior to the enactment of the Economic Cooperation Act of 1948, you requested the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce and Interior to nominate representatives to examine with representatives of the State and Army Departments plants scheduled for dismantling in the three Western Zones of Germany and to recommend which of such plants, if any, should be retained because they could if left in Germany make a substantial contribution to the world supply of critical items. In order to assist the study, a Technical Mission was sent to Germany which made a report on July 23, 1948 (attached2 ) recommending the retention in Germany of 315 plants and 16 part plants, listed in three categories by order of importance. This report is based exclusively on certain technical considerations and does not take into account the political and security considerations which are involved. The conclusions of this report have been considered along with other relevant factors by an ad hoc Committee representing the five Secretaries, to which the Economic Cooperation Administrator has sent an observer. The Committee does not find any assurance in the Technical Mission report that plants recommended therein for retention in Germany can be brought into production during the period of the European Recovery Program.

The ad hoc Committee has made the following four recommendations, which we have approved: 1. That the 163 whole plants and 1 part plant (listed in Annex A3 ) having the greatest possibility of contributing to European recovery, if brought fully into production in Germany, be referred to the Economic Cooperation Administrator for such further study or other action as he may consider necessary to the discharge of his responsibilities under Section 115(f) of the Economic Cooperation Act. Note: If the French Government confirms its intention to retain any of the 35 whole plants and 14 part plants listed in Annex B,4 no further consideration or action by this Government with respect to retention of such plants is required. Any plants in Annex B which are not confirmed by the French Government will be added to Annex A.

2. That the remaining plants recommended for retention by the Technical Mission be released forthwith for removal as reparations in view of the uncertainty that any of these plants could make a substantial contribution to European recovery by retention in Germany and the importance of previous commitments involving prompt reparations deliveries of substantial amounts of equipment.

3. That, in view of the necessity of negotiating with the British and French Governments with respect to plants in their zones of occupation which this Government may consider should be retained in Germany, the report of the Technical Mission not be disclosed to persons outside this Government before completion of the further study of all relevant factors required to support the conclusions to be reached by this Government and discussion of these conclusions with the British and French Governments.

4. That with this report the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce and Interior conclude their examination of the reparations program, and that the ad hoc Committee be dissolved.

As stated above, the Economic Cooperation Administrator has been represented by an observer during the study of Technical Mission report and other pertinent factors and is informed of the conclusions and recommendations set forth herein.

Faithfully yours,

G. C. Marshall
Secretary of State

Kenneth Royall
Secretary of the Army

J. A. Krug
Secretary of Interior

Charles F. Brannan
Secretary of Agriculture

Charles Sawyer
Secretary of Commerce

1 This letter was prepared by the Ad Hoc Committee on Reparation. The circumstances attending the preparation of the letter are discussed in footnote 2 to the memeordum of July 26 from Saltzman to Lovett, supra. It was transmitted to the five secretaries composing the Cabiet Committee oh Reparations on August 9 under cover of a brief transmittal memorandum signed by the five members of the Ad Hoc Committee: Covey T. Oliver, Department of State; Col. Raymond L. Cheseldine, Department of the Army; Norman H. Collisson, Department of the Interior; Thomas Rawlings, Department of Agriculture; and V. Lewis Bassie, Department of Commerce. This letter was not signed by all members of the Cabinet Committee on Reparations until August 13, at which time it was transmitted to President Truman. Secretary of State Marshall signed on August 10. The source text is countersigned “Aug. 16, 1948 Approved Harry Truman” in the President’s own handwriting.

2 For the Report of the Technical Mission, see p. 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466].

3 Annex A is not printed.

4 Annex B is not printed.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) 740.00119 EW/8–1648

[Document 469]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

secret [Washington,] August 16, 1948.

Participants: U—Mr. Lovett

O—Mr. Hemmendinger

ECA—Mr. Hoffman

Mr. Bruce

Mr. Hoffman referred to the keen interest the committees of the Congress, in particular Mr. Taber and Senator Bridges, were manifesting in the retention in Germany of plants scheduled for dismantling. Mr. Hoffman further referred to the letter which had just been written to him by the Secretary transmitting the letter of the five Secretaries to the President, requesting that the release of the 160 plants be dealt with as a matter of priority.1 He said that he was anxious to do this and to get on with the program generally, but that the heat from the Congress made it impossible for him to release the 160 plants without being responsible himself for the conduct of an investigation. He asked, therefore, if Mr. Lovett could agree that Mr. Hoffman appoint a group of leading industrialists—he mentioned specifically Mr. Humphrey and Mr. Budd—to look into the matter and advise him, He further proposed that they might have the use of a group of expert consultants such as Overseas Consultants Inc. The object of this proposal, he said, was to find some buffer between him and the Congress to justify a decision which would be workable.

Mr. Lovett said that he thoroughly understood the reasons for the suggestion and that he thought something of the sort was probably necessary. Mr. Hemmendinger suggested that Overseas Consultants Inc. would be considered by European countries to be already committed on reparations questions, and that the suggestion for a further technical study would be very badly received by the French and British who would point out that we had just made a technical study, and that they had agreed to such a study under the understanding that it would result in the deletion of a limited number of plants. Mr. Bevin in particular would be sure to be very angry. Mr. Lovett emphasized to Mr. Hoffman that the use of Overseas Consultants Inc. might be undesirable for the reasons just stated. Mr. Hoffman said that others could doubtless be obtained, and that Overseas Consultants Inc. had been referred to only by way of illustration. Mr. Lovett said that he did not feel that the reaction of the French and British was a determinative factor, however, because they would understand that the Administrator had to discharge his responsibilities under the statute. Mr. Bruce suggested that they already had some inkling that the Administrator was confronted with a report of recommending the retention of 323 plants, and that they would understand that he had to do something to deal with it.

Mr. Hemmendinger pointed out that the reasons for reparations were largely political, emotional and historical, that it might be necessary to take the lightning some time, and that perhaps it would be done without a new inquiry. Mr. Lovett felt that Mr. Hoffman needed the assistance of impartial consultants in order to answer Congressional critics, however.

Mr. Hemmendinger informed Mr. Lovett that Mr. Steelman had stated this morning that the President wished to discuss the matter with the Secretary of State at noon today before the five Secretaries’ letter to the President was released to the Congress. In view of that, Mr. Lovett went immediately to the Secretary in order to inform him of Mr. Hoffman’s proposal before the discussion with the President. Mr. Lovett told Mr. Hoffman that he agreed that the step was proper and that there was no objection to Mr. Hoffman proceeding to invite Mr. Humphrey and Mr. Budd to Washington to discuss it.

[Robert A.] L[ovett]

1 Under Secretary of State Lovett’s letter of August 13 to Hoffman, under reference here, is not printed (740.00119 EW/8–1348).

Directive to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) 740.00119 EW/8–2048

[Document 470]

Directive to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay)1

secret Washington, [undated.]

Subject of this directive is external restitution from Germany.

1. This directive is issued to you as Commanding General of the United States Forces of Occupation and as Military Governor in Germany. It amplifies paragraph 17 a of JCS 1779/1 (SWNCC 327/4)2 and supersedes WX 85965, November 1945, as amended (SWNCC 204/2),3 and WX 99226, March 1946, as amended (SWNCC 204/5).4 Paragraph two sets forth the basic policies of this Government which affect external restitution. Paragraphs three et seq. represent specific instructions based upon these basic policies.

2. You will be governed by the following basic policies of your Government in completing the program of restitution from Germany: a. (1) Policy of fulfilling international obligations and respecting property rights.

(2) Policy of giving economic and political assistance to countries participating in the European Recovery Program.

(3) Policy of protecting the cultural heritage of all nations.

b. (1) Policy of denying certain types of products to countries in the Soviet orbit.

(2) Policy of meeting essential requirements of the minimum German economy.

(3) Policy of avoiding the restitution of property to the Soviet Union or a Soviet satellite which is claimed independently by a non-national or a refugee national of the claimant government.

(4) Policy of bringing the entire restitution program to a conclusion as soon as is feasible.

3. Policies 2 a (1) and 2 a (2), separately or together, will prevail over policy 2 b (2) unless the property is required for the German economy with great urgency, comparable, e.g., with the need to retain rolling stock.

4. With reference to policy 2 b (1) you will from time to time be given guidance as to the products which this government desires to deny to the economy of the Soviet Union and its satellites. You will suspend restitution of such products from Germany even if they appear subject to restitution by international agreement under policy 2 a (1). You will also suspend restitution in all cases where there is a conflict between the urgent requirements of the German economy as indicated in 2 b (2) and international obligation as stated in 2 a (1) and also when there is a conflict between the policy in 2 a (1) and 2 b (3). You should report action taken under this paragraph together with the grounds therefor.

5. You should, where possible, avoid informing the representatives of any claimant country that a claim has been deferred or rejected on the grounds set forth in paragraph 2 b (1), (2), or (3) above. In such cases other legal or procedural grounds should, if possible, be stated. You should consult your Government before making any overt refusal to execute an agreement to which the United States is a party.

6. The legal bases for restitution to the United Nations are the agreements of the Allied Control Authority, so long as they are considered to be in force. Property removed from a United Nation in the course of a transaction essentially commercial in character is not considered to be subject to restitution under such agreements.

7. The legal bases for restitution to Italy, Rumania, Hungary, and Bulgaria are the relevant provisions of the Treaties of Peace with those countries. In the absence of Control Council decision implementing the treaties, you will proceed with restitution to those countries as provided in this directive. You will bear in mind that property which is lawfully owned by a national of Italy, Rumania, Hungary, or Bulgaria, which is determined to be not subject to restitution under paragraph two of the relevant article of the peace treaty, falls under paragraph one of such article.

8. You will make restitution to Austria of property removed from Austria after 12 March 1938 upon the same terms as are set forth in the relevant articles of the treaties of peace referred to in paragraph seven of this directive. You will coordinate restitution to Austria with the U.S. High Commissioner so that, at his discretion, and within the means available to him, products, subject to policy stated in paragraph 2 b (1), may be denied entry into Soviet occupied areas.

9. You will make restitution to Finland in the same manner as if the United States were a signatory of the treaty of peace executed by that country.

10. You will make restitution to Italy, Rumania, Hungary, Bulgaria, Austria, and Finland of property removed from these countries under circumstances which do not fall within the terms of the treaties of peace or of paragraphs eight and nine of this directive where to do so appears equitable and follows from application of the policies set forth in paragraphs two, three and four of this directive. In particular, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, you will make restitution to Italy, so long as it is a participant in the European Recovery Program, of property removed from that country, as set forth in Article 77 of the Italian Peace Treaty, after July 23, 1943, including property removed by or under the authority of the so-called Republican Fascist Government.

11. You will report to this Government, with your recommendations, the facts with respect to any property which appears to have been removed from Albania by the Germans by force or duress.

12. The disposition of property removed from Latvia, Esthonia, and Lithuania is subject to later decision, except for ships which are disposable under TMMC agreement (see WX 84577, 16 April 19465 ). The Soviet Union is not recognized as a proper restitution claimant for property removed from those countries.

13. The restitution of railway rolling stock and of inland waterway craft will be governed by special arrangements with the claimant governments. The disposition of looted gold, currencies, and securities will be made pursuant to separate instructions.

14. Confirming ourad August WX 86914, you are authorized to announce 31 December 1948 as target date for terminating restitution deliveries, subject to conditions cited in urad July CC 5324.6

1 The source text was transmitted to Assistant Secretary of State Saltzman by Under Secretary of the Army Draper under cover of a letter dated August 20, not printed. In his letter, Draper proposed that this directive be communicated to General Clay as the agreed United States policy as regards restitution from Germany to those United Nations that had been occupied by Germany. In a reply dated August 25, not printed, Wisner reported Department of State concurrence with this directive (740.00119 EW/8–2048). The Civil Affairs Division, Department of the Army, transmitted the draft directive to General Clay on August 28 in message Warx 88362. The Joint Chiefs of Staff in message Warx 89109 of September 13 confirmed the text of the draft directive and declared it to be in effect. This directive had originally been drafted in the Department of State and had been circulated to the State–Army–Navy–Air Force Coordinating Committee as document SANACC 204/33, May 7, 1948, not printed. The revised terms of reference of SANACC, as approved by the National Security Council on August 18, 1948, provided that SANACC would no longer be used to coordinate occupied areas matters, and that such matters would instead become the responsibility of the State and Army Departments.

2 See “Directive to Commander in Chief of United States Forces of Occupation Regarding the Military Government of Germany,” Germany 1947–1949, p. 34. In that publication the directive, dated July 11, 1947, is incorrectly designated JCS 1779,” rather than JCS 1779/1.

3  Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. iii, p. 1427.

4 Not printed; for the substance of the JCS directive under reference here, see the circular telegram of March 16, 1946, Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. v, p. 525.

5 The message under reference here is not printed. For the text of the Report of the Tripartite Merchant Marine Commission (TMMC), December 7, 1945, see Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. iii, p. 1513.

6 Neither of the messages under reference in this paragraph is printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 EW/8–2648: Telegram

[Document 471]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

secret Washington, August 26, 1948—9 p. m.

3408. For Douglas; Paris for Caffery and Harriman. Recent developments on reparations follow: 1. On Aug. 9, five Secretaries submitted report to President transmitting report of Technical Mission and recommending:2 a. That 163 whole plants and 1 part plant having greatest possibility of contributing to European recovery if brought fully into production in Germany be referred to ECA for such further study or other action as he may consider necessary to discharge of his responsibilities under Section 115 (f) of Act.

b. That remaining plants recommended for retention by Tech. Mission be released forthwith for removals as reparations. (This recommendation affects approx 125 plants because it has been necessary to add to Tech Mission “a” list certain plants which OMGUS has indicated should have priority for retention if any plants are to be retained.)

c. That in view necessity negotiating with British and French for retention plants report of Tech Mission continue to be kept secret.

d. That with this report Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce and Interior conclude their recommendations of reparations program and Ad Hoc Interdepartmental Committee be dissolved.

President approved report August 16.

2. Mr. Hoffman has found pressure of interested Congressional committees so strong that he feels unable to act upon recommendation for release of further plants until an ECA investigation has been conducted. To assist him in reaching conclusions which will be generally acceptable, he has, with concurrence State Department, invited following five leading industrialists to advise him: George Humphrey, M. A. Hanna Co.; Charles E. Wilson, General Motors; Gwilym Price, Westinghouse; John L. McCaffery, International Harvester; Fred Geier, Cincinnati Milling. Initial conferences were held with these men on August 21.3 State, Army, Congressional representatives and Collisson attended and made lengthy presentations.

3. Mr. Hoffman together with Wisner of State Department met today with representatives British and French Embassies.
Hoffman made following points: a. ECA responsible to Congress under Section 115 F of Act.

b. In his judgment importance of dismantling program with respect to recovery has been grossly exaggerated. ECA would prefer if it had choice, not to be involved in reparations issue, but strong pressure on him even from supporters of ECA in Congress makes this impossible.

c. Had hoped to release at this time substantial number of 323 plants recommended for retention by technical mission but pointed warnings to him from Congressional leaders make it impossible to release any plants recommended for retention by technical mission or other known studies until examination of specific plants has been made under his responsibility.

d. Therefore, Hoffman has appointed five industrialists to advise him as stated above. He is convinced public opinion and Congress will accept judgment of this committee. He intends to transmit its recommendations to State Department as his action under Section 115 F.

e. Procedure will be to prepare check sheet on each plant. About 40 engineers are being hired who will proceed to Germany. Expected to complete entire re-examination within sixty to ninety clays. Hoffman very anxious complete before Congress reconvenes.

f. Terms of reference of advisory committee are to determine first, what plants are most important to recovery, and second which of these can best serve recovery by being kept in Germany. Concern will be with European recovery not merely German.

4. French and British representatives expressed dismay at further delay which this program entails. Both agreed ECA entitled make examination, but British argued that not necessary hold up dismantling while investigation proceeds. Hoffman replied that is absolutely necessary because members Congress told him pointedly they so interpret statute. Discussions indicated number of plants subject to inquiry approximately 350. British French pointed out forcefully political and emotional significance of Reparations Program in their countries. Hoffman invited them express views to members of advisory committee, which, if their Governments approve, they will do August 31. In closing, Hoffman urged British and French representatives to support his request for cooperation of their Governments in re-examination. Stated Governments need not accept and are free to act as they think best but in his judgment their cooperation absolutely necessary for continuation ECA appropriations.

5. Above sent you for your use in event respective foreign offices desire discuss with you, which we consider very likely in view gravity attached to new development by British and French representatives here.

Hoffman action outlined above fully supported by State Department in view our recognition his extremely serious problem with appropriation committees.

Fully appreciated here that you will have difficulty explaining and justifying this development.

Marshall

1 This telegram was sent to Paris as 3335 and to Berlin as 1532.

2 For the Report summarized here, see p. 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468].

3  Hemmendinger’s memorandum of conversation covering this meeting is filed separately under 740.00119 EW/8–2748.

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Under Secretary of the Army (Draper) 740.00119 EW/8–2848: Telegram

[Document 472]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Under Secretary of the Army (Draper)1

secret [Berlin, August 28, 1948.]

CC–5729. Have just seen State Dept message to Douglas 2 advising him that Hoffman proposes to send forty engineers to Germany to re-examine individual plants proposed for reparations with a view to submitting data to top industrial committee for their consideration and final recommendations. I doubt very much if these forty engineers can obtain any data that is not now available or that we cannot make available from here. The problem really is not one of examining the individual plant because a good case can be made to retain any individual plant in the interests of the German economy. The real answer is in the over-all production which can be developed in Germany in light of the general economic picture to include availability of coal, transport and labor. As you know I have defended the general reparations program because of our international commitments and also because I believe that the level of industry left to Germany is all that it would be able to manage during the next several years. Obviously in a personal sense my own job would be made easier if no further plants were removed from Germany. This would, of course, be a popular move in Germany and any dissatisfaction would come from the countries to which we are committed to give capital equipment as reparations.

However, the two things which worry me in the Hoffman approach are the visit of the forty engineers to Germany to examine individual plants and the delay which will be involved in this kind of examination. Recently one state government has resigned in the French zone over dismantling. This kind of discontent is becoming evident everywhere. Our original policy contemplated the quick removal of the capital equipment to be made available for reparations so that reparations would be ended once and for all, as we recognized it would eventually become a political problem of much magnitude in Germany.

The visit of the engineers to the individual plants will develop great dissatisfaction if these plants are later made available for reparations. Moreover it will emphasize the entire question as a popular issue at a time when Communist propaganda will be at its maximum. The final decision will be made about the time the Germans are deciding on the acceptance of the proposed constitution. It may have a very real and perhaps even disastrous effect if at that time we proceed with further dismantling.

Personally, I believe that an arbitrary decision made promptly as to the number of plants to be retained will represent as good a job as can be done. If a questionnaire could be devised to be filled out for each of the plants under consideration we could do it quickly and quietly to place it before Mr. Hoffman’s committee to assist them in their deliberations. I do not want to be understood as opposing in any way Mr. Hoffman’s real examination of this problem to include the examination by his top committee. However, I must point out that the field visits of the forty engineers may burst into flame the smoldering fire of resentment against dismantling to include possible protracted labor disturbances and strikes. In fact, a further delay in this program may well make it impossible to remove these plants without the use of force and if this becomes necessary we will truly have lost our political objectives. Obviously if the examination should result in all or a great part being left in Germany, this condition would not result but of course we would face the loss of good will by the countries expecting to receive this reparations equipment.

This problem does not apply primarily to the American zone where our program for all practical purposes is completed. However, it becomes even worse since the majority of the plants are located in British zone and particularly in the Ruhr where labor unrest could completely destroy coal and steel production.

I cannot over-emphasize the political and social unrest which exists in Germany and which makes it difficult indeed to recreate or highlight punitive measures. If we are going to take further plants from Germany we must get it over with now.

[ Clay ]

1 The source text was transmitted to the Department in telegram 2187, August 28, from Berlin, not printed; Ambassador Murphy expressed concurrence with Clay’s message.

2 Telegram 3408, August 26, to London, supra.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/9–148: Telegram

[Document 473]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent London, September 1, 1948—noon.

3920. Deptel 3408, August 26,1 raises some questions.

1. The question of reparations is much more than economic. It is a far-flung political question. I have always felt that reparations would be a nightmare, but the past is the past. Political agreements have been made about reparations; among them is the IARA agreement. Under the level of industry for Bizonal area, commitments have been made to the Germans and justifiable expectations among IARA countries have developed. Implied obligations have been undertaken to France, which is not only an occupying power, but also a IARA country.

2. At this particular moment, when the whole German question is the center of one of our most serious and critical issues bf foreign policy, a further protracted postponement of closing the book on reparations and thereby accentuating suspicions already mounting as to our intention to honor the obligations to which we are a party and the implied undertakings that we have entered into, might very seriously and adversely affect our ability to establish and maintain a united and solid front among the Western Powers.

3. The dispatch of forty engineers, no matter how eminent, under the auspices of men no matter how distinguished, to review a problem which has already been reviewed many times, may have far-reaching effects. Such a review might affect, unfortunately, the achievement of the purposes—political as much as economic—we have in mind under the European Recovery Program. I can well understand why, therefore, Hoffman is reluctant to inject himself into this essentially political complex.

4. I will, of course, if you wish, talk with the Foreign Office which I know will be deeply disturbed by developments you have described, but I very much hope you will relieve me of doing so. I cannot urge too strongly the importance of finally and conclusively disposing of this matter with the greatest possible speed. Further delay may not only have very unfortunate consequences in France and other countries, the former of which is, as you know, uneasy about the whole German problem. It may also be the cause of serious disturbances in Germany.

5. Is there no mechanism we can employ which will bring this matter to a speedy close? For example can not the material in Washington be examined promptly and a very small group be sent (a) to Germany to examine with Clay availability of labor, raw materials and power etc for operation of any plant to determine whether it can actually, in context of all facts, be brought into production in 4¼ years, and (b) to Paris and London to obtain first hand view of political consequences?

Douglas

1  Ante, p. 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471].

Editorial Note [Document 474]

Editorial Note

At his press and radio news conference on September 1, the Secretary of State was asked to comment on a report that the Economic Cooperation Administration was making a review of the German reparations program. The Secretary replied that the law establishing the E.C.A. imposed on Mr. Hoffman certain clear responsibilities which he had to meet in regard to the issue. The Secretary stated that Mr. Hoffman had appointed a committee to consider the details which had already been covered on the Cabinet level and otherwise at considerable length. He further stated that Mr. Hoffman had called upon the State Department for its cooperation with the other governments concerned in the matter, and that the issues had been taken up with them. When asked if a report that France and the United Kingdom had been requested to curtail reparations withdrawals was true, the Secretary said that this was a matter of negotiation and he would not comment upon it.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 EW/9–248: Telegram

[Document 475]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

secret Washington, September 3, 1948—6 p. m.

3504. Re Embtels 39202 and 3949.3 Following developments on reparations since Deptel 3408,4 sent Paris as 3335, Berlin as 1532.

1. Br Emb Wash has indicated that Hoffman’s announcement Aug 26 received with great concern by Br Gov, and on instructions has inquired State if action concurred in by State and to be regarded as action this Gov. Affirmative answer made. Br Emb indicated that full statement position Br Gov being prepared for presentation Sec State.

2. No reaction from French Gov presumably by reason Cabinet changes, Berard of Fr Emb presented general Fr views on reparations to ECA Industrial Advisory Committee Aug 31. They appear to have made considerable impression. So far Br Gov has not permitted any Washington representative to appear, but we hope it will do so as we believe exposition to Committee of Br views by Br Amb would be informative both ways and might tend reduce Br FonOff tension this subject.

3. Clay’s cable CC 5729,5 reptd by Murphy as 2187, read to Hoffman and Committee Aug 31. Com considered seriously and at its request Army now exploring with Clay possibility obtaining desired info on each plant thru authorities each Mil Gov. Now planning send only small group about six engineers Germany to collect info available through Clay and to make spot checks. Check sheet desired info for each plant being drafted.

4. Wolf of Steel Mission summarized its report,6 not yet printed, to Com Aug 31. Com considered so important that study full report will be made before any decision to request surveys of steel plants. Wolf emphasized’ that steel recovery Germany possible only with Br and Fr cooperation.

5. Com appears to be impressed by relevancy European political aspects of problem and has discussed possibilities some more rapid decision. Has concluded however, that it must have full info each plant or else neither it nor Hoffman will be able justify its conclusions to Congress and public. There is no present indication Corns recommendation release any plant assigned it for examination can be acted on before end year.

6. Next meeting Com probably next week. Hoffman will give it your tels 3920 and 3949. By that time Br may have made known their position, and it will be possible make better judgment whether there remains any chance quick decision on substantial number plants.

7. Agitation issue in press is unfortunate from standpoint overall relations between US and UK, but see no way make (reassuring statement pending presentation Br position and further action by Hoffman and Com. However, we believe that if Br and Fr public reaction better understood here, it will tend to counter growing public hostility here to reparations.

8. Above for your info and such use as you find appropriate. Will continue deal with Br and Fr Emb Wash and do not expect you assume burden this negotiation.

Marshall

1 This telegram was sent to Paris for Caffery and Harriman as 3445 and to Berlin for Murphy and Clay as 1578.

2  Supra.

3 Not printed. In it Ambassador Douglas reported that the adverse British press reaction to Secretary Marshall’s September 1 statement on reparations (see the editorial note, supra) was possibly the first of a gathering storm. Douglas asked for guidance as to what might be said in London to cushion the shock to opinion in Britain and in Europe caused by the Secretary’s statement. (740.00119 EW/9–248)

4 August 26, p. 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471].

5 August 28, p. 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472].

6 During May and June 1948, George W. Wolf and a group of his associates conducted a preliminary survey of the status of the German steel industry. The survey was carried out under the auspices of the Office of Military Government in Germany (OMGUS), the Economic Cooperation Administration, and the Joint Congressional Committee on Foreign Economic Cooperation. The Wolf Mission submitted a report and recommendations to its three sponsors on August 14, 1948. The Mission recommended a moratorium on further dismantlement and shipments of any and all steel making facilities from Germany until a complete review could be made of the dismantling program.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/9–748

[Document 476]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] September 7, 1948.

Participants: Sir Oliver Franks, British Ambassador

Secretary Marshall

Mr. Hickerson—EUR

Mr. Saltzman—O

The British Ambassador, Sir Oliver Franks, called on me this morning and left with me the attached message1 from Mr. Bevin on the subject of German reparations. The Ambassador stated that he believed that this message had been written prior to some recent developments in connection with Mr. Hoffman’s Advisory Committee and he then outlined briefly to me contents of the message. He indicated that he understood the ECA Administrator’s responsibilities respecting reparations as set forth in the Foreign Assistance Act.

I told the Ambassador that the Department’s view with respect to this subject was in substantial agreement with Mr. Bevin’s, but pointed out to him the U.S. political situation in this regard with special reference to its possible effect on foreign aid appropriations. Referring to Mr. Bevin’s discussion of the security aspects of the reparations program, I told the Ambassador that I believe that there has been a tendency on the part of both governments to follow a piecemeal and detailed approach to the security problem, rather than a fundamental and over-all basis, and that while the various details which had been considered are in certain instances important ones, a successful solution will depend on an accurate diagnosis and treatment of the fundamental factors involved.

The Ambassador asked me whether I could see any objection to his appearing before Mr. Hoffman’s Advisory Committee on this subject. I replied that I thought it appropriate for him to do so.

Upon his departure, the Ambassador asked whether Mr. Bevin’s note would be answered and was told that the reply2 would be given in the near future.

G. C. M[arshall ]

1 See infra.

2 Secretary Marshall’s reply of September 16 is printed, p. 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479].

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Bevin) to the Secretary of State 840.50 Recovery/9–748

[Document 477]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Bevin) to the Secretary of State 1

secret [London, September 7, 1948.]

I am profoundly disturbed at Hoffman’s stated intention to undertake a fresh enquiry on the strength of section 115 (F) of the Economic Cooperation Act into the question of what plants if any now scheduled for reparations should be retained in Germany in the interest of the European Recovery Progamme. I cannot help thinking that this proposal, if acted upon, will have very far reaching consequences outside the economic field and I earnestly hope that before anything further is done you will agree that we should look at the implications of the scheme together in consultation with our military advisers.

2. Six months ago I agreed in principle to consider retaining a small number of plants in Germany if that would help the European Recovery Programme. I understood that a list of 20 or 30 plants would be involved and I said I would be ready to look at it. No list was ever produced. Instead a United States Technical Mission went to Germany. I have never seen its report, though I have been frequently assured over the past three months that final decisions would shortly be taken in Washington on the basis of that report. Now it is being suggested that the work of investigation should start all over again, and that the reparations programme should be held up meanwhile, perhaps for as much as four months. This creates what I must regard as a new situation.

3. I have never been asked to suspend the dismantling of any particular plant, although I was, prepared to consider doing so if given a short list of plants to look at. Dismantling has gone steadily on and is now in progress at some 200 plants in the British Zone. In the United States Zone it is, I understand, already almost complete. At many of these plants in the British Zone dismantling has not yet gone far but another three months would make a lot of difference. On the other hand a reduction in the rate of dismantling, or a fortiori its interruption, would put the whole reparations programme in jeopardy. The Germans do not want to pay reparations, although they are at present carrying out the dismantling programme with a fairly good grace. But, once we falter, all the German politicians who have been appealing against dismantling over the heads of the Military Governors and our two Governments, will believe themselves to have beaten us; and they will be right. With the formation of a Western German Government a few months hence, German resistance to reparations can be counted upon to harden. It is therefore not the future of certain plants which is now in question, but the whole reparations policy of the three Western Powers. By far the greater part of the dismantling still to be done is in the British Zone. Please believe that the position is as I describe it. If I accept Hoffman’s proposal and there is a further three or four months’ delay, reparations are finished once and for all. We must face that fact and its implications.

4. It is not only the plants on the existing reparations list which are at issue. When we drew up the Revised Level of Industry Plan over a year ago we excluded from consideration, at Clay’s insistence, the so-called “prohibited industries”. We still have not reached final decisions about this most important group. The Military Governors are now under instructions from their Governments to study these industries and to make recommendations concerning them. No reparations list for these industries has been drawn up, and if dismantling of plants which have been scheduled for reparations for months were now to be suspended it would never be possible to carry out a reparations programme in the prohibited industries field, which is of course the most; important of all from the security point of view.

5. The issue is therefore whether to continue our existing reparations plans in substantially their present form and tempo, or to abandon them and with them our whole policy of industrial disarmament. Unless we intend to give up reparations I fear that another review of the reparations programme would be disastrous. I am quite prepared as before to consider withdrawing from reparations a small number of selected plants, for the withdrawal of which a good case can be made out; but if this is to be done I would only say that it must be done quickly.

6. Our two Governments are committed, and rightly in my view, to the industrial disarmament of Germany. The United Kingdom Government have throughout pursued a consistent and moderate policy in this respect. When the Quadripartite Level of Industry Plan was being negotiated in 1945 and 1946, we were consistently in a minority of one, advocating against the opposition of all our Allies levels two and even three times as great as those considered sufficient by our Allies. Subsequently the United States Government came round to our way of thinking, and the Revised Level of Industry Plan is very close to the original British proposals; we do not now want to rush to the other extreme.

7. Quite apart from the fact that we are deeply committed to the disarmament of Germany and that the peace of mind of Germany’s neighbours depends upon our honouring the undertaking into which we have entered, I consider that the industrial disarmament of Germany is as necessary as ever it was. It is true that the danger of a resurgent and aggressive Germany has receded; but we are now faced by the menace of Germany allied to or occupied by the Soviet Union, whose industries may be used to feed the Soviet war potential. The necessity of physically removing the element of war potential from German industry is therefore as great as ever, and indeed much more urgent than before; and the reparations programme is the only means we have of removing it.

8. There are many economic and political arguments for adhering to our reparations policy; but security is the overriding consideration. I hope you will agree with me that, as an immediate step, our two Governments should jointly seek the advice of the Combined Chiefs of Staff upon the effects in the defence field of any deviation from our present policy for the industrial disarmament of Western Germany. I think, moreover, that it might be desirable that we should find some means of associating the French Government with these discussions. I ask you to agree that we should receive, and consult together upon, the advice of the Combined Chiefs of Staff before doing or saying anything further which might cast doubt upon our determination to carry through the reparations programme.

9. There are also other considerations which I suggest we must take into account before reaching any final conclusions.

10. The effect on other members of the Inter-Allied Reparations Agency would be most serious. Some of them are participants in the European Recovery Programme; others are not. In either case the termination of the reparations programme would deal a serious blow to their recovery plans. I can speak feelingly on this point because we in the United Kingdom are counting on certain plant from Germany to help us to restore our external trade.

11. There are also other international considerations. There is the effect upon the Germans themselves of abandoning the reparations programme. We should be playing right into the hands of all their agitators. German politicians and publicists will flatter themselves that they have induced us to abandon our intentions; the whole German people will be encouraged to think that if they complain loud enough they will be able to get away with anything; and the prestige and authority of the Occupying Powers will suffer a serious decline.

12. Finally there is the effect upon Soviet Russia. If at this particular moment action is taken which they will recognise to mean the end of the reparations programme, the Russians will assume that we are deliberately taking this step in order to deprive them of any further reparations from the Western Zones of Germany. They would not only regard this as a most serious breach of Potsdam; it would also make any hope of reaching agreement much more remote.

13. I fully understand that you have to face questions and criticisms about a programme which appears at first sight to be inconsistent with European recovery and which cannot be expected to have a popular appeal. I know how difficult all this can be because we too have our critics of the reparations programme in this country who are very active and have a lot of plausible arguments. But I do not regard this as a reason for taking a step which may have incalculable consequences. I beg you that we may have an opportunity of looking at all these aspects of the problem together before irrevocable steps are taken.

1 The source text was left with the Secretary of State by the British Ambassador on the morning of September 7; see supra.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/9–1348: Telegram

[Document 478]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Baden Baden, September 13, 1948—3 p. m.

77. Would appreciate receiving confirmation my understanding is correct that proposed review by ECA of reparations program will not extend to plants released by technical mission dismantling of which has already been ordered by French authorities (see mytel 75, September 41 ).

I have been questioned on this point by French officials who tell me position, vis-à-vis Germans, of General Koenig, Governor Widmer and other French occupation authorities would become untenable if they were compelled to revoke dismantling orders already given. Regardless of what ECA’s final decision might be, revocation or suspension of orders would be regarded by the Germans as having been brought about by themselves through such actions as resignation of Württemburg and Baden cabinets and would encourage further acts of resistance to the occupying powers.2 I fully share these apprehensions although French occupation authorities deplore further delay another review of the reparations program would entail, they appreciate ECA’s reasons for wishing to do so and do not oppose review by ECA of plants not released by technical mission. (However, they do not seem to realize that ECA proposes to send another survey team to Germany for the purpose.) Furthermore, I am reasonably certain they would be willing to accept ECA recommendations to retain in Germany a substantial number of plants. Of course, the authorities in Paris, whose views would prevail over those of the occupation authorities, might be less willing to accept such recommendations.

Sent Department 77; repeated Berlin 58, Frankfurt 12, Paris 23.

Murphy

1 Not printed.

2 On August 6 the Land Government of Württemberg-Hohenzollern resigned in protest against orders given by French occupation authorities for the dismantlement of a number of industrial plants scheduled for reparations. On August 26 the Land Government of Baden also resigned in a similar protest. On August 31, following a meeting at Rüdesheim, the eleven Ministers President of the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany issued a communiqué calling for a review of the dismantling program in the light of Marshall Plan requirements to be undertaken with the assistance of German experts.

The Secretary of State to the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Bevin) 840.50 Recovery/9–748

[Document 479]

The Secretary of State to the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Bevin)1

secret Washington, September 16, 1948.

I refer to your recent note2 on the examination of plants in Germany scheduled for reparations as proposed by Mr. Hoffman, which has been given me by Sir Oliver.

I appreciate the importance of the several considerations brought out in your note. Their importance has been a strong influence in determining our policy with regard to reparations. In particular, I realize the danger that reparations might be exceedingly difficult to revive should dismantling come to a halt during the period Mr. Hoffman’s Committee is reviewing the situation. We £hall do everything we possibly can to have the new survey made as speedily as possible and to obtain the release of plants as the study progresses so that dismantling will not come completely to a halt. I entirely agree with you that no irrevocable steps should be taken regarding the further limitation of reparations without the fullest consultation between our Governments and the French.

Beyond this we cannot go at this time. Because of our very large expenditures directly for the support of Germany and for the European Recovery Program, there is a strong feeling among our people and particularly in Congress that we should not agree to the removal of plants from Germany which, if left in operation there, would reduce our total financial burden under the European Recovery Program. This feeling has been expressed in the Economic Cooperation Act.

Admittedly, much time has been taken up in the initial examination of the plants scheduled for reparations. We had hoped that this examination would yield a basis on which to proceed. If we had adopted the recommendations resulting from that examination, however, we should have had to request you to agree to a very large increase in the German level of industry. We consider that the facts supporting those recommendations do not warrant our doing so and overriding the many other considerations outlined in your note, in particular the political and security aspects. It is our intention that any request for retention of plants in Germany made of you shall be based upon adequate technical evidence that any such plants could make an important contribution to European recovery if retained in Germany.

On the other hand, members of Congressional appropriations committees have clearly indicated to Mr. Hoffman that future appropriations for European recovery will be made only after Mr. Hoffman has demonstrated that he has adequately examined the potential usefulness in Germany of plants scheduled for reparations and has requested me to obtain consent from you and the French to retain in Germany such of those plants as can better contribute to the European Recovery Program if left in Germany. This he is required to do by Section 115 (f) of the Act which is quoted as follows: “The Administrator will request the Secretary of State to obtain the agreement of those countries concerned that such capital equipment as is scheduled for removal as reparations from the three western zones of Germany be retained in Germany if such retention will most effectively serve the purposes of the European Recovery Program.”

I am entirely in agreement with Mr. Hoffman as to the necessity for his examination of the plants. We agree further that the points emphasized in your note make it essential that the examination be completed with the utmost speed. Mr. Hoffman has indicated that to this end he has already revised his plans to take maximum advantage of the facilities and data available to the zonal authorities.

In view of the foregoing 1 strongly urge that you accept as of paramount importance the request which this Government has made to permit this further reexamination of the plants in the British Zone, approximately 176, which have not yet been released from consideration. In order that these plants may not be dissipated, I also request that dismantling, allocation and shipment of these plants be suspended temporarily during the period of the examination. A list of the affected plants is being furnished to the British Embassy here.

I suggest the possibility that dismantling of those plants not affected by the review of the ECA Committee be so scheduled as to obtain maximum continuity of dismantling operations during the period of the examination.

In view of our recognition of the security problems which are inherent in a halt in dismantling, it is my judgment that the Combined Chiefs could not add anything now to evaluation of this aspect of the matter.

The second matter in which I ask your cooperation is in connection with the work required for the reexamination. While many of the data already assembled here can be of use in the further examination proposed by Mr. Hoffman, he considers it imperative, in discharging his responsibility to Congress, to obtain additional information. It is earnestly hoped that its collection and evaluation will not require more than ninety days, provided they can be started as soon as possible. To the extent that your representatives in the British Zone in Germany can make available their assistance, the time required for the reexamination can be very materially shortened.

1 Transmitted to the British Ambassador on September 16 under cover of a brief letter signed by the Secretary. The source text is unsigned.

2  Ante, p. 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris 740.00119 EW/9–2448: Telegram

[Document 480]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris 1

secret Washington, September 24, 1948—6 p. m.

Telmar 10. For the Secretary from Saltzman. Hoffman committee of industrialists who are to re-examine dismantling in connection recovery program has decided not to undertake assignment unless and until British and French have agreed to suspend temporarily any further dismantling, allocation or shipment respecting plants still under consideration numbering presently approximately 179 in British Zone and 90 in French Zone. Such suspension already requested by us in notes to Bevin and French Ambassador Washington, which requested also cooperation with activities in Germany of Hoffman committee representatives.

Committee considers basic steel industry, largely concentrated British Zone, fundamental to entire study and that dismantling in steel industry tantamount in most plants to destruction, eliminating possibility reconstruction of the plants later without large cost in manpower and materials. Unofficial reports indicate British have stepped up dismantling steel plants.

Anticipate British objection that, since dismantling substantially complete U.S. Zone, it is inconsistent for us request different treatment British Zone. U.S. Zone has small basic steel capacity.

Hoffman states if British refuse suspend dismantling, he will probably have to withdraw his field investigation group, soon to go to Germany, and make public announcement of his reason for doing so. Hoffman suggests and I concur that you should point out to Bevin that continuation of dismantling plants under ECA review can have most serious consequences with Congress and U.S. public. Report that dismantling stepped up already in U.S. press and Hoffman believes British exposing themselves to severe criticism and may do great damage to European recovery program.

Request that if practical you obtain definite answers from Bevin and Schuman as to suspension and cooperation. [Saltzman.]

Lovett

1 Secretary Marshall was in Paris as the head of the United States Delegation to the Third Regular Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations; which opened on September 21.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/9–2848

[Document 481]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

secret [Paris,] September 28, 1948.

Participants: Secretary Marshall

Mr. John Foster Dulles

Rt. Hon. Ernest Bevin 1

Mr. Hector McNeil

Mr. Bevin brought up the question of reparations, stating his extreme embarrassment in dealing with his own people, his Cabinet, who had been reluctant to submit to the first re-examination, and now would be extremely difficult to handle; but he was particularly concerned over the effect on the French, the Belgians and the others who felt very deeply in this matter, and also who felt that the American reactions were based on very hasty opinions of a problem that had been carefully analyzed.

I explained the situation elaborating on my written note to him on the subject,2 in answer of his to me, and emphasized the great importance of quick action and the relationship of this to the Appropriations Committee hearings on the European recovery program in January and February. I made the point that while these plants were in the British Zone and the American, it was not the location of the plant but its general relationship to European recovery that was the important factor. On this point, Bevin spoke of the consideration of location from the viewpoint of exposure to Russian conquest. He thought it was better to have some plants more distant from such an advance than where now located, and spoke of particular transfer to a certain section in England. I failed to make the point that as to distance there was little difference in hazard between where the plants now stood in many instances and a short distance further west, say in France or Belgium. Possibly, it would not have been advisable to have mentioned it even if I had thought of it. I insisted that the important thing was to act quickly before this matter got stirred up in the public print along the line of those critical of the British and always suspicious of their motives. Bevin said he understood and would like to have a meeting with me and Mr. Schuman in order to convince Schuman. I told him that the committee appointed by Hoffman was entirely nonpolitical and were very able people and I was quite certain that if a careful presentation were made by a representative of the French, the Benelux countries and the British, they would consider that along with the technical considerations which they would normally have most in mind. He said they would be careful to do that.

G. C. M[arshall ]

1 Foreign Secretary Bevin was in Paris as the head of the United Kingdom Delegation to the United Nations General Assembly.

2 See p. 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris 740.00119 EW/9–2848: Telegram

[Document 482]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

secret   us urgent Washington, September 29, 1948—6 p. m.

Telmar 22. For the Secretary from Saltzman. Re Martels 14 and 161 info recd from Brit Emb Sep 13 reveals that of 185 plants in Brit Zone (including 179 referred to Telmar 102 ) 28 plants completely dismantled; 8 more than 70 percent dismantled; 128 less than 70 percent dismantled; and 21 dismantling not begun. No allocation (and therefore no shipment) of the 179 plants to IARA has occurred and none can be allocated except by joint action 3 Western military governors under terms London Agreement.

Info re dismantling 90 plants French Zone not available here. However, understood from various reports that French have generally withheld dismantling plants until allocated by IARA. Believe this practice still in effect. Situation respecting allocation and shipment these plants similar Brit.

Hoffman Committee of Industrialists (consisting Presidents General Motors, International Harvester, Westinghouse, M. A. Hanna Co., Cincinnati Milling Machine) have in person reviewed carefully steps involved in making reexamination plants Brit and French Zones. They stress that their reexamination pointless if while in progress, plants under review are dissipated by shipment or dismantling. They consider this particularly applicable dismantling basic steel plants (and to some extent basic chemical plants) which they believe equivalent to destruction. For practical purposes their concern involves only dismantling of the 179 Brit plants and 90 French plants, since allocation and therefore shipment cannot take place under London Agreement without Clay’s concurrence. Their concern has wider application, however, to the 15 plants (10 unallocated and 5 allocated to IARA) referred to below on which request was made yesterday to Brit Emb for suspension further allocation, dismantling and shipment.

Comm states it will not carry out Hoffman’s proposed examination unless dismantling and shipment cease with respect to all plants under examination. Comm not particularly concerned with suspension allocation since they consider suspension dismantling and shipment will effectively halt dissipation plants under review. Dept however believes suspension allocation also important in view rights other nations established through allocation procedure.

Bevin’s agreement to general proposition, but not including suspension dismantling, would not satisfy Hoffman or Comm, since 75 percent plants Brit Zone now undergoing dismantling. Present situation contrasts sharply with April 1, 1948 (beginning of U.S. Technical Mission review) when dismantling had started in only 11 of 179 plants. Hoffman and Comm aware this and although no agreement by Brit not to dismantle plants under review, regards their departure from apparent previous practice generally to withhold dismantling until allocation as means to vitiate examination while it is in progress.

In view fact that Hoffman and his Comm feel that no effective examination as required by Section 115 (f) Economic Cooperation Act can be made if dismantling and shipment plants under review are not suspended during period such examination, Dept believes that cooperation Brit and French this respect must be obtained. It is felt that if it becomes known that Hoffman or his Comm believe they are prevented from making effective examination because unwillingness Brit or French to suspend action during period review, there would be risk that unfavorable public and Congressional reaction against Brit and French would have adverse effect on recovery program as a whole.

For your info at Hoffman’s request, Dept yesterday asked Brit Emb suspend further action on 15 plants in Brit Zone in addition to 179 plants mentioned telmar 10. These plants were previously released by U.S. Technical Mission and Brit Gov was notified last June that U.S. had no objection their allocation. 10 of them have not been allocated to IARA. In other 5 cases, IARA has solicited bids with due dates in near future but no official sub-allocation to individual recipient country has taken place to date. These 5 plants were included in report of a special consultant as being important to Ruhr coal mining industry and Brit Emb has been asked either to request IARA defer sub-allocation these plants until ECA examination completed or agree our doing so with Brit support. We have informed Brit we would not take this latter action without their support.

In addition, Hoffman has requested us obtain suspension further action on 5 plants in Brit Zone and one plant in French Zone which have been allocated to IARA (and in 2 Brit instances sub-allocated by IARA to recipient countries). He has been informed that in these cases he has not given us adequate data on which to base reasonable request to Brit or French that the international allocating machinery be suspended. [Saltzman.]

Lovett

1 Both dated September 28, from Paris, neither printed; they requested information regarding dismantling, allocation and shipment of plants for reparations (740.00119 EW/9–2848).

2  Ante, p. 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480].

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Bevin) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/10–148

[Document 483]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Bevin) to the Secretary of State 1

Paris, 1st October, 1948.

Dear Mr. Marshall : I think it might be useful if, following our conversation of September 28th,2 I were to set down some suggestions as to how we might proceed in the matter of reparations from Germany.

2. I fully understand the obligation which Section 115F of the Economic Co-operation Act places upon Mr. Hoffman and yourself, and I am anxious to give you every possible assistance in hastening a solution of this problem. At the same time, you will understand the great importance which I attach to avoiding any step which has a perceptible effect on the rate of dismantling in Germany and which consequently would in my view endanger the whole reparations programme.

3. As regards dismantling, I am advised that the present position is as follows. There are 176 plants in the British Zone which have not yet been released from consideration by the United States Government. Of these, 37 have been completely dismantled. The total tonnage of these plants is, however, only about 13,000 tons, 74 plants are in the process of being dismantled. I consider that if dismantling were interrupted on these plants it might well be impossible ever to resume and that the consequences would not be confined to the particular plants in question. There remain 64 plants at which dismantling has not yet started, but it is due to begin at a number of these within the next few weeks.

4. The arrangements which I would propose for your consideration are as follows:— (i) In connexion with the re-examination of the information about unreleased plants in the British Zone which Mr. Hoffman finds it necessary to undertake in order to discharge his responsibilities to Congress, I shall be glad to arrange for any questionnaires to be completed by United Kingdom representatives in the bizone. I believe that it would also be useful to have an early discussion with those specially concerned on the United States side either in London or Paris with a view to reaching agreement as soon as possible on which plants, if any, should be retained in Germany in the interest of the European Recovery Programme. The sooner we can agree on a precise policy in this respect, the sooner will the present uncertainty, which I regard as a serious obstacle to the execution of the reparations programme, be removed.

(ii) I am ready to arrange that no new dismantling shall begin at any of the 64 plants mentioned above where it has not yet started until December 15th. I would hope that the examination will have been completed and inter-Governmental agreement reached by that date. I am afraid that I cannot offer to delay any new dismantling beyond that date because to do so would, I believe, have serious effects on the reparations programme.

(iii) Equally, I am afraid that I cannot offer to stop or to interrupt dismantling at any of the plants where it has already begun. If, however, agreed decisions about retention can be taken quickly, I do not exclude the possibility that certain of these plants should be retained provided dismantling has not gone too far at the time when the decision is taken.

(iv) I would ask that a further substantial list of plants be released for allocation very soon, including those already dismantled or in which dismantling has reached an advanced stage and which are not considered of the highest priority from an E.R.P. point of view. I believe that it is essential to declare a further list of plants available for allocation in the near future, both in order to satisfy our friends in the Inter-Allied Reparations Agency, and in order to make it clear to the Germans that our reparations policy is being substantially maintained.

(v) I would ask that no investigation by United States experts should be conducted in the British Zone until such a declaration of further plants for allocation has been made.

(vi) With the same thoughts in mind I would urge that a public statement in terms to be agreed between us should be made as soon as possible, explaining the limited scope and temporary character of the examination proposed. This I believe necessary in order to avoid misunderstanding in Germany, which is already having its effect on the execution of the dismantling programme in the British Zone.

5. I earnestly hope that arrangements on the above lines will be acceptable to your Government. In the view of my Government they offer a practicable means of reconciling your Government under the E.C.A. with the need for a rapid completion of the reparations programme.

Yours sincerely,

Ernest Bevin

1 The text of this message was also transmitted in telegram 4434, October 8, from London, not printed (740.00119 EW/10–848). Telegram Martel 43, October 8, not printed, reported that this letter had been delivered at the American Embassy in Paris on October 2 but had inadvertently been misplaced and did not reach Secretary Marshall until October 8. (740.00119 EW/10–848)

2 See Secretary Marshall’s memorandum of conversation, p. 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481].

Editorial Note [Document 484]

Editorial Note

In an undated letter handed to Secretary of State Marshall in Paris on October 6, not printed, Foreign Minister Schuman reviewed French arguments against the American proposal to suspend the dismantling of factories in Germany pending the results of the Humphrey Committee inquiry. Schuman emphasized that an extended delay of dismantling could not be reconciled with current French policy toward Germany and risked bringing to an end the inter-allied policy on reparations (740.00119 EW/10–648). There is no indication in the files of the Department of State that Secretary Marshall replied to the letter or discussed with Schuman any of the issues raised therein. During a brief visit to Paris on October 12, Economic Cooperation Administrator Hoffman called on Schuman. No record of the meeting has been found, but evidence in the files of the Department of State indicates that Hoffman urged a suspension of dismantling and a delay of French requests for new allocations from the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency until the Humphrey Committee had completed its review.

The Administrator of the Economic Cooperation Administration (Hoffman) to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/10–1148

[Document 485]

The Administrator of the Economic Cooperation Administration (Hoffman) to the Acting Secretary of State 1

Washington, October 11, 1948.

My Dear Mr. Lovett : I have just received the cable from London which gives the text of a letter dated October first from Mr. Bevin to the Secretary of State in which he makes certain observations and proposals concerning reparations.2 Needless to say I am profoundly disturbed at what Mr. Bevin says in this letter. Despite his statement that he fully understands the obligation which Section 115 (f) of the Economic Cooperation Act places upon me, it is clear that he has failed to grasp the extent and nature of that obligation and the intent and purpose which Congress had in passing that section of the law. Unless this misconception on the part of Mr. Bevin can be corrected and unless the British can be persuaded to accede to our going forward with the examination which I have proposed that the ECA Industrial Advisory Committee make, we shall be faced with a most serious threat to continuation of the European Recovery Program. The American public and the Congress would never understand or accept a situation in which the British Government had acted to prevent our making a review of the reparations program as stipulated in the Act.

I am particularly concerned with Mr. Bevin’s flat statement that he “cannot offer to stop or to interrupt dismantling at any of the plants where it has already begun”. Immediate stoppage of dismantling of the plants on our list is absolutely essential. Otherwise the ECA Industrial Advisory Committee will be denied an opportunity to perform the task for which it was appointed. Continuing dismantling would preclude my carrying out of my responsibilities under Section 115 (f) of the Act. For this reason we must move immediately to bring before Mr. Bevin and the British Government the seriousness of the situation, to give him a full understanding of the threat to the European Recovery Program inherent in his proposals and thus to clear the way for an adequate examination and determination of which German plants should be retained in Germany in the interest of the recovery of Western Europe.

I consider the matter so urgent that I am leaving today for Paris where I hope Secretary Marshall will be able to join me in a meeting with Mr. Bevin to see whether we cannot reach a prompt and satisfactory settlement of this question.

I am not discussing in this letter any of the other serious questions which Mr. Bevin’s letter raises such as, for example, his point 4 which proposes the release very soon (presumably before we have had an opportunity to make our examination) of a further substantial list of plants for allocation. This and other proposals contained in his letter arise out of the fundamental fact of his misconception of the purposes of the Congress and of my responsibilities and can all be ironed out if only we can succeed in correcting that basic misconception.

Sincerely yours,

Paul Hoffman

1 In a reply dated October 13, not printed, Acting Secretary Lovett wrote in part as follows: “The Department of State fully shares your concern and it was for this reason that it was suggested that you join General Marshall on his flight back to Paris so that you would have an opportunity to discuss the matter in person with Mr. Bevin. We very much hope that in the course of your personal discussions, which we are informed Ambassador Douglas has made arrangements for, it will be possible to reach a satisfactory settlement of this question.” (740.00119 EW/10–1148)

Secretary Marshall had flown from Paris to Washington on October 9 in order to confer with President Truman, and he returned to Paris on the evening of October 10.

2 For the Bevin letter referred to here, see p. 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483].

Memorandum of Conversation, by James P. Hendrick, Special Assistant, Office of the Deputy Administrator, Economic Cooperation Administration CFM Flies: Lot M–88: Box 2234: File–Reparation Plant Review

[Document 486]

Memorandum of Conversation, by James P. Hendrick, Special Assistant, Office of the Deputy Administrator, Economic Cooperation Administration 1

secret [Washington ?, undated.]

Present: Mr. Bevin

Lord Henderson

Mr. Makins

Mr. Stevens

Mr. Hoffman

Ambassador Douglas

Mr. Harriman

Mr. Hendrick

Subject: German Reparations

Ambassador Douglas explained in some detail the situation which had arisen in respect to Section 115(f) of the Foreign Assistance Act. He pointed out that, according to the understanding of the U.S., agreement had been reached that there would be no dismantling of plants which were on the Collisson Technical Mission List. He cited the letter from Secretary Marshall to Senator Vandenberg dated June 7, 19482 as indicating the agreement reached and pointed out that it was only fair to assume that if plants were to be considered for a possible retention in Germany that they would not be dismantled in the manner British plants are now being dismantled. The news that dismantling is proceeding at a rapid rate in the British Zone did not reach the U.S. until the end of August 1948 when Mr. George Wolf reported that dismantling was going on. This was later confirmed by other sources and led to a formal request of ECA, which was, thereafter, made by the State Department to the British to stop dismantling on the Cabinet Technical Mission retention list plants and a few others in which Congress was interested.

The fact that dismantling is going on is not generally known in the United States. The Chicago Tribune had a very bitter article on it but this was not picked up by the other papers.

The real danger, Ambassador Douglas said, lay in the fact that Congress was extremely exercised over the subject. A report had been prepared by Mr. Vorys, Chairman of a Sub-Committee of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, which was a blistering denunciation of the British attitude in this matter. Mr. Hoffman explained that the Staff of the Foreign Affairs Committee sought to circulate this report in such a way that it would undoubtedly have been made public. Mr. Hoffman had seen Congressman Eaton, Chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, and it was agreed that the report should be kept “under wraps” for the present. Mr. Hoffman said that he did not mind if the report was made public after agreement with the British had been reached (although, even then he would prefer not to see it made public) but that if it was made public before agreement with the British had been reached, a real international situation would be created. Both Ambassador Douglas and Mr. Hoffman stressed the fact that feeling in Congress had run very high and that if an agreement could not be reached with the British, the entire ECA appropriation would be placed in jeopardy. They made it clear they did not wish to appear to be pointing a pistol at Mr. Bevin’s head; they were interested in one thing only and that was European recovery which was precisely the same thing Mr. Bevin was interested in. It was essential that Mr. Bevin give the most serious consideration to the problem and if dismantling could not be stopped, Mr. Hoffman and Ambassador Douglas could not answer for the consequences.

These remarks were supported by Mr. Harriman.

Mr. Bevin started by remarking almost in an aside that it would be quite impossible to stop dismantling. He said that the U.K. had been the victim of shuffling of policy in the United States. It was important that Congress should know the history of the reparations question for without it we don’t get the correct perspective.

U.K., Mr. Bevin said, was at the start under tremendous pressure to pastoralize Germany. Mr. Bevin had to resist this. The pressure from Ambassador Winant had been very great. Mr. Bevin had never wavered from the 10.7 million ton steel production figure for Germany which had been based on the 1936 level of industry in Germany, which, in turn, was prior to Germany’s abnormal development. Mr. Bevin did not want to take the most efficient plants away from Germany by way of reparations but was forced into this position by the United States and France. As a result, the German steel industry did not get going until this year—production is now at 7 million tons according to figures he received yesterday.

Mr. Bevin felt that the United States action in stopping delivery of the reparations to the USSR was a mistake but he could not help that.

At Yalta there was a discussion of sending capital goods out of Germany and payment of $10 billion cash.3 Mr. Bevin had told Mr. Churchill this must not be done. The United States did not make the same reservation. The U.K. was striving to avoid repetition of World War I problems.

At Potsdam Mr. Bevin had been surprised at the U.S. proposal that capital goods should be shipped out of Germany as reparations.4 This had been largely on advice of Mr. Pauley. Mr. Bevin, at length, agreed to this proposal but he was not happy about it.

The situation became acute in Moscow when there was discussion of war plants.5 In an effort to get a settlement, Mr. Bevin proposed then that the plants be cleared out of Germany by June 1948, taking into account the 10.7 steel level.

When E.R.P. was first discussed, Mr. Bevin was under the impression that Congress was very concerned over the reparations question but when Mr. Douglas conferred with him at the time of the passage of the Foreign Assistance Act he talked about the eventual retention of 25–30 plants in Germany under Section 115(f) of the Foreign Assistance Act. Mr. Bevin had agreed to this but he was still waiting for the list of plants.

Now, Mr. Bevin said, he received the Wolf report.6 He felt that what Mr. Wolf said about tube mill plants was correct and had asked that an examination be made of these plants. Mr. Bevin was apparently under the impression that dismantling had been stopped on these plants but he was advised by his assistants that this was not the case.

Mr. Bevin complained that the U.S. had proceeded on the line of what it can release, not on the line of what it can retain. This leaves the U.K. Cabinet in doubt. The Cabinet was led to believe by the State Department that it would get a list of plants in about a month. This was arranged in March. Later on Mr. Douglas told Mr. Bevin the list would not be 25–30; it would be about 70. But Mr. Bevin is still awaiting the list.

Mr. Bevin said he never agreed to stop dismantling. He asked whether the fact that the U.S. Congress was raising new points justified our throwing out agreements. Is the Congressional Committee to be the sole arbiter of what happens in Germany? Mr. Bevin stated he had great difficulty with his Administration. He would like to get a postive line—something he can do. It is well known that there is a number of plants the U.S. does not want to retain in Germany. Mr. Bevin felt he should have a list of those plants. Once dismantling is stopped, Mr. Bevin said, he is done. There is a growing demand in Parliament to stop dismantling and join with the USSR and get 10% cash from Germany out of current production. He felt that a cessation of dismantling was completely out of the question.

Mr. Hoffman pointed out that he had been asked by the Cabinet Technical Mission to retain 323 plants and by Congress to retain an additional 50. He could very easily have asked State Department to retain all 373. This would have been made public and if State Department had not succeeded in securing the retention of all or most of these plants a very difficult situation would have been created. What Mr. Hoffman did instead was to get a Committee appointed—the Humphrey Committee—with the view of cutting the list down to proportions. What Mr. Hoffman needs now, he said, is some help. He explained the proposed procedure of data sheets to be filled out and spot checks by engineers with a report to the Humphrey Committee.

Mr. Bevin stated that from the strategic point of view there was a great danger in leaving plants in Germany which the USSR could “take in 5 minutes.” He concluded “it is a squalling kid you have left in my lap. It is a very difficult political situation:”

Mr. Harriman pointed out if Mr. Bevin’s letter of October 17 were made public it would be misunderstood in the United States. It is merely a question of mutual cooperation and can be put to the British and IARA in that form.

Mr. Bevin complained that he had never been invited to look into this problem; that now the U.S. has sent a Committee and then sends its Ambassador to make representations. He indicated he might possibly slow down the dismantling and said he would send for General Robertson. He felt that it might be advisable for Mr. Humphrey to come over and meet General Robertson.

Mr. Bevin emphasized that he wished, under no circumstances, to announce that dismantling had stopped. He has a Parliament which he must consider. This is a very awkward political position which he is not prepared to face. At this point Ambassador Douglas suggested that it might be advisable for the Americans to confer with Lord Henderson, Mr. Makins and Mr. Stevens and endeavor to reach an agreement which could be presented to Mr. Bevin that afternoon.

James P. Hendrick

1 This conversation took place on October 13, 11 a. m. in Foreign Secretary Bevin’s office in London. E.C.A. Administrator Hoffman left Washington on October 11 for a trip to Europe to hold talks with Bevin. This memorandum was apparently prepared following Hoffman’s return to Washington.

2  Ante, p. 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455].

3 For documentation on the conference of the heads of government of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union at Yalta, February 2–10, 1945, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, 1945.

4 For documentation on the conference of the heads of government of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union at Berlin (Potsdam), July 12–August 2, 1945, see Foreign Relations, The Conference at Berlin (The Potsdam Conference) 1945, two volumes.

5 The reference here is presumably to the meetings of the Allied Commission on Reparations in Moscow in 1945; for documentation on this Commission and related matters, see Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. iii, pp. 1169 ff.

6 Regarding the report of the Wolf Mission of May–June 1948, see footnote 6 to telegram 3504, September 3, to London, p. 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 475].

7  Ante, p. 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483].

Memorandum of Conversation, by James P. Hendrick, Special Assistant, Office of the Deputy Administrator, Economic Cooperation Administration CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 2234: File–Reparation Plant Review

[Document 487]

Memorandum of Conversation, by James P. Hendrick, Special Assistant, Office of the Deputy Administrator, Economic Cooperation Administration 1

secret [Washington,] October 16, 1948.

Present: Lord Henderson

Mr. Makins

Mr. Stevens

Mr. Hoffman

Ambassador Douglas

Mr. Harriman

Mr. Hendrick

Subject: German Reparations

The problems discussed at the morning meeting with Mr. Bevin 2 were brought under scrutiny.

The suggestion was made that the British might continue dismantling but switch to the “American type” of dismantling. This would involve unbolting and disconnecting power but would not involve removal of equipment, tearing down structures or packing. It was pointed out that the U.S. type of dismantling had been completed in practically all plants in the U.S. Zone but that they were in such condition that it should be easily possible to put them back into operation within a short period of time with little expenditure of labor. Mr. Stevens expressed some surprise at learning of the U.S. type of dismantling. He had not heard of this before nor had the other two British gentlemen present.

Mr. Stevens stated that there was a large labor force now assembled to work on dismantling. There were some 15 or 20 thousand engaged in this work. It would be impossible to let them go and thereafter assemble them. Ambassador Douglas protested that to say this would mean that we had lost control of Germany and he did not feel that we had come to that point yet. Mr. Hoffman suggested that in the early days of the WPA it had been found possible to get a large number of laborers to do a surprisingly small amount of work and Mr. Stevens picked up this suggestion agreeing that it might be favorable to indulge in what he called boon doggling. Mr. Hoffman stressed the fact that the American public simply would be unable to understand the British refusal to stop dismantling or at least change to American type of dismantling. There had been reports that the British had speeded up dismantling in order to improve their competitive position in the steel industry. He also pointed out that until early July the British had consistently followed the system of doing no dismantling until a plant was suballocated. Mr. Stevens said that the reason the British had started dismantling in July was merely that this was the time the currency change was put through and that after this it was much easier to secure labor.

Mr. Stevens said that pursuant to an agreement with General Clay some U.K. steel experts were now in Germany looking over the steel problem. They were concerned only incidentally with reparations. Their main problem was the question of the “product mix” which Mr. Wolf had suggested should be changed.

Again returning to the labor question Mr. Hoffman suggested that it might be possible to transfer the laborers now working on dismantling to the plants which are on the release list. Mr. Stevens said this would be impossible in many cases because 50 plants on the release list are remaining in production until they terminate their contracts.

At this point, Mr. Hendrick produced a draft statement of what might be agreed to regarding cooperation with the Humphrey Committee and change to American type of dismantling. This was revised by Mr. Hoffman and read to the group. Mr. Douglas suggested a change in wording. It was then agreed that the draft, as amended, should be gone over by Mr. Stevens and Mr. Hendrick and a redraft presented to the subsequent meeting with Mr. Bevin.3

James P. Hendrick

1 This conversation took place on October 13 at Ambassador Douglas’ home in London.

2 See supra.

3 For the final version of the statement tinder reference here, see telegram 748, October 13, from London to Paris, infra.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State, at Paris 740.00119 EW/10–1348: Telegram

[Document 488]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State, at Paris

top secret   us urgent London, October 13, 1948—10 p. m.

748. Hoffman, Harriman and I had long meeting with Bevin and some of his advisers this morning on reparations.1 Spent most of the remainder of day with the advisers,2 and subsequently saw Bevin late this afternoon. As a result, the following paper was prepared: “The reparations and dismantling programme of the British Zone has hitherto been operated on a basis of agreement in connection with the level of industry and in cooperation with the other governments concerned. The US Government have requested a reconsideration of this programme in the light of the European recovery programme and have accordingly appointed a committee, called the Humphrey Committee, to investigate certain plants in the three zones, to determine whether or not they would be better operated in Germany in connection with the recovery programme or should be dismantled and removed elsewhere. Accordingly they have requested that the British Government should, so far as their zone is concerned, cooperate fully with the Humphrey Committee, with a view to facilitating its work of investigation both in the British Zone and elsewhere into the possibility of retaining in Germany, in the interests of ERP, plants at present scheduled for reparations. The committee will be asked to maintain close contact with British representatives as its work progresses.

They have further requested that continued dismantling in the British Zone will be of such a character as will not prevent the eventual retention in Germany in the interests of ERP of any plante under review by the Humphrey Committee excluding those already allocated by IARA.

Mr. Hoffman will urge the Humphrey Committee to give priority in their examination to the plants on which dismantling has already started.

Mr. Hoffman will further urge the Humphrey Committee to give early attention to preparing a list of plante in which they have no further interest in order that such plants can be made available to IARA for allocation.

Before any examination of plants is conducted in the British Zone a press statement will be issued in agreed terms explaining the nature of the investigation, emphasizing its limits, scope and duration and the fact that, subject to its findings, the reparations programme is unaffected and will be brought to as speedy a conclusion as possible.

The Foreign Secretary undertook to examine the technical implications of these proposals, to submit them to the Cabinet, to consult with the French Government and to notify the US Government of his position at an early date.”3

Hoffman accepted the above paper on behalf of ECA … I made it clear, however, for the record, that the above paper represented a cooperative effort to arrive at a solution of the problems which confronted both governments, and did not reflect Hoffman’s original request.

British Cabinet will meet on Friday when Bevin will present the paper quoted above. After it has been approved, as seems most likely, a formal communication will be addressed to me outlining the agreement reached probably on Friday.4

Sent Paris (for the Secretary and Harriman) as 748, repeated Department as 4496.

Douglas

1 Regarding the meeting under reference here, see the memorandum of conversation by Hendrick, p. 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486].

2 See Hendrick’s memorandum of conversation, supra.

3 The text of the paper quoted here was subsequently transmitted to the Department of State as a memorandum from the British Embassy, dated October 14, 1948, not printed (740.00119 EW/10–1448).

4 See Foreign Secretary Bevin’s letter of October 16 to Ambassador Douglas, p. 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491].

The President of the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency (Rueff) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/10–1548

[Document 489]

The President of the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency (Rueff) to the Secretary of State 1

[Brussels,] 14 October, 1948.

Sir: As President of the Inter Allied Separation Agency I have been charged by its Assembly to ask you to be good enough to bring to the notice of the United States Government certain matters on which this Agency urgently requests information.

On 5 July, 1948, the Agency was notified by the United States Zone Commander, in accordance with normal procedure, that certain plants in the United States Zone of Germany were available for allocation as Reparation to Member Governments of this Agency. At the same time the United States Zone Commander stated that the equipment in these plants had been dismantled and that shipment could be started immediately. He requested the Agency to allocate these plants at the earliest possible date. Accordingly, the Assembly of this Agency, by virtue of its powers under the Paris Agreement on Reparation of January, 1946 proceeded forthwith to allocate these plants among its Member Governments.

Subsequently, several Governments, Members of the Agency, to whom certain of these plants had been finally allocated, were informed by the United States Zone Commander that deliveries were suspended. Representatives of these Governments informed the Secretary General of this Agency of this state of affairs, and requested him to enquire into the apparent contradiction between the United States Zone Commander’s letter of 5 July, 1948,2 and the information they had now received. The Secretary General sent a letter to the United States Zone Commander on 23 September, 1948,2 asking him whether it was correct that delivery of these plants had been suspended, and if so, the reason for this decision.

A reply was received in writing, stating that the delivery of the equipment in these particular plants was being held in abeyance pending completion of a study being made by the Economic Cooperation Administration for the possible need of the retention of these plants in Germany.

This reply has caused Member Governments of this Agency surprise and grave concern, since it would seem to suggest that their rights, deriving from the Paris Agreement on Reparation of January, 1946, of which the United States Government is a Signatory, may be overridden in connection with a study by a body foreign to this Agency, and which would appear to have no functions nor authority in relation to the majority of the Signatories of the Paris Agreement.

I wish to emphasize that the allocation of a reparation item to a Member Government of this Agency does not arise from a bilateral agreement arrived at by one of the Occupying Powers and the Government concerned. It is the result of a decision of the Assembly of this Agency, after taking into consideration the rights and interests of the nineteen Governments represented. It would be difficult to conceive that this decision could be set aside by a unilateral renunciation on the part of a recipient Government, for such a renunciation could not fail to affect the rights and interests of all the other Governments, signatories to the Paris Agreement on Separation.

It follows that the effect of withdrawals, whether temporary or permanent, is gravely prejudicial not only to the plans for economic reconstruction put in hand by Member Governments of this Agency, but also to the operations of the Inter Allied Reparation Agency as a whole, which is thereby seriously impeded in carrying out its functions under the Paris Agreement on Reparation. The Agency understands that further withdrawals are contemplated for the same reason as has been given by the United States Zone Commander. If this be so, the situation will deteriorate still further.

In view of the foregoing, I am sure you will understand why I have been charged by the Assembly of this Agency to request you to be good enough to inform this Agency at your earliest convenience of the United States Government’s position in this matter.

I have [etc.]

Jacques Rueff

1 Transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to despatch 420; October 15, from the United States Delegation to the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency at Brussels, not printed.

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

Editorial Note [Document 490]

Editorial Note

On October 15, following his return to Washington from his brief visit to Europe, E.C.A. Administrator Hoffman held a press conference at which he made a statement regarding the reparations problem. Hoffman announced that in order to meet the responsibilities imposed upon him in Section 115(f) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1948, he appointed a committee headed by George M. Humphrey to study the reparations and dismantlement problem. Hoffman stated that both Foreign Secretary Bevin and Foreign Minister Schuman had promised to give the fullest cooperation to the Humphrey Committee and had under consideration a proposal that, pending determination by the Humphrey Committee of the list of plants recommended for retention in Germany, dismantling in the British and French zones of occupation would be of such a character that it would not prevent the eventual retention in Germany of such plants. The text of Hoffman’s statement and the transcript of his press conference were transmitted in telegram Torep 1495, October 15, to Paris, not printed (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 2234, File–Reparation Plant Review).

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Bevin) to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) London Embassy Files: 1948: File–850 Reparations

[Document 491]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Bevin) to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas)1

confidential London, 16 October, 1948.

Dear Lew : In the course of our discussions on 13th October,2 Mr. Hoffman asked for reconsideration in the light of the European Recovery Programme of the reparations and dismantling programme of the British Zone which has hitherto operated on a basis of agreement in connection with the level of industry, and in co-operation with the other Governments concerned. He made certain specific requests regarding co-operation with the Humphrey Committee which he has appointed and dismantling in the British Zone. I undertook to examine the technical implications of the proposals we discussed, to submit them to the Cabinet, to consult with the French Government and to notify the U.S. Government of the position of His Majesty’s Government at an early date.

I am now writing to you as arranged, after having obtained the views of my colleagues, after consultation with the French Government, and after a preliminary technical examination of the dismantling problem. Mr. Hoffman requested that His Majesty’s Government should so far as the British Zone is concerned cooperate fully with the Humphrey Committee with a view to facilitating its work of investigation both in the British Zone and elsewhere into the possibility of retaining in Germany in the interests of E.R.P. plants at; present scheduled for reparations. I confirm that His Majesty’s Government is ready to cooperate fully with this investigation and I take this opportunity of re-affirming my anxiety that it should be completed at the earliest possible date. I understand that the Committee will be asked to maintain close contact with British representatives as its work progresses. Such contact will be warmly welcomed by His Majesty’s Government and every effort will be made to ensure that cooperation and contact will be as effective as possible.

Mr. Hoffman further requested that continued dismantling in the British Zone should be of such a character as will not prevent the eventual retention in Germany in the interests of E.R.P. of any plants under review by the Humphrey Committee excluding those already allocated by I.A.R.A. I am prepared to go as far as I possibly can to meet this request. On the basis of the technical examination which has already been conducted I am able to give an assurance that there will be no dismantling of items of equipment in unreleased plant which cannot be re-erected. In particular no blast furnaces under examination by the Humphrey Committee will be dismantled. I am also prepared to give an assurance that priority as regards the use of labour will be given to the dismantling of released plants wherever this can be done. I would add that our experts would be glad to examine with U.S. experts the practice of dismantling in the U.S. Zone with a view to seeing whether there are any methods which could be usefully adopted in the British Zone in order to give further effect to the objectives we both have in view. I also confirm the undertaking given in the letter which I sent to Mr. Marshall on 1st October that no new dismantling shall begin at any of the plants under examination by the Humphrey Committee where it has not yet started until December 15th, by which date I hope that the examination will have been completed.

I must, however, enter one caveat in connexion with the plants, which according to Mr. Hoffman numbered 22, which were released for allocation last June, but which the Humphrey Committee, on instructions from Congress, has been asked to re-examine. There is some doubt on the part of the experts about the exact identity of these plants, but the following is based on the assumption that they are identical with 20 plants in this category of which the State Department gave particulars to the British Embassy in Washington on 30th September. Of these 20 plants, 10 have been divided east and I am ready to treat these as regards dismantling in the same manner as plants which were not released in June. Five have already been sub-allocated by I.A.R.A. and I understand that these are not covered by Mr. Hoffman’s request. There are, however, five further plants which have been made available to I.A.R.A. but not as yet sub-allocated. On three of these dismantling has begun. I consider that it would prejudice the relationship between the Military Governor and I.A.R.A. if these plants were to be withdrawn unilaterally. I shall, however, be ready to arrange for these plants to be treated in the same way as unreleased plants if the U.S. Government can arrange for I.A.R.A. to agree that they should be withdrawn from allocation.

The foregoing commitments are entered into by His Majesty’s Government on the understanding that Mr. Hoffman will urge the Humphrey Committee to give priority in their examination to the plants on which dismantling has already started and to give early attention to preparing a list of plants in which they have no further interest in order that such plants can be made available to I.A.R.A. for allocation. I also understand that before any examination of plants is conducted in the British Zone a Press statement will be issued in agreed terms explaining the nature of the investigation, emphasising its limited scope and duration and the fact that subject to its findings the reparations programme, including any plants made available for reparations as a result of the intergovernmental discussions now in progress concerning the prohibited industries, is unaffected and will he brought to as speedy a conclusion as possible.

It might be well if finally I were to confirm my understanding of the procedure for the investigation now being conducted by the Humphrey Committee. I understand that when this Committee has completed its investigation it will report to Mr. Hoffman. Mr. Hoffman will then examine the report and reach his conclusions about the plants which in his view should be retained in Germany in the interests of E.R.P. These conclusions will then be forwarded by him to the U.S. Secretary of State who will communicate with the British and French Governments with a view to seeking their agreement as provided in Section 115F of the Economic Cooperation Act; and the conclusion will not become binding upon His Majesty’s Government until that agreement has been sought and obtained.

Yours sincerely,

Ernest Bevin

1 The text of this letter was transmitted to the Department in telegram 4528, October 16, from London, not printed (740.00119 EW/10–1648).

2 See telegram 748, October 13, from London to Paris, p. 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488].

Editorial Note [Document 492]

Editorial Note

On October 20 in Paris and on October 22 in London, George Humphrey, Chairman of the Industrial Advisory Committee of the Economic Cooperation Administration, held a number of meetings with French and British officials on various aspects of the problems of reparations and dismantlement. Humphrey was accompanied by members of the staff of the Industrial Advisory Committee, and he was joined in London by Ambassador Douglas. Participating in these talks for France were Hervé Alphand, Jacques Rueff, and François de Panafieu. Lord Henderson, General Robertson, Roger Makins, and Roger Stevens participated for the United Kingdom. Records of these meetings are included in Department of State file 740.00119 EW/10–2048.

On October 27, the United States, the United Kingdom, and France issued to the press a three-power statement announcing that agreement had been reached among the three governments that there was need for a review of certain aspects of reparations and dismantlement lists. The review, to be carried out by the Industrial Advisory Committee of the Economic Cooperation Administration with the cooperation of the United Kingdom and French Governments, was to determine which plants scheduled for reparation might better serve general European recovery if retained in Germany. For the text of the tripartite statement, see Department of State Bulletin, November 7, 1948, page 584, or Germany 1947–1949, page 424.

The statement had been prepared by American, British, and French representatives in London following preliminary discussions in Paris and London between representatives of the Industrial Advisory Committee and French and British officials.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 EW/10–2948: Telegram

[Document 493]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 1

secret Washington, October 29, 1948—7 p. m.

4231. Reurtel 5487 Oct 20,2 request you make reply French note substantially as follows: “Humphrey committee has had preliminary conversations with French experts and specialists as requested.

Contemplated investigations will be directed in first instance to plants already dismantled or in process which French originally stated were 10 and Oct 26 increased to 15.

Humphrey committee, as agreed with Mr. Alphand in Paris on Oct 20, will recommend the release of plants from time to time before final report if any plants, or appropriate group of plants, can be so segregated as to be released independently.

Humphrey committee understands that there is no agreement with either British or French as to discontinuance of dismantling of plants in their zones which have already been suballocated. As to allocated plants which have not been suballocated, it is the hope of the committee that dismantling will be treated in all zones in same way as unallocated plants. Committee also understands that pending its review no dismantling will be started on any plants where dismantling has not previously been under way. Committee understands that paragraph numbered 4 of letter of Oct 20 from the French Foreign Minister3 relates only to discontinuance of dismantling and is not to imply any limitation on the duty of the Humphrey Committee to review.

No plants which may become available for reparations as the result of any future agreements with respect to prohibited, limited, or restricted industries have been referred to the Humphrey committee, and we think it is undesirable to attempt to make agreements on the subject of such plants at this time as an incident to arrangements for the consideration of plants now under review by the committee.”

For your information, but definitely not for repetition to French, Department informed that Coignard, head of reparations under General Koenig, intends attempt to cover in suitable agreement major points set forth above suggested letter.

Lovett

1 This telegram was repeated as 1782 to Berlin for Ambassador Murphy and as 1512 to Brussels for Delegate Daspit.

2 The telegram under reference here is not printed. It transmitted the text of a French Foreign Ministry note of October 18 accepting the requests made by Hoffman (see the editorial note, p. 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485]) with certain reservations. (740.00119 EW/10–2048)

3 The reference here is to the French Foreign Ministry note of October 18, not printed.

Notes on a Meeting Between the United States and British Military Governors for Germany and the Ministers President of the United States and British Zones of Occupation of Germany, Frankfurt, October 29, 1948 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–348

[Document 494]

Notes on a Meeting Between the United States and British Military Governors for Germany and the Ministers President of the United States and British Zones of Occupation of Germany, Frankfurt, October 29, 1948 1

[Extract]

confidential [Frankfurt ?,] 1 November 1948.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Dismantling

4. The Ministers President asked whether their recent memorandum on dismantling had been carefully studied and what had been the reaction of Mr. Hoffman. They stressed the great interest which was felt on the subject throughout Germany but denied that their attitude in the matter was in any way governed by political pressure.

5. General Clay emphasized the following:— a. The sixteen Nations are entitled to reparations for damage which they sustained in the war.

b. The Western Allies have put four billion dollars into Western Germany which is ten times the capital value of the plant scheduled for removal. There is also more industrial plant in Germany than can be utilized for many years.

c. Any review of the list of plants scheduled for dismantling has the object of ascertaining where these can best be employed in the interests of European recovery and not for the personal advantage of Germany. This is the only basis on which the sixteen Nations could be expected to agree to any amendment of the list. The constant submission of memoranda and political agitation on the part of the Germans only tends to show that they are considering their own interests. This attitude can only result in fewer and not more of the plants scheduled for removal being allowed to remain in Germany.

d. In Eastern Germany a much larger amount of plant has been stripped down. Political capital is now being made out of dismantling by those who were responsible for stripping the East of its plant. German interference by Trade Unions in the matter can only endanger United States aid.

e. Demands for payment of war damages by Germany have been small, since under the Paris agreement the list of plants scheduled for dismantling is to be the final one.

6. General Robertson stated that the failure of the German people to appreciate the principle of reparations only hindered progress. He had previously promised to consider the retention of any plants shown to be vital to coal production.

7. Both Military Governors then stressed that minor alterations might be made in the list but there is no use in hoping that a large-number of the 300 plants would be allowed to remain.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1 The source text, which apparently was prepared by General Clay’s staff secretariat, was transmitted under cover of a letter of November 3 from Ambassador Murphy to Jacob Beam, not printed. The West German Ministers President in attendance at this meeting were: Kopf of Lower Saxony, Ehard of Bavaria, Arnold of North Rhine-Westphalia, Brauer of Hamburg, Kaisen of Bremen, Luedemann of Schleswig-Holstein, Maier of Württemberg–Baden, and Stock of Hesse. Besides Generals Clay and Robertson, Ambassador Murphy was also present.

Editorial Note [Document 495]

Editorial Note

At a meeting at Frankfurt on November 4, the United States, United Kingdom, and French Military Governors for Germany briefly discussed the question of reparations policy. For records of the proceedings of the meeting, see the notes prepared by Ambassador Murphy and telegram 2686, November 5, from Berlin, pages 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291] and 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292].

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1748: Telegram

[Document 496]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

[Extracts]1 secret Frankfurt, November 17, 1948—1 p.m.

266. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. I attended at Frankfurt yesterday a meeting of the three Military Governors for a discussion of the following subjects:2

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7. Limited and prohibited industries. Koenig referred to this question, and Clay stated that he would be glad to hear the views of his colleagues, but that Military Governors are not in position to act until ECA Administrator Hoffman has made his final report. Further discussion of this question was postponed. Koenig referred in this connection to items relating to atomic energy, stating that French Government had instructed him to raise this question within the framework of limited and prohibited industries. French desire all atomic industry items to be prohibited and suggested it would be desirable that this matter be given priority by the Military Security Board3 after list of limited and prohibited industries has been finally established. It was pointed out by the US and UK that they had already discussed this matter but agreed that the discussion would be enlarged to include the French both regarding exports and imports and also under the heading of security as a long-range proposition. Clay pointed out that JEIA is now the only agency actually in a position to control exports.

Naval construction. The economic advisers were instructed to prepare a paper summing up the differences in the point of view regarding ship construction.

Robertson raised the question of the duration of the restrictions relating to limited and prohibited industries. He said that the UK believes that the agreement now being negotiated4 would apply up to the conclusion of the peace treaty, but that the UK contemplates that these restrictions would be maintained in the peace treaty. Koenig said that his government contemplates permanent limitations and prohibitions. Clay emphasized that his authority to discuss this matter extended only to the period of occupation. Robertson also raised a question regarding the application of Control Council Law No. 435 regarding items which could be manufactured only by special permission and referred to white phosphorus. It was agreed that this question should be carefully examined by the economic advisers in consultation with the Military Security Board.6

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Murphy

1 For other portions of this telegram, reporting on the discussion by the Military Governors of the work of the Parliamentary Council in Bonn, see p. 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293].

2 For portions of General Clay’s report on this meeting, covering the discussion of the work of the Committee on Allied Controls and the Tripartite Working Party on the Occupation Statute, see message CC–6781, November 18, from Clay, p. 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386].

3 Regarding the Military Security Board, see pp. 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399] ff.

4 Regarding the efforts of the working party of the Military Governors to negotiate an agreement covering prohibited and limited industries in Western Germany, see the editorial note, p. 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403].

5 Allied Control Council Law No. 43, December 20, 1946, defined those war materials whose manufacture, importation, etc. were prohibited.

6 The question of limited and prohibited industries was briefly discussed again by the American, British, and French Military Governors at their meeting in Frankfurt on November 30. General Clay again stated that he could not take a position on the matter until E.C.A. Administrator Hoffman had made his report on reparations.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 EW/11–2248: Telegram

[Document 497]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

top secret Washington, November 26, 1948—9 p. m.

4557. For Thorp 1 from Saltzman. Urtel 5988 Nov. 22.2

1. Position of Dept on level of steel production in Germany has not been changed and we have no proposal for any change at this time in 10.7 level for Bizone or 11.1 for Western Germany.

2. No contrary indication given ECA or Humphrey and we do not know what letter Humphrey refers to.

3. Dept understands ECA–Humphrey examination steel plants relates only to capacity to be retained but that ECA might ask retention different plants than US–UK Mil Govs intended retain and result might be more efficient capacity, different product composition or increase in potential production capacity. Although this might affect eventual ability of Germany to produce steel, this considered separate problem not affecting our continued adherence to 10.7 limit as agreed August 1947 and confirmed, at least by implication, London talks this spring. ECA has now formally requested statement of Govt’s position on this matter and it will be necessary to settle question definitely within next week.

4. Clay’s position present Berlin talks on prohibited and limited industries identical with above-stated position.

5. Suggest you clarify foregoing for Clay if no objection.3 [Saltzman.]

Marshall

1 Assistant Secretary of State Thorp was serving as an Alternate United States Representative at the Third Session of the United Nations General Assembly tin Paris.

2  Not printed. In it Assistant Secretary Thorp reported having recently been informed by General Clay that George Humphrey was considering a German steel production level well above that agreed upon in level of industry plan for Germany. General Clay felt that the heretofore agreed steel production level of 10.7 million tons was inviolate. Humphrey had apparently cited a State Department letter permitting such reconsideration of the level of industry plan (740.00119 EW/11–2248).

For the level of industry plan for Germany as approved by the Allied Control Council for Germany in March 1946, see Department of State Bulletin, April 14, 1946, pp. 636–641, or Ruhm von Oppen, Documents on Germany, pp. 113–118. For the revised level of industry plan for the U.S.–U.K. zones of occupation, made public on August 29, 1947, see Germany 1947–1949, pp. 358–362, Department of State Bulletin, September 7, 1947, pp. 468–472, or Ruhm von Oppen, Documents on Germany, pp. 239–245. Documentation on the revised level of industry plan of August 1947 is presented in Foreign Relations, 1947, volume ii .

3 In his telegram 2869, December 3, from Berlin, not printed, Ambassador Murphy reported that General Clay seemed to understand the Department’s position on this matter (740.00119 EW/12–348).

The Under Secretary of State (Lovett) to the President of the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency (Rueff) 740.00119 EW/10–1548

[Document 498]

The Under Secretary of State (Lovett) to the President of the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency (Rueff)

Washington, November 29, 1948.

My Dear M. Rueff : I should like to acknowledge receipt of your letter of October 14, 1948,1 and to reply for my Government to the matter to which it refers.

On behalf of the Assembly of the IARA you express its concern that the action of the U.S. Zone Commander in suspending the delivery of certain plants which had been allocated to Member Governments of IARA might impair rights of Member Governments of the Agency deriving from the Paris Agreement on Reparation.

You will no doubt have been informed by representatives of the Member Governments to which the plants in question were allocated that the delivery of these plants has been resumed, with the expectation that it will be promptly completed. Nevertheless, in view of the concern which you express on behalf of the Assembly I feel that I should make clear the position of the United States Government in this matter.

The action of the U.S. Zone Commander in suspending delivery of the plants in question was a temporary one, taken in connection with this Government’s consideration of whether to undertake appropriate negotiations with the countries concerned for the retention in Germany of any of the equipment involved. This consideration, as indicated above, resulted in a negative decision. As the United States Delegate to IARA stated in the Assembly at the time this matter was under discussion, if the decision had been to seek the retention of any of this equipment in Germany, the United States Government had no intention to impose a unilateral decision on either the recipient countries or the IARA Assembly. It is considered that the rights of all Member Governments and of the Assembly under the Paris Agreement on Reparations would have been fully safeguarded.

I hope that the foregoing statement will adequately explain the position of the Government of the United States with respect to this matter, and I request that you promptly communicate it to the Member Governments of the Inter Allied Reparation Agency through their representatives in the Assembly.

Sincerely yours,

Robert A. Lovett

1  Ante, p. 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 489].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Administrator of the Economic Cooperation Administration (Hoffman) 862.6511/12–348

[Document 499]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Administrator of the Economic Cooperation Administration (Hoffman)1

secret Washington, December 3, 1948.

My Dear Mr. Hoffman : Reference is made to an oral request by Mr. Wood of the Economic Cooperation Administration to Mr. Nitze of this Department on November 26 for a statement of the Department’s views as to the possibility of a change in the level of permitted production of steel in the bizonal area of Germany which is now fixed at 10,700,000 ingot tons. It is understood that Mr. Wood’s request related to the studies which are now being made of the German dismantling program by the Industrial Advisory Committee headed by Mr. Humphrey.

The present level of permitted steel production was fixed by agreement between the United States and United Kingdom Military Governors in Germany in the revised bizonal level-of-industry plan of August 1947, which was approved by the United States and British Governments. This plan involved an increase from the level of 5,800,000 tons for all of Germany, established in the quadripartite plan of March 1946.2 The bizonal level-of-industry plan was discussed in detail with representatives of the French Government prior to its publication. Later, at the meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers in London in November–December 1947, agreement was reached to establish the permitted level of steel production for all Germany at 11,500,000 tons, a figure which corresponds to that previously established for the bizonal area. The CFM agreement was, of course, not made effective, owing to disagreements among the four powers on other matters.

The situation with respect to the amount of steel capacity to be retained in Germany differs radically from that relating to the amount of retained capacity fixed for other industries under the level-of-industry plan. In the case of other industries dealt with in the bizonal level-of-industry plan, the amounts of retained capacity were, in the view of this Government, effective solely in determining the capacity excess to the peaceful needs of Germany and hence available for removal as reparation. Any limitations of a continuing character on these industries for security purposes were to be separately determined. Except for such restrictions as might be imposed on security grounds, it has been the consistent view of this Government that Germany should be free to develop capacity in these industries in the future as required by the needs of the German economy.

In the case of steel, it has been the view of the British and French Governments that the restriction on production should be maintained indefinitely on security grounds. It has been the view of this Government that the present restriction is applicable only until the German peace settlement. The United States position with respect to continuance of a restriction after the conclusion of a settlement has been reserved. As you know, the list of industrial prohibitions and restrictions to be effective in Western Germany is now being studied, pursuant to the London Agreement on Germany, by a working party set up by the three Military Governors. The British and French have reiterated their views on the steel level in the working party, whose report will probably be submitted to the three Governments for consideration in the near future.

The motives which have led to the adoption of this restriction are, I am sure, fully familiar to you. I might recall, however, that an important consideration has been the belief that excessive development of the German steel industry, primarily for armament purposes, together with the effects of German occupation of Western Europe during the recent war, created a serious unbalance between the economic potential of Germany and other Western European countries, and a threat to security of the latter. The Western European countries have not only supported the limitation of German steel capacity but are engaged in extensive development of their own steel industries.

Under all the circumstances, the Department is of the opinion that any proposal by this Government to raise the permitted level of steel production in Germany at the present time would involve serious political repercussions and would be contrary to the interests of the United States. The Department believes that the present level should be continued in effect until the conclusion of a German peace settlement, subject to an understanding that it may later be reviewed if the settlement is unduly delayed.

The Department understands that the technical studies now being conducted by the Industrial Advisory Committee may involve the question of the maintenance of the present restriction on German steel production and that this subject may arise in the discussions which the Committee plans to conduct with experts of the British and French Governments in London beginning December 6. The Department would prefer that the matter not be raised. However, it does not wish to interpose objections which would interfere with the conduct of the Committee’s investigation. If the subject is raised, the Department would wish the American Ambassador in London, under whose chairmanship the meeting will be conducted, to make clear that the Committee is of an advisory character and that its studies have not been completed or reported to the United States Government. He should also state that after the studies have been reported, they will be reviewed in the light of all pertinent considerations prior to the adoption of a final Governmental position.

I propose to instruct Mr. Douglas in this sense, but would like to receive your comment before doing so.

I am sending a copy of this letter to Mr. Draper.

Sincerely yours,

Robert A. Lovett

1 In a letter to the Acting Secretary of State, dated December 9, not printed, Under Secretary of the Army Draper stated that he had received a copy of this letter and that the Department of the Army had no objection to the position stated here (862.6511/12–948). Paragraphs 6 and 7 of this letter were transmitted to Ambassador Douglas in telegram 4535, December 4, to London, not printed. The telegram stated that the full text of the letter was being brought to London for the Ambassador. (740.00119 EW/12–448)

2 Regarding the level of industry plans of March 1946 and August 1947, see footnote 2 to telegram 4557, November 26, to Paris, p. 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 497].

The British Embassy to the Department of State 840.50 Recovery/12–448

[Document 500]

The British Embassy to the Department of State 1

Memorandum

His Majesty’s Government have been giving serious thought, in the light of recent developments, to the problem of the industrial demilitarisation of Germany. In their opinion this problem has important security, political and economic aspects, all of which require careful and simultaneous consideration. We are on the threshold of achieving our immediate political aims in Western Germany, and we hope that the establishment of a Provisional German Government will coincide with a new phase of cooperation between the Western Allies in the control of the three Zones of Occupation. At such a moment it is imperative that there should be complete understanding between the three governments concerned as to the objectives of their policy, and as to the means by which those objectives should be reached.

2. The Anglo-American level of industry plan of August 1947 represented a broad measure of agreement, and was believed by His Majesty’s Government at the time to provide a satisfactory foundation on which allied policy towards the German economy could be built. Admittedly it needs to be applied in present circumstances to the whole of Western Germany including the French Zone; and it calls for some review in order to take account of the German contribution to the European Recovery Programme. It also needs to be completed by decisions relating to certain prohibited industries in respect of which the plan itself envisaged that the existing provisions might be subsequently reviewed, and by provisions for the enforcement of demilitarisation and industrial disarmament in accordance with the broad principles agreed during the London talks which concluded in June of this year. With these amendments and additions, it forms, in the view of His Majesty’s Government, a satisfactory framework within which to plan long term economic policy for Germany.

3. Ever since the German surrender, it has been a primary concern of His Majesty’s Government that their policy and that of the United States Government should remain in step. This aim has been steadfastly pursued as United States policy towards Germany has evolved over the past three years. In particular His Majesty’s Government have fully appreciated that the very great financial contribution which the American people are making to the support of the Bizone and to the European Recovery Programme endows the problem of German recovery with a special sense of urgency in the eyes of the United State Government. Though anxious to complete the Reparations Programme with all speed, and thus remove a running sore in relations between Germany and the Western Allies, they have nevertheless cooperated fully with the United States Government in the review of the Reparations Programme in the British Zone over a period of eight months. It has been their constant hope that this review would be completed at an early date, and that thereafter the uncertainties surrounding the various aspects of allied policy on industrial disarmament would be finally removed. It is hoped that the forthcoming meeting in London with the members of the Humphrey Group will contribute to this end.

4. Some recent expressions of view by United States representatives on this subject have accordingly given them concern. They understand for example that the review of the Humphrey Committee, unlike that of the Wolf Committee, is being conducted on the assumption that the permitted level of steel production of 10.7 million tons a year will not be maintained. It has been suggested by the United States Military Governor in the course of discussions on the prohibited industries that decisions on the level of such industries might be subject to further revision in the light of the views of the Economic Cooperation Administration, as would the agreed level of steel production itself. It has also been proposed that in certain cases plant above the permitted level should be allowed to remain in Germany; whereas in the view of His Majesty’s Government any prohibition or limitation not accompanied by the removal of surplus capacity is not worthy of the name. The United States Military Governor is understood to have already referred to the United States Government the objections raised by his British and French colleagues to this proposal. British representatives in Germany are also from time to time faced with requests for ad hoc decisions affecting matters of security which are not in accordance with existing agreements and tend to disregard the cumulative effect of such decisions upon the general security problem. His Majesty’s Government trust that these indications do not foreshadow a change of policy on the part of the United States Government.

5. The United States Government is already aware of the views of His Majesty’s Government on the importance of the effective demilitarisation of Germany from the direct security point of view. In their opinion neither the international situation nor the present political and economic position of Germany dispel the possibility of a resurgence of German military power at a future date, whilst the danger of German war potential being put to effective use by an invading power has greatly increased. But there is another, and perhaps more immediate aspect of the problem to which it is desired to draw the attention of the United States Government. The successful organisation of a Western European defence system, and the realisation of wholehearted Western European cooperation in both the political and economic spheres equally required that the former victims of Nazi aggression shall be given tangible assurance that Germany shall not again be permitted to become a menace to security. Such assurance is an indispensable pre-condition of effective and confident cooperation between those states and a healthy and prosperous Germany; to such cooperation His Majesty’s Government, like the United States Government, attach the greatest importance.

6. By contrast, continued delay in reaching final decisions on the details of the level of industry plan—in particular on the industries to be subject to continuing prohibitions or limitations—and the removal of surplus equipment is bound to create a loss of confidence and may even bring about internal strains which will shake the position of existing Governments, and so have far-reaching political consequences in Western Europe. Before a German Government is formed it is imperative that our plans in this field should be completed and should form a clear basis on which the Allied Military Security Board can operate. For both these reasons very early decisions appear essential.

7. His Majesty’s Government believe that, in the interests of both harmony and speed, it would be desirable that these matters should, if possible, be negotiated by the Military Governors, rather than discussed between Governments. They therefore ask that the United States Government should restate its policy with regard to the demilitarisation of Germany; authorise the United States Military Government to reach an accord on the revision of existing agreements relating to the prohibited and limited industries which shall be made effective by the removal of equipment surplus to the security level laid down, while taking account of the needs of European recovery; and confirm the United States Government’s agreement with regard to the level of the German steel industry on which the industrial demilitarisation of Germany so much depends. They urge that this action should be taken at a very early date.

Washington, 4 December, 1948.

1 The text of this memorandum was transmitted to Ambassador Douglas in telegram 4538, December 4, to London, not printed. The telegram observed that the Department did not propose to make an answer until the Humphrey Committee had concluded its discussions in London. “Ambassador Douglas and E.C.A. Administrator Hoffman, then in London, were asked for their comments on the memorandum (740.00119 EW/12–448).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/12–748: Telegram

[Document 501]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, December 7, 1948—8 p. m.

Subject: Humphrey Committee and Separations

5140. From Douglas and Hoffman for ECA and State. Original plans developed into prospect of 50 or 60 persons December 6 to discuss reparations. This was cancelled and instead meeting between Hoffman, Humphrey, Douglas, Saltzman representing US; Alphand, Maeff [ Rueff?] representing France; Stevens, Whitham representing UK.1

General problem outlined by Douglas. Humphrey then stated 381 plants on ECA list considered for retention and indicated approximate number recommended by Wolf and engineers for release with statement committee will concur in this recommendation. (Actual figures are as follows: Committee started with 381 plants. ECA released 12 at outset. Thereafter committee recommended release 13 suballocated, 20 allocated, approved by ECA. French agreed retain 43, excluding parts of 7 allocated plants included in list of 20 above. Total thus reduced to 293. Tentative figures agreed to by committee December 6 as follows: Of 85 steel plants release 42. Of 208 other plants release 21. These figures currently being reexamined by committee.)

Wolf recommendation on steel2 was outlined by Humphrey noting that increase to 13.5 million tons capacity was insignificant since 1947 phase of industry agreement with 10.7 million production envisaged 13.3 million capacity. Pre-war ingot capacity was 18.5 millions; 25 million thus lost can be accounted for by approximately 1 million electric furnace capacity, 750,000 Goering plant and 2 million Hamborn plant, all of which are to go as reparations under the Wolf recommendations (with however special provision as to Hamborn involving production of finished steel, for export only over period presumably not exceeding ERP) and 1 million bomb damage.

Regarding standards for his committee Humphrey stated he did not feel bound in making recommendations by level of industry agreements and added that in his view a plant on reparations list now retained breaks level of industry agreement. Only question is, how far do we break it or bend it. However, he stated that the level of industry problem was not within scope of his committee. Nor did Humphrey Committee consider military security or political factors; but as businessmen they knew these factors existed and they did not blind themselves to them.

Humphrey Committee is here pursuant agreement with British and French to advise with them. The committee wishes to discuss with British and French recommendations of its experts so committee can reach firm conclusion. These meetings not to be considered negotiations.

Douglas pointed out disadvantages of large meeting of 50–60 and suggested for comment and British and French advice that instead such meeting the various groups divide into four committees as follows: (1] Main committee consisting of approximately those listed in opening paragraph.

(2) Chemical and non-ferrous Industry Committee.

(3) Mechanical Industry Committee.

(4) Steel Committee.

This suggestion was agreed to.

It was agreed that press would be told meeting was being held but details and figures would be kept in strictest confidence by all. (However, this morning’s Paris Herald Tribune contains story reflecting possible breach this understanding.)

British and French expressed desire at later time to discuss military and political factors.

Main committee will meet again December 7 to obtain general and preliminary French and British reactions to presentations made December 6 before the various committees referred to above. Point will be made by Douglas at that meeting that 10.7 level of industry for steel stands until changed at the Peace Treaty or by intergovernmental arrangement. (Deptel 4535 December 43 )

Sent Department 5140; repeated Paris 997. [Douglas and Hoffman.]

Douglas

1 Between December 6 and 14, 1948, United States, British, and French Delegations held a series of talks on reparations and dismantling problems. These talks were held at the Foreign Office in London. The United States was represented by Ambassador Douglas, members of the Industrial Advisory Committee (Humphrey, Geier, Price, McCaffrey, and Wilson), experts to the Committee, Assistant Secretary of State Saltzman, Special Assistant Reinstein, E.C.A. Administrator Hoffman, James Hendrick, Deputy I.A.R.A. Delegate Robinson, and others. The United Kingdom was represented by Roger Stevens and D.W.G.L. Haviland of the German Department of the Foreign Office, Gilbert Whitham of the Control Commission for Germany, and by other officers of the Foreign Office, Ministry of Supply, Ministry of Defence, Board of Trade, Treasury, and Control Commission for Germany. France was represented by Hervé Alphand, Jacques Rueff, François de Panafieu of the Foreign Ministry and by other officers of the Foreign Ministry, the Ministry of Industrial Production, and the French Military Administration in Germany.

2 On November 3, 1948, E.C.A. Administrator appointed a Steel Mission headed by George W. Wolf to conduct an inspection and evaluation of German steel plants scheduled for removal as reparations from the western zones of occupation of Germany. The report of the Wolf Steel Mission, entitled “Recommendations for Retention of Steel Capacity in Western Germany,” was submitted to the E.C.A. Administrator on December 4, 1948.

3 Not printed; it transmitted a portion of the text of the letter of December 3, from Acting Secretary of State Lovett to E.C.A. Administrator Hoffman, p. 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 499].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/12–848: Telegram

[Document 502]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent
niact London, December 8, 1948—5 p. m.

5157. For Lovett from Hoffman and Douglas. Hoffman has discussed with Saltzman and me Deptel 4538,1 and we have discussed prohibited and limited industry aspects with Humphrey. Our comments are as follows:

1. As to the 10,700,000 tons a year permissible production of ingot steel, at a meeting the afternoon of December 7 with representatives of British Government and French Government and Hoffman, Humphrey and three members of his committee present, and Saltzman. Douglas stated, in accordance with Deptel 4535,2 that any retention of plant capacity in the steel industry now on the reparations list was not related to the 10,700,000 tons permitted production of ingot steel; that the US Government was not contemplating suggesting in the immediate future that this level of production be increased; that it should be continued until the conclusion of a German peace settlement or, if the settlement is unduly delayed and postponed, at an earlier date. Douglas also stated the relevant substance of the balance of Deptel 4535.

2. Question of prohibited and limited industries was raised in the meeting and subsequently by Mr. Bevin during the course of a conversation he had with Mr. Hoffman, Mr. Harriman and Douglas. As to this category of industries, it is our view that it is one of military security, and that in respect of: (a) Prohibited industries: the Military Governments should proceed promptly to reach an agreement and either to destroy, if this is the appropriate procedure, or to place on the reparations list all plants in this category without review by the Humphrey Committee;

(b) Restricted industries, which are also related to military security and not to European recovery: all plant capacity in excess of that permitted to be retained be placed upon the reparations list without further review by the Humphrey Committee; (in regard to at least steel, which is a restricted industry, the Humphrey Committee will have completed its task when it submits its report as a result of its present examination and review).

(c) Deletion, if any, from the prohibited and limited category of industries: any plants released for reparations be reviewed by the Humphrey Committee, since under these circumstances such plants are not related to military security.

3. As to that portion of paragraph 5 of Deptel 4538 which refers to ad hoc decisions affecting matters of security, we have no comment to make.

4. As to paragraph 5, we have no comment to make since we doubt that there has been any change in US policy in this connection.

5. As to paragraph 7 of Deptel 4538: (a) We think it may be appropriate to restate the policy of the US Government with regard to demilitarization.

(b) We have, we think, covered the matter of prohibited and limited industries. In this connection, however, we would add that if there is any disagreement among the Military Governors on this point, as we understand is the case in regard to synthetic oil and synthetic rubber, we suggest that the normal procedure of submitting such disagreements to governments for resolution be followed.

6. At the meeting with Mr. Bevin, attended by Mr. Hoffman, Mr. Harriman and Douglas late in the afternoon of December 7, Bevin raised: First, the matter of the recommendation of the Humphrey Committee; and

Second, the question of prohibited and limited industries.

As to the first, Bevin said he was very anxious to reach an agreement and dispose of the matter, but that he would naturally have to consider the French preoccupation and apprehensions. His own advisers have told him that by Friday they would have had a sufficient opportunity to examine in greater detail the material which has been discussed with them by the Humphrey Committee and to give them more definitive views.

As to the second, he referred to the aide-mémoire which was submitted and which was quoted in Deptel 4538, and urged that the question of prohibited and limited industries be promptly disposed of.

7. Please pass to ECA.

8. An urgent and favorable reply to comments contained in paragraphs 2 and 5(b) above would be, we believe, most helpful in bringing us closer to a tentative approximate agreement with British and French on retention of plants.3

Sent Department 5157, repeated Paris 1001. [Hoffman and Douglas.]

Douglas

1 Not printed; it transmitted to London the text of the British Embassy memorandum of December 4, p. 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500].

2 Not printed; it transmitted a portion of the text of the letter of December 3 from Acting Secretary of State Lovett to E.C.A. Administrator Hoffman, p. 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 499].

3 Telegram 4593, December 9, to London, not printed, repeated as 1933 to Berlin, replied that the Departments of State and of the Army agreed to the relationship of the E.C.A. to prohibited and restricted industries as suggested by Ambassador Douglas and Administrator Hoffman (740.00119 EW/12–848).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/12–848: Telegram

[Document 503]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent London, December 8, 1948—9 p. m.

5169. For State and ECA, AmEmbassy Paris and OSR from Douglas and Hoffman. Meetings of steel, chemical and mechanical engineering groups, December 6 and 7 concerned for most part with general principles. French and British stressing level of industry. French protesting substantial number chemical plants US wished retained.

Meeting Douglas, Hoffman, Saltzman, and Humphrey Committee members with Stevens and Whitham (UK) and Alphand (France) December 7. Highlighted by Alphand’s protest that US asking retention too many plants. He noted that many nonparticipating countries involved in reparations picture and asked whether there could be compensation for plants retained in Germany under 115 (F) Foreign Assistance Act, for example, by excess machine tools. Stevens stressed importance of security element, both from military and psychological standpoints. Hoffman and Douglas minimized the reparations problem showing only some $40 million residual value of equipment involved in the 230 plants under consideration, pointing out the surest security is US cooperation and asking whether it is worth while risking this cooperation for the small amount involved.

Douglas explained that committee was not raising for consideration revision of agreement on 10.7 million tons as permitted limit steel ingot production, and said that committee’s proposal related only to which facilities were to be retained, without affecting agreement as to permitted operating rate.

At December 8 morning meeting, Humphrey Committee members, Hoffman, Douglas, Saltzman, Alphand, Rueff (France), Stevens, Whitham (UK) British asked retention a few designated plants explaining reasons. Asked reduction number of two-inch tubing plants to be retained. Asked speedy settlement mechanical engineering plants, since uncertainty situation encouraging German resistance their dismantlement. Urged plants 40 percent or more dismantled be released. On chemical and mechanical engineering plante, stated their concern was with French situation and security.

French stated would agree retention 12 mechanical engineering plants, 14 chemical plants, 1 steel plant.

UK agreed extend agreement dismantlement on plants still under consideration. French silent on this point, but assumed they will go along.

Present plan is for French and British present lists plants they consider essential for release at same time Humphrey Committee presents list of plants considered essential for retention. Subsequent meetings with such members Humphrey Committee as may remain London December 11–14. Thereafter unlikely any further changes made Humphrey Committee list.

Number plants to be recommended for retention by Humphrey Committee still under discussion December 8.

Present plan Humphrey, Wilson, Geier, McCaffrey, Rose, Hendrick, return, sailing December 15.

Sent Department 5169; repeated Paris 1009. [Douglas and Hoffman.]

Douglas

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/12–1048: Telegram

[Document 504]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, December 10, 1948—7 p. m.

Subject: Humphrey Committee and Reparations.

5205. From Douglas and Humphrey for ECA and State Department. December 9 Douglas delivered detailed list of German plants scheduled for reparations to Stevens (UK) and Alphand (France), showing recommendations of Humphrey Committee for retention and release.

Summary of figures follows: Total plants on ECA list August 31, 1948 381 original releases before examination 12 sub-allocated plants released 13 allocated plants released 20 total releases prior to London meeting 45 total 336 recommended for release by engineers 21 recommended for release by Wolf Mission 44 subtotal 65 total 271 additional releases approved by committee in London meeting 44 total 227 French voluntary retention list 43 total 184 sub-allocated plant (ACA 12) not yet released (in addition to ACA 18, included in steel retention list) one total 183 recommended for retention 183 consisting of part plants 59 whole plants 124 total 183.1

Copy of list being airmailed to Washington, Paris, Brussels, ECA Frankfurt, OMGUS Berlin.

Figures given above undergoing slight revision, in steel plants. List of steel plants given UK and France today shows almost half plants retained are retained in part only. No such arrangements made in respect chemical, non-ferrous and other plants examined by engineers, which are total retentions or total releases.

Pursuant agreement meeting December 9 Stevens, Whitham (UK), Alphand, Rueff, Coignard (France), Douglas, Humphrey Committee, Saltzman (US), the list will be examined by British and French and suggestions to be made by them December 11 if possible what plants on retention list they especially desire have released. Further meeting with UK and France December 14, following which Humphrey Committee will be in position formulate conclusions.

Specific arguments at present are chiefly concerned with wire and tubing production in steel plants and list 18 small mechanical engineering plants which Committee not disposed to release.

Weight to be given political and security factors has been subject of lengthy discussion. Humphrey’s position is that his Committee does not consider itself qualified evaluate these factors. However Committee recognizes they exist, and attempts to reach a business solution of problem, how many plants should be retained in Germany. British and French complain more specific evaluation of these factors necessary, since once Humphrey Committee report published it will be difficult to secure agreement satisfactory to American people at substantially lower level than that recommended in report.

Agreement on reparations list before Humphrey Committee leaves (December 14) not considered possible since British and French representatives have stated they must report to their Ministries before making commitment. However margin of disagreement substantially narrowed result London meeting.

Not contemplated there will be intermediate release any plants before Humphrey Committee’s report submitted which may not be before next year. Rueff (French representative, also official of IARA) satisfied on this point.

Sent Department, repeated Paris 102, Brussels 158, Berlin 643, Frankfurt ECA 48. [Douglas and Humphrey.]

Douglas

1 The parenthetical references in this sentence are to industrial plants appearing on the consolidated Allied Control Authority lists.

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin 740.00119 EW/12–1048: Telegram

[Document 505]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin 1

secret Washington, December 10, 1948—8 p. m.

1946. For Murphy and Clay. Reourtel 1933,2 further discussion with ECA and Army results in agreement that negotiations by U.S. Military Governor re prohibited and restricted industries will be carried out under instructions initiated in State in formulation of which views of ECA and Army will be coordinated.

If negotiations result in any industry remaining in prohibited or restricted category, plants declared surplus in such industry will not be subject Humphrey Committee review, except in steel industry where Humphrey Committee recommendations as to specific plants will be given consideration.

Plants declared surplus in other industries will be reviewed by Humphrey Committee.

Above agreement subject to following two considerations: a. With respect to applicability of paragraphs 2 (a) and (b), London’s 5157 repeated Berlin 1931, to industries such as synthetic rubber, we may wish to see only those portions of plants destroyed or removed as is necessary to make prohibition or restriction effective and leave remainder in Germany for production of needed non-prohibited or non-restricted items.

b. With respect to restricted industries, in addition to steel, principle would be maintained keep sufficient capacity, to include necessary margin so that as practical matter, the limited production could be attained.

With reference continuance negotiations prohibited and restricted industries, Government position to be furnished soonest.

Lovett

1 This telegram was repeated to London for Douglas and Saltzman as 4620 and to Paris for Caffery as 4748.

2 Not printed; but see footnote 3 to telegram 5157, December 8, from London, p. 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin London Embassy Files: 800 Germany: Telegram

[Document 506]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

secret
u.s. urgent London, December 11, 1948—4:20 p. m.

644. For Murphy from Douglas. Re your 923 to London, December 10.1 It was Hoffman’s view and mine, concurred in by Humphrey and Saltzman, that the Military Governors should proceed promptly to reach an agreement in regard to prohibited industries, and that any plants in this prohibited category, if they are not destroyed, should be placed on the reparations list and should not be subject to review by the Humphrey Committee.

It was our further view that, as regards restricted industries, all plant capacity in excess of the amount necessary to produce up to the permissible limit be placed on the reparations list without further review by the Humphrey Committee.

Plants in both of the above two categories are essentially, if not exclusively, matters of military security and should therefore be the subject of negotiations by the Military Governors without review by the Humphrey Committee.

If, however, there should be deletions of industries from any present prohibited or limited and restricted list, and plants in these categories should be placed on the reparations list, then such plants should be subject to review by the Humphrey Committee. Any such plants or industries would, by reason of the fact that they have been stricken from a prohibited or restricted list, no longer, in the judgment of the Military Governors, be matters of military security. They would, therefore, be related exclusively to European recovery.

Obviously, steel is at least one exception to para 2(b) of Embtel 5157, December 9 [8], but in respect of steel, the present survey of the Humphrey Committee and the report which it makes should cover the plants in this category.

If you have any further questions as to the intent of para 2, and particularly para 2(c), please let me know.

Douglas

1 Not printed; it asked for clarification of some points contained in telegram 5157, December 8, from London, p. 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502] (London Embassy Files: 800 Germany).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/12–1348: Telegram

[Document 507]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, December 13, 1948—11 a. m.

Subject: Humphrey Committee—German reparations—prohibited industries.

5212. From Douglas and Humphrey for ECA and State Department. Meeting held December 11 Foreign Office chairmanship, Douglas, Humphrey, McCaffrey, Alphand, Stevens and others. UK and French presented lists plants they are willing to retain as follows: UK—119 plants; France—121 plants, of which 39 partial retention, 82 complete retention. This compares with Humphrey committee request 183 plants.

British figures, hurriedly prepared do not check exactly. Detailed calculation shows following:

[Here follows listing of plants proposed by the United Kingdom, France, and United States Delegations for retention in Germany.]

Details will be cabled later when definitive texts of British and French available and analysis made quantity plants they wish released.

UK comments largely dealt with security and level of industry. UK felt any final negotiation on list must be reviewed in light of decision to be taken on Ruhr and prohibited industries. Admitted possibility these decisions might increase retention list as well as possibility decrease as to chemical industry, UK said its proposal would be definitely increase capacity. As to steel, Coleclough (UK) felt reduction US figure justified since US did not take sufficiently into consideration French and US zone capacities. Stevens (UK) pointed out main anxiety in mechanical engineering list not security but desirability making more plants available to IARA.

Alphand stressed small size reparations asked by Allies and desirability sending out of Germany large numbers machine tools.

At start of meeting Douglas announced US position prohibited any restricted industries: plant capacity in excess required to produce level agreed on will be subject to reparations (or in prohibited industry cases destroyed) without review by ECA. This does not, however, apply to steel. Plants in industries deleted from prohibited or restricted list will be subject to review by ECA before final release reparations. In formulating governmental positions, various agencies of governments may be consulted. Thus in case of US, ECA would be consulted on general principles relating prohibited industries, even though it will not review specific plants.

Wilson and Geier left for Germany December 10 inspect further plants. Expected back December 13. Next meeting with British and French December 14. Price left SS America December 10.

Sent Department 5212, repeated Paris 1026, Brussels 159, Frankfurt 49, Berlin 646. [Douglas and Humphrey.]

Douglas

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/12–1548: Telegram

[Document 508]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, December 15, 1948—1 p. m.

5248. From Douglas and Humphrey. Final meeting between Humphrey Committee, Douglas, Saltzman; Stevens and other UK representatives; Alphand and other French representatives December 14. Humphrey explained 184 plants under discussion for retention (including 1 suballocated plant—AC 12—not theretofore included in total, and stated Committee now willing release 17, thus reducing total to 167. With respect this total British and French have agreed retention 81 plants. British or French (but not both) agreed have retention 42 additional plants. British and French oppose retention 44 plants.

In addition to release of 17 plants, Humphrey stated Committee willing release 3 other plants in part, together with considerable number partial releases in steel category already informally agreed to. He also stated few more releases could be expected in wire and precision tubing plants but that no undertaking would be made by the Committee until it had conferred with Wolf in US.

It was agreed present arrangements on dismantlement should be extended with respect 167 plants still on Humphrey Committee retention list until after Committee report is made. With respect balance of plants British and French given discretion whether they will dismantle or not. Rueff’s suggestion, made last week, that no releases of plants should be made until Committee’s report rendered, was confirmed.

Alphand (France) complained US was asking retention most valuable plants. He stated Committee proposals regarding mechanical engineering plants not at all acceptable to his government.

Individual plants discussed. Humphrey stated Committee willing give further consideration points raised, notably including butadiene, ammonia and coal mining machinery plants.

Committee expects work on this and other matters, and on report, return voyage Queen Elizabeth —completed report expected first week January.

17 plants released by Committee at this meeting: BS 57, 63, 135, 146, 153, 157, 201, 234, 245, 273, 274; ACA 2156, 2158, 2363; ACA 12, 18, 407.

Sent Department for ECA 5248, repeated Paris Torep 404 Brussels 162, Frankfurt 50 for ECA, Berlin 660 for OMGUS.[Douglas and Humphrey.]

Douglas

Editorial Note [Document 509]

Editorial Note

On their return trip to the United States aboard the Queen Elizabeth (December 15–21), members of the Industrial Committee on Reparations met daily to prepare a draft of the Committee Report. A preliminary draft of the Report was submitted to Assistant Secretary of State Saltzman on December 27 for comment by the Department of State. The final Report of the Industrial Advisory Committee was transmitted to the Secretary of State in January 1949. The major recommendations of the Committee and subsequent documentation on reparations policy are scheduled for publication in a forthcoming volume of Foreign Relations covering the year 1949.

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army 740.00119 EW/12–2848: Telegram

[Document 510]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

top secret
priority Berlin, 20 December 1948.

CC 7127. From CINCEUR Berlin Germany sgd Clay to Dept of Army for SAOUS Wash DC. Reurad W 81460.1 My own views on prohibited and restricted industries are too well known to Department for further comment to be necessary. Unfortunately, before we established present policy, I had thought them the views of our government. Security against Germany lies in the intent to enforce security and not in artificial restrictions of industries essential to normal commerce.

I have urged that the question of prohibited and restricted industries be resolved at governmental levels and not here in Germany. Our present position is not only embarrassing to my past negotiations but it is one in which a lack of success might lead to accusations of lukewarmness. Therefore, I repeat and urge my previous recommendation that this question be removed from hands of the Military Governors and negotiated at governmental level.2 Since I have no new comments, I have nothing to send to Secretary Royall.

Clay

1 Not printed.

2 At the meeting of the United States, United Kingdom, and French Military Governors for Germany at Frankfurt on December 16, General Koenig had inquired whether the negotiations of the working group on prohibited and limited industries could be resumed. General Clay replied that pending instructions from his Government it would be inadvisable to have the working party meet. General Clay reported upon this meeting of the Military Governors in his message CC–7108, December 18, from Berlin. (CFM Files, Lot M–88, Box 121, File–Occupation Statute, Cables)

B. The disposition of German external assetsB. The disposition of German external assets

[511] Current Economic Developments

[Washington,] April 19, 1948.

Bureau of Economic Affairs Files: Lot 54 D 361

[512] Official Report by Seymour J. Rubin, Chairman of the United States Delegation to the Conference on Economic Security, Paris, April 26–May 7, 1948

[Washington, undated.]

800.515/5–2648

[513] Report by Seymour J. Rubin, Chairman of the United States Delegation to the Conference on Economic Security, Paris, April 26–May 7, 1948

[Washington, undated.]

800.515/6–1148

Current Economic Developments Bureau of Economic Affairs Files: Lot 54 D 361

[Document 511]

Current Economic Developments 1

[Extract]

secret [Washington,] April 19, 1948.

No. 147

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

US, UK and France To Discuss. German Assets Issues in Paris

The British and French have agreed to a tripartite meeting in Paris on April 27 to discuss all outstanding issues on German assets in non-IARA countries of the western and eastern hemisphere and in the neutral countries of Spain, Portugal, Sweden and Switzerland. It is also expected that informal conversations will be held on the question of German assets in Italy.

On March 25 we presented an aide-mémoire jointly to British and French representatives in Washington proposing certain concluding steps with regard to German assets in all countries except the neutrals and IARA member nations.2

Other American Republics. In line with the resolution for the elimination of Axis economic influence from the western hemisphere adopted in Rio in 1942 and reaffirmed at the Mexico City Conference in March, 1945, all of the American Republics except Uruguay and Bolivia have undertaken the liquidation of German assets.3 We propose that in all except these two countries the German external assets program be considered as satisfactory or adequately accomplished and that no further representations be made in this regard.

Both Bolivia and Uruguay have placed German assets under government supervision. Bolivia has enacted but has not implemented legislation for the liquidation of the assets; Uruguay does not even have such legislation. The Department has many times requested both of these ‘Countries to institute programs comparable to those executed by other of the republics. Recently we have concentrated our efforts on securing the vesting or liquidation of only those assets owned directly from Germany. Since the amount of the assets involved is so small, we are proposing to instruct our (missions in these two countries to make no further representation with respect to this matter.

Iraq, Iran, Lebanon, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Ethiopia, Iceland, Liberia, China and Siam. None of these countries, with the exception of China, has officially embarked on a program for the liquidation of German assets, and we recommend to the UK and France continuation of our efforts to achieve the security objective. However, we do suggest that consideration be given to a change in views on the disposition of the proceeds of liquidation. In all of these countries the amount of German assets is small, and it may be assumed that all have some legitimate war claims against Germany. Since it is unlikely that any assets can be obtained for distribution to IARA countries, we suggest that the three Allied Missions to Iraq, Iran, Lebanon, Syria, Saudi Arabia and Ethiopia present final notes urging the liquidation of German assets and reminding the governments that their claims against Germany arising out of the war can be compensated only from German assets in their countries and suggesting that the proceeds of the liquidation be retained in satisfaction of such claims. In the case of Ethiopia, we would further turn over to that government the keys to the German Legation of which the Ethiopians have physical control. Similar notes would be sent to the governments of Iceland, Liberia, China and Siam even though previous specific communications on this matter have not been sent them.

Turkey. In the case of Turkey, we suggest to the British and French that the Turkish offer of December 30, 1947 be accepted. At that time the Turks agreed to place at the disposition of the three Allied governments any balance of sums realized from German assets after all types of claims against the Turkish Government and Turkish nationals against Germany have been satisfied from the German assets subject to Turkish jurisdiction. However, the Department recommends that the Turkish Government not be informed of our acceptance of their offer at this time. Rather we should leave the timing of such notification to the discretion of the three Allied Missions at Ankara as of possible utility in arriving at a satisfactory settlement on the question of looted gold.

Switzerland. Although agreement was reached with the Swiss in May 19464 for the liquidation of German external assets in that country and distribution of 50 percent of the proceeds to IARA, the Swisshave not executed that part of the agreement which secures part of the proceeds of liquidation for IARA countries. The Swiss have taken the position that they are not obligated to execute the agreement until a rate of exchange is established between the Swiss franc and the German reichsmark so that compensation in reichsmarks can be paid to the German owners of property in Switzerland. The US, UK and France—the governments concerned in the first instance—have always rejected this Swiss contention. The Department’s most recent proposal made in a note to the French and British5 is to accept an offer made by the Swiss in October 1947 to accelerate liquidation of German assets and place the proceeds in blocked account pending establishment of a satisfactory rate of exchange with Germany. The Department would make its acceptance of this offer conditional upon agreement with the Swiss as to types of assets which would be liquidated. We would not be satisfied with an acceleration of liquidation of real estate and other comparatively insignificant property but would insist that the Swiss liquidate the important German investments. If these negotiations fail, we have proposed to the British and French that a report be filed with IARA outlining the status of the situation under the Accord of 1946 and that, under the circumstances, the three countries consider their obligations under the Accord discharged. At the meeting in Paris this month, the US proposal and any other proposal which may be offered by the British and French will be discussed.

In this connection, the Department has again indicated to the British its preparedness to abolish the Joint Commission which has been handling liquidation and leave the liquidation program entirely in the hands of the Swiss, providing the Swiss will make a lump sum settlement by paying 250 million Swiss francs to IARA countries.

Sweden. The agreement with Sweden on German external assets was reached in July 1946,6 and the Swedish Government has paid the US, UK and France their share of German assets in Sweden. However, they have not paid the other IARA countries, and numerous attempts to persuade Sweden to make an allocation to the other IARA countries in accordance with their percentage shares in German external assets under the Paris Reparation Agreement have been futile. The General Assembly of IARA has passed a resolution calling upon the Swedish Government to make such an allocation, and has also recommended that the resolution be presented by all IARA countries and particularly that the three Allies exert their efforts toward inducing the Swedish Government to accept it. Although we doubt the effectiveness of such a move, we instructed Embassy Stockholm to present this resolution to the Swedes. Our future course of action will also be discussed with the other powers at the Paris meeting.

Spain. The negotiations with Spain, which have been going on intermittently for almost 18 months, are nearing conclusion. The major unsolved issue at this time is the percentage-wise distribution of the proceeds to be made to the IARA countries. Otherwise, the Accord is ready for signature except for minor details.7

Portugal. In February of 1947 Portugal reached agreement with the three Allies on the liquidation of German assets and for allocation of the majority of the proceeds to IARA.8 However, it was stipulated in that agreement that the effective date would be contingent on reaching a settlement on looted gold. The Allies have evidence that Portugal acquired at least 38 tons of looted gold from Germany, but the Portuguese have refused to make restitution of any of this gold unless full compensation is paid them by the Allies. At the meeting in Paris the three Allies will discuss various courses of action aimed at arriving at a final statement on the gold question.

Italy. More than a year ago, the British and French advised the Department of their agreement to our proposal that all of the proceeds of liquidation be given the Italian Government. The French have not wavered from their agreement. The British, however, have shown some reluctance to carry through on their original agreement and, when in early March we proposed that we announce immediately a policy of turning over to the Italian Government unconditionally the proceeds of German assets in Italy as they become available, the British demurred. Bevin stated that it would be of doubtful wisdom to deal with the matter prior to the elections. He suggested instead that the question be discussed during the tripartite talks on Germany.9

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1 This weekly classified publication, prepared by the Policy Information Committee of the Department of State, was designed to highlight developments in the economic divisions of the Department and to indicate the economic problems which were currently receiving attention in the Department. It was circulated within the Department of State and to missions abroad.

2 Copies of the aide-mémoire summarized here are included in the Department files under 800.515/3–2548.

3 The reference here is to the Final Act of the Meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the American Republics, held at Rio de Janeiro, January 15–28, 1942. For the text of the Act, see Department of State Bulletin, February 7, 1942, p. 117. For documentation on the meeting, see Foreign Relations, 1942, vol. v, pp. 6–47. Documentation on the Inter-American Conference on Problems of War and Peace, held at Mexico City, February 21–March 8, 1945, is included in Foreign Relations, 1945, volume ix .

4 For the text of the so-called Washington Accord with Switzerland on German External Assets, May 25, 1946, see Department of State Bulletin, June 30, 1946, p. 1121 or Inter-Allied Reparation Agency, Report of the Secretary General for the Year 1948 (Brussels: Inter-Allied Reparation Agency, 1949), p. 75.

5 Department of State aide-mémoire, dated April 7, 1948, not printed (800.515/4–748).

6 For the text of the agreement, dated July 18, 1946, see Department of State, Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS) No. 1657 or 61 Stat. (pt. 3) 3191. For a summary of the agreement, see Department of State Bulletin, July 28, 1946, p. 174.

7 Further documentation on the question of the disposition of German external assets in Spain is included among the materials on the interest of the United States in the liberalization of the Spanish regime in volume iii .

8 A copy of the agreement with Portugal, signed February 21, 1947, in Lisbon, was transmitted to the Department in despatch 1363, February 22, 1947, from Lisbon, not printed (800.515/2–2247). Additional documentation on the question of assets in Portugal is included among the materials on United States relations with Portugal appearing in volume iii .

9 The matter of German assets in Italy was not taken up at the London Conference on Germany. Other documentation on Italy is included in volume iii .

Official Report by Seymour J. Rubin, Chairman of the United States Delegation to the Conference on Economic Security, Paris, April 26–May 7, 1948 800.515/5–2648

[Document 512]

Official Report by Seymour J. Rubin, Chairman of the United States Delegation to the Conference on Economic Security, Paris, April 26–May 7, 1948 1

[Extracts]

[Washington, undated.]

1. Background:

On April 7, 1948 the Department in an aide-mémoire handed to the British and French Embassies, referred to the unsatisfactory situation arising by reason of failure of the Swiss Government to comply with the terms of the Swiss-Allied Accord of May 25, 1946 on the subject of German assets in Switzerland.2 The Department suggested that a meeting be held at Paris within the current month among representatives of the governments of the U.S., U.K. and France to arrive at an immediate agreement among themselves on steps to be taken satisfactorily to resolve the impasse.

The U.K. and French governments speedily accepted the suggestion of the Department, and urged an enlargement of the scope of the conference to include other problems pertaining to the economic security program of the three governments.

2. Agenda: a. Action to be taken to resolve the impasse with the government of Switzerland regarding the implementation of the Swiss-Allied Accord of May 25, 1946.3

b. Action to be taken to settle with the government of Portugal the problem of looted gold acquired by Portugal, so that gold might be restored to the countries from which looted, and the Portuguese-Allied Agreement of February 1947 on the liquidation of German assets might come into effect.4

c. Action to be taken to resolve issues outstanding in negotiations with the government of Spain on the subject of German assets in that country, so that an accord might be signed forthwith.

d. Action to be taken with regard to German assets in certain countries of both hemispheres not members of the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency but which were involved in the war against Germany.

3. Participation:

Delegations of the three countries invited attended. There were no observers.

[Here follow Sections 4, 5, and 6 describing the members of the United States Delegation, the travel itinerary of the Delegation, and the headquarters of the Delegation and of the Conference.]

7. The Opening Plenary Session:

Mr. François de Panafieu, Chairman of the French Delegation opened the conference by pointing up the urgent need of the countries entitled to reparation from Germany under the Paris Reparation Agreement for the proceeds of German assets in the neutral countries of Europe, in order that the economic recovery of Europe might be advanced, and the economic security of Europe be safeguarded. These informal comments were concurred in by Mr. Rubin arid by Mr. Francis W. McCombe of the British Foreign Office, Chairman of the British Delegation. Thereafter the conference proceeded immediately to the agenda.

8. The conference sat primarily throughout the plenary session except for two committee sessions for drafting purposes. Mr. de Panafieu, as chairman of the host government, acted as chairman of the conference.

[Here follow Sections 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 dealing with the official languages of the Conference, the policy with regard to the press, the work of the committees, entertainment and official functions, and the closing plenary session.]

14. Conclusions: a. All items of the agenda were covered, and determination of action to be taken forthwith by the three governments was made. The substance of the determinations is classified. If the action agreed upon with respect to Switzerland has satisfactory results, U.S. participation in a further conference in this series will be necessary, not only to permit solution of problems between Switzerland on the one hand arid the three powers on the other, but to allow the three powers themselves to compose differences among them that will undoubtedly arise. To the holding of such a conference among themselves and with Switzerland, should it be necessary, the three powers at the conference have committed themselves.

b. From the standpoint of the Government and the people of the United States, the potential benefits to be derived from the accomplishments of the conference are extensive. Economic security against the improper use of German assets in the neutral countries of Europe would be fortified; and large financial resources would accrue to the United States and other countries members of the Inter-Allied Reparation Agency.

1 This report was transmitted by Mr. Rubin to the Secretary of State under cover of a brief letter of May 26, not printed. Rubin’s supplementary, confidential report sprinted infra.

2 The Department’s aide-mémoire of April 7, not printed, is briefly summarized in paragraph 7 of the extract from Current Economic Developments, No. 147, April 19, p. 854.

3 See footnote 4 to the extract from Current Economic Developments. No. 147, p. 854.

4 See footnote 8 to the extract from Current Economic Developments, No. 147. p. 856.

Report by Seymour J. Rubin, Chairman of the United States Delegation to the Conference on Economic Security, Paris, April 26–May 7, 1948 800.515/6–1148

[Document 513]

Report by Seymour J. Rubin, Chairman of the United States Delegation to the Conference on Economic Security, Paris, April 26–May 7, 1948 1

secret [Washington, undated.]

I. Switzerland:

The aide-mémoire handed to the British and French Embassies by the Department on April 7, 1948 served as the basis for discussion at the conference of action to be taken to resolve the impasse with Switzerland on the implementation of the Swiss Allied Accord on German assets in Switzerland. (Copy attached as Annex 12 )

In the first formal meetings with the British and the French at the conference and in a number of informal conversations, the British displayed considerable reluctance to take any action outside the Joint Commission, The British seemed optimistic that the Swiss planned to implement the Accord, their optimism being based on statements of certain Swiss officials, in discussions with Britain on tourist trade, that Britain could permit British tourists larger exchange allowances because of the sums that would be realized from the implementation of the Swiss-Allied Accord. The French member of the Joint Commission, present at the conference, pointed out various reasons to doubt the good intentions of the Swiss. The British thereafter shifted to urge an approach to the Swiss that would neglect technical details and focus on the objectives of the Accord, especially the objective of making available for European rehabilitation the foreign exchange that would result from the liquidation of German assets. This they desired to tie in with present CEEC efforts to marshal all possible resources.

The U.S. Delegate told the British and French, in amplification of a proposition in the aide-mémoire, that the U.S. is willing to consider limiting or abolishing the Joint Commission in Bern if an over-all satisfactory arrangement can be made with the Swiss. Both the British and French were reluctant to contemplate such a limitation or abolition, and extremely reluctant to say anything in the note to the Swiss that would give the Swiss hopes that any such concession might be made. The pertinent portion of the text of the final note represents a concession by the British and the French to the U.S. point of view.

The French suggested that the U.S. adopt sanctions against the Swiss, should the Swiss continue recalcitrant, especially with regard to the certification of blocked assets in the U.S. The U.S. Delegate reminded the British and French that sanctions had been ruled out in the beginning of negotiations two years before and that the U.S. would certainly not take them now unilaterally. The U.S. Delegate suggested that the British, in their tourist trade discussions with the Swiss, might threaten or actually take sanctioning steps, and this suggestion was sufficient to close off discussions of sanctions altogether.

It was finally agreed that a revised note (Annex 23 ) would be presented to the Swiss in the three capitals on May 11, and that copies would be presented in Bern by the three Missions on May 13.

The US Delegate told the British and French that should the Swiss reply to the note prove unsatisfactory, the US wishes to report fully to IARA so as, if possible to relieve itself of a task that would then threaten our dignity and promise no success. The French expressed concern lest we take action amounting to a renunciation of the Accord, and the US Delegate assured the conference that we would take no steps in IARA that would embarrass further efforts by the French and British to secure implementation of the Accord, should such further efforts be forthcoming. The US Delegate handed the British and French a memorandum outlining the US position on this question. (Annex 33 )

II. Spain:

By virtue of great efforts made at Brussels and Madrid and at the Department, the need for action at the conference with reference to the German assets in Spain was necessary only in securing coordination among the three governments in the actual signing of the Accord. Apparently French instructions to the Chargé d’Affaires at Madrid had become confused, and the combined efforts of the US and the British delegates and Embassies helped to resolve the procedural problem, and arrangements were made to sign the Accord on May 10.

III. Portugal:

Putting into effect of the Accord on German assets with the Portuguese had been conditioned on reaching a satisfactory agreement with the Portuguese on the restoration of gold looted by Germany and brought under Portuguese control. The British and French emphasized the necessity for an approach some place other than Lisbon to remove the question to as high a level as possible. The French suggested making the representation in Washington and linking the representation with a refusal by the US to unblock Portuguese assets in the United States without a satisfactory solution of the gold question. This was flatly rejected by the US Delegate who recommended that a new approach be made in Lisbon with the British Ambassador (the senior head of missions) taking the lead. Both the British and French continued to maintain their position that the approach should be made outside Lisbon, and the French agreed to make the presentation at Paris, supported by the British and US. The three delegates agreed that timing of the presentation close to that of the presentation of the Swiss note was desirable.

The US Delegate pointed out that if the Portuguese made a completely unreasonable offer of gold, the US feels that we should report the offer to IARA and not take the responsibility of accepting it. This alarmed the French who were concerned lest nations at IARA not particularly interested in gold, but very much interested in the assets, might outvote France who is especially interested in the restoration of looted gold from Portugal. The French went to great lengths to suggest, without an outright statement to that effect, that gold—some gold—should be a primary objective, and that the three governments should be very slow to take any position with the Portuguese that would drive us back to IARA. The French seemed to want to come down to a figure on gold that would justify hopefulness of Portuguese acceptance, and the figure in the final note (Annex 43 ) is the result of bolstering by the British and U.S.

(After the termination of the conference, the French Foreign Minister thought better of the undertaking that the note be presented at Paris by the French; and it was subsequently decided that the note would be presented in Lisbon under the leadership of the British Ambassador, and that the importance of the note would be emphasized at the three capitals.)

IV. Non-IARA Countries of Both Hemispheres Involved in the War Against Germany:

The Aide-Mémoire presented to the French and British at Washington on March 25, 1948, (Annex 54 ) served as the basis of discussion at the conference on German assets in those non-neutral, non-members of IARA of both hemispheres that were involved in the war against Germany.

The U.S. Delegate rehearsed the history of the U.S. efforts toward economic security against Germany in the Western hemisphere and toward obtaining some proceeds of German assets in the Other American Republics for the benefit of IARA. The U.S. Delegate reminded the French and British that we had already pointed out in a previous aide-mémoire and orally, as well as in the reference aide-mémoire that the security goal has been, for the most part, attained but that the U.S. is reconciled to the proposition that there will be no funds from the Other American Republics available for IARA.

With regard to Iceland, Turkey, Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Ethiopia, Liberia, Siam and China, the U.S. Delegate emphasized that there is little hope of securing any proceeds for the benefit of IARA and that the three powers are really wasting time in attempting to secure any, and that we should make a final effort to secure liquidation of German assets for security reasons and then terminate our efforts altogether.

Both with regard to the Other American Republics and the named miscellaneous countries, the British stated very strongly that they could not subscribe to a doctrine that the mere declaration of war acts as a release of German assets to the country in which located. The British were particularly exercised about Argentina and Turkey. The U.S. Delegate reminded the British that the U.S. is far from championing any such principle as the British suggested, but that we are anxious to recognize the facts and, since we are not prepared to do anything to change them, make the best of them. Finally the British and the French (who had no particular point of view one way or the other on this subject) accepted the suggestions of the U.S. aide-mémoire except that the question of German assets in Turkey was reserved, and, except further, that all delegates were agreed that the problem of German assets in China should be allowed to “slide” and that no representations should be made or action taken with regard thereto … or, in other words, that the question should simply be forgotten. This was satisfactory to the U.S. Delegate who considered that by concurring in our suggestion for every other country, the French and British had placed themselves in an almost untenable position with regard to Turkey.

It was agreed however that the draft note in the aide-mémoire should be changed from “retain the proceeds of the liquidation of German assets in satisfaction of such claims” to “retain so much of the proceeds of liquidation of German assets as will satisfy its legitimate claims.” No surplus was anticipated by the delegates.

Mr. Dorr, U.S. Delegate to IARA, present at the conference, told the U.S. Delegate that he is embarrassed by repeated requests by IARA to report on the situation in the Other American Republics with regard to German assets, and it was agreed by the three delegates that the U.S. Delegate at IARA would present an informal report on German assets in the Other American Republics, in which the French and British would concur, and the British would present an informal report in IARA on German assets in the miscellaneous named countries in which the US and France would concur, but not including Turkey.

V. Sweden:

The French referred to the fact that the Swedes have failed to distribute gold in keeping with the Accord and asked whether the three governments should not now make still another approach to Sweden. The US Delegate stressed that the Swedish obligation to make this distribution was entirely clear both in the Accord and in statements made by the Swedish and US representatives during the negotiations. The only question that the Swedes could legitimately raise in the opinion of the US Delegate was that of sufficiency of identification, and it was his understanding that all requisite identification had been made. The US Delegate was willing, however, to put the matter before the Department. The French also referred to a newspaper report that proceeds of German assets in Sweden had risen well above the 100,000,000 kronor mark and asked whether the letter annexed to the Accord regarding a possible excess should be invoked. The US Delegate had no objections to putting this matter before the Department although he referred to the improbability of obtaining any such excess and to the unreliability of such newspaper reports.

The British were without instructions but gave the impression that they would go along with the U.S. It was the impression of the US Delegate that the French were raising both questions without any particular enthusiasm and without any intention of urging action thereafter. Certainly it was not the kind of inquiry toward the resolution of which the US should now take any initiative.

VI. Italy:

In opening the conversations the US Delegate explained, and subsequently repeated, that he was not authorized to express any official US reactions to the position taken by the British Cabinet on the liquidation of German assets in Italy; the matter was being carefully studied in Washington, but as the British position had only recently been taken the US Government had not, so far, had an opportunity to consider the problem on so high a level as the British. Consequently, he continued, any remarks made by the US Delegation at this time should be taken as unofficial and intended only to clarify questions which might be raised and invite such explanations as might be offered so that the Delegation would be in a position lucidly to report to the State Department on this subject.

The British said that their government considered the American proposal was essentially a “pre-election move” which, in the opinion of the British was exaggerated, and that although the point is disputable, events have indicated that the British opinion may have been correct. Furthermore, the British believe that a gift to the Italian Government of all the German assets would run counter to the program for European recovery, inasmuch as the interests of the other European countries were not taken into consideration. He agreed that the bulk of the German assets should revert to the Italians in order to assist in alleviating their sufferings and in placing them on as sound as possible economic footing. Nevertheless, it is the British belief that a substantial portion of the assets should be made available to IARA, especially in the light of the fact that the reparation program has been held up. It was also pointed out that the value of German assets in Italy was so high (based on the estimate of the Italian authorities) that as a result of the American proposal the Italians would receive a larger measure of reparation than the countries which had been on the Allied side throughout the war. In summary the British proposal is that: a) the Italians should continue to liquidate the assets;

b) the libraries be given to the Italians with an endowment of 1 billion lire, the latter to be a first charge on the proceeds from liquidation;

c) the balance of the proceeds from liquidations be divided 60% to Italy, 40% to IARA.

The US Delegate stressed the importance of continuing after the elections our beneficent attitude toward Italy. It was also pointed out that dollars would be drained out of Italy for IARA countries without any US control on their use. He did not believe the US Government would welcome this in general and more particularly if the dollars, (as they would), went to countries behind the iron curtain. He realized that there might be repercussions in IARA to the US suggestion; however, these would probably come mainly from the countries we are not over-anxious to have the money.

The French Delegate explained that the French Government originally expressed scruples with respect to the exclusion of IARA in this case; nevertheless, they had finally concurred. However, he would be happier if some formula such as the British suggested (the precise percentages might be subject to discussion) could be reached. On the other hand the US is financing European recovery and consequently the dollar problem deserves serious consideration. The French Delegate maintained that a distinction should be made between governmental and private assets, and promised to give the US a statement in writing explaining precisely the French position in this regard.

The US Delegation again emphasized the Italian foreign exchange situation, not only from immediate viewpoint where Italy might be required to make convertible lire available to IARA, but also from the future viewpoint when the foreign owners might request the conversion of dividends and profits derived from the interests they had acquired. It was also pointed out that Italy had lost many sources of foreign exchange.

The British admitted that convertible lire would drain dollars from Italy, but believed that many purchases would be made in foreign exchange. If enough foreign exchange were not acquired the balance should be made up in lire—not necessarily convertible. The problem of future pressure on the lire was discounted.

It was generally agreed that the Three Powers legally could do what they wished with the assets. Nevertheless the British felt that “reasonable” action should be taken, as both they and the French did not consider that the Italians should profit to a greater extent, from the German assets, than the countries which were on the Allied side throughout the war.

1 The source text was transmitted by Mr. Rubin to the Secretary of State under cover of a brief letter, dated June 11, which explained that this classified report was a supplement to the official report, supra.

2 The aide-mémoire of April 7 is not printed, but see footnote 2 to Rubin’s reports supra.

3 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

4 The substance of the aide-mémoire of March 25 is summarized in paragraphs 3, 4, 5, and 6 of the extract from Current Economic Developments, No. 147, April 19, p. 853.

C. Western Germany and the European recovery programC. Western Germany and the European recovery program

[514] Editorial Note

Editorial Note [Document 514]

Editorial Note

The relationship of the United States, British, and French Zones of Occupation to the European Recovery Program was discussed during the first part of the London Conference on Germany, February 23–March 6 (see chapter I, part B). It was agreed that for the political and economic well-being of the countries of Western Europe and of a democratic Germany, there should be a close association of their economic life. It was agreed by the United States, the United Kingdom, and French Governments that they and their occupation authorities in Western Germany should cooperate closely in all matters arising out of the European Recovery Program in relation to Western Germany and that the combined United States-British Zone and the French zone should be fully associated in the European Recovery Program and adequately represented on any continuing organizations.

Representatives of the United States, British, and French Military Governors for Germany participated in the Conference on European Economic Cooperation, held in Paris, March 15–April 16, and were signatories to the Convention for European Economic Cooperation, signed at the close of the Conference. In an exchange of letters between Ambassador Murphy and Generals Clay and Robertson (in their capacity as members of the U.S.–U.K. Bipartite Board) of May 1 and May 14, 1948, the United States and United Kingdom Zones of Occupation adhered to the Economic Cooperation Act of 1948 and expressed intention to conclude an agreement with the United States Government to govern the terms of economic aid to be provided under the terms of the Act. The Economic Cooperation Agreement between the United States Government and the United States and United Kingdom Zones of Occupation of Germany was subsequently signed in Berlin on July 14, 1948. For the texts of the agreements and exchanges cited here, see Germany 1947–1949, pages 518 ff.

The relationship between the Organization of European Economic Cooperation and the proposed International Authority for the Ruhr was considered in detail during the London Conference on the Ruhr in November and December. Documentation on the Ruhr Conference is presented in chapter II, part B.

Full documentation on the European Recovery Program, including materials on the participation by the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, is included in volume III.

D. Extension of the U.S.–U.K. bizonal fusion agreementD. Extension of the U.S.–U.K. bizonal fusion agreement

[515] Editorial Note

Editorial Note [Document 515]

Editorial Note

The agreement for the economic fusion of the United States and United Kingdom Zones of Occupation of Germany, concluded on December 2, 1946 (for text, see Germany 1947–1949, page 450) and amended on December 17, 1947 (for text, see ibid., page 454), was scheduled to expire on December 31, 1948. Discussions within the United States Government, with United States occupation authorities, and between the United States and British Governments, were carried on during the last months of 1948, regarding extension of the agreement. It was decided that it would not be practicable to negotiate a new fusion agreement to include France prior to December 31. It was therefore finally agreed to extend the current Bizonal Fusion Agreement for three months. A note from the British Ambassador dated December 31, 1948, prepared by officers of the British Embassy and the Department of State, together with the Secretary of State’s reply of the same date, constituted an agreement extending the Bizonal Fusion Agreement. For the text of the Secretary’s note, which included the text of the British Ambassador’s note, see ibid., page 460. Documentation on the exchanges and negotiations eventuating in the exchange of notes of December 31 is included in the Department of State’s file 740.00119 Control (Germany).

IV. The Berlin CrisisIV. The Berlin Crisis

[516] Editorial Note

Contents

Editorial Note [Document 516]

Editorial Note

The papers presented in this chapter seek to delineate the main lines of development of the Berlin crisis of 1948. For reasons of space, the editors have been obliged to restrict the scope of the documentation to important high-level diplomatic exchanges and major meetings and negotiations between the principal occupation authorities in Germany. Documents defining the formulation of the more significant United States policies at various junctures in the Berlin crisis have also been included where possible and appropriate. Important reports from responsible officials in Germany regarding the situation in Germany and particularly in Berlin during the months of the blockade have likewise been included. Detailed documentation on the conduct of the Berlin airlift and on the many aspects of the political, economic, and financial situation inside blockaded Berlin has not, however, been presented. An official account of developments within Berlin during this period is included in Office of Military Government, U.S. Sector, Berlin, A Four Year Report, July 1, 1945 to September 1, 1949 (Berlin, 1949). A personal but authoritative account of the airlift appears in Clay, Decision in Germany, Chapters 19 and 20. A large collection of documents on all aspects of Berlin life during the blockade appears in Berlin Senate, Berlin, Quellen und Dokumente, particularly chapters IX through XIII.

A. The breakdown of quadripartite control in GermanyA. The breakdown of quadripartite control in Germany

[517] The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, January 21, 1948—noon.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2148: Telegram

[518] The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, January 21, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2148: Telegram

[519] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, February 1, 1948—1 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–148: Telegram

[520] The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, February 12, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–1248: Telegram

[521] The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, February 12, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–1248: Telegram

[522] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, February 21, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–2148: Telegram

[523] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, March 3, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–348: Airgram

[524] Memorandum by Frank G. Wisner, Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas, to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

[Washington,] March 10, 1948.

862.515/3–1048

[525] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, March 12, 1948—5 p. m.

862.00B/3–1248: Telegram

[526] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, March 20, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–2048: Telegram

[527] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 1, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–148: Telegram

[528] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 1, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–148: Telegram

[529] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 2, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–248: Telegram

[530] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Bogotá

Washington, April 2, 1948—6 p. m.

710. J/4–248: Telegram

[531] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 6, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–648: Telegram

[532] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman)

Berlin, April 13, 1948.

862.515/4–1348

[533] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 13, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–1348: Telegram

[534] The United. States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 15, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–1548: Telegram

[535] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, April 15, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–1548: Telegram

[536] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

London, April 17, 1948.

840.20/4–1748

[537] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, April 22, 1948—11 a. m.

740.00119 Council/4–2248: Telegram

[538] The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

Washington, April 28, 1948.

Department of Defense Files: Telegram

[539] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, April 28, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–2848: Telegram

[540] The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Chase) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, April 29, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–2948: Airgram

[541] Editorial Note

[542] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Glay) to the Department of the Army

Berlin, May 2, 1948.

Department of Defense Files: Telegram

[543] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 22, 1948—11 a. m.

862.515/5–2248: Telegram

[544] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 29, 1948—noon.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–2948: Telegram

[545] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, May 29, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–2948: Telegram

[546] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

[Washington,] June 4, 1948.

862.515/6–448

[547] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, June 17, 1948—11 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–1748: Telegram

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2148: Telegram

[Document 517]

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

restricted
urgent Berlin, January 21, 1948—noon.

163. Under “other business” US Representative gave preliminary report 77th meeting Allied Control Council held January 201 re US-British decisions Frankfurt January 7 meeting.2 US emphasized aimed at increasing efficiency administration, preliminary nature of talks, and economic rather than political nature proposed changes, which will in no way prejudge Germany’s future organization. Invitation to Soviets and French to join Bizonal economic fusion still stands. Latest Bizonal plans not yet complete, except for export-import field, now being circulated ACC, but as further details become available they will be circulated ACC.

As anticipated, Soviet member (Sokolovsky) read prepared statement attacking latest Bizonal developments. This contrasted US, British and French refusal London CFM 3 agree Soviet proposal for establishment central German Govt with new Frankfurt setup, which Soviet branded as separatist German Govt for Bizonal area. These Bizonal measures taken behind ACC’s back constitute gross violations Potsdam and Control Council machinery agreements. Sokolovsky also ridiculed US-British claim that Frankfurt decisions taken in consultation German leaders, charging US and British persecute German pro-unity forces while cooperating with the splitters: Schumacher, Adenauer, and Kaisen. Soviets insist on termination Bizonal activities.

French member made short statement, noting US-British assurances,] but indicating forced state reservations to latest developments. British member emphasized joint US-British views.

US member suggested deferring further discussion until new Bi-zonal arrangements complete. Control Council agreed.

Berlin press January 21 reports above discussion, Soviet-controlled press giving full text Sokolovsky’s statement.4

Sent Dept; Moscow as 20; London as 21; Paris 30.

Dept please pass to Moscow as Berlin’s 20.

Riddleberger

1  The Allied Control Council for Germany, composed of the military governors of the four zones of occupation of Germany, was the supreme Allied agency in the Allied Control Authority for Germany. For a survey of the organization and functions of the Allied Control Authority for Germany, including a description of the operations of the Control Council and its subordinate agencies, see des patch 8336, January 6, 1947, from Berlin, Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 831.

The other transactions of the 77th Meeting of the Control Council were re-ported upon in telegrams 172, January 21, from Berlin, infra, and 173, January 21, from Berlin, not printed. Present at this meeting of the Council were Generals Clay, Robertson, Koenig, and Marshal Sokolovsky.

2 The January 7 meeting under reference here is reported upon in telegram 14, January 7, from Frankfurt, p. 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2].

3 Under reference here is the Fifth Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers, held in London, November 25–December 15, 1947; for documentation on that session, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 676 ff.

4  Marshal Sokolovsky’s statement, which was published in the Soviet press, on January 22, is printed in Vneshnyaya politika Sovetskogo Soyuza, 1948 god, Chast’ (Part) I (Moscow: 1950), p. 365.

At the 79th Meeting of the Control Council, February 11, 1948, Marshal Sokolovsky made another, similar, lengthy statement, protesting the issuance in the United States zone of occupation of Proclamations 7 and 8 regarding the reorganization of the Bizonal Economic Council and the establishment of the Bizonal Supreme Court. Sokolovsky’s statement was reported upon in telegram 346, February 12, from Berlin, not printed. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–1248)

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2148: Telegram

[Document 518]

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, January 21, 1948—5 p. m.

172. Seventy-seventh meeting Control Council held January 20 included following: 1. Council unable reach any agreement re distribution between zones German refugees received since war’s end (item two mytel 3633, November 261 ). British, French and US members all emphasized concern re this important and serious question, British suggesting establishment overall German commission as advocated Moscow CFM. While presently unable accept this proposal, French member expressed willingness study possibility absorbing some additional refugees his zone, indicating, however, food, coal and other supplies are limiting factors. Only real solution obviously would consist German emigration. Soviet member referred vaguely necessity, before establishing any German commission, of providing necessary conditions, political and economic, such as land for farmers, adding British zone contains many Poles and Soviet citizens who should be repatriated. British member agreed withdraw his paper from agenda.

2. Council was unable agree plan for repatriation German war prisoners (item four mytel 3700, December 102 ). US member emphasized his obligations already carried out, French reporting that at current repatriation rate 25,000 monthly, the 300,000 prisoners remaining France will be repatriated end 1948. Soviets also promised meet this deadline, refusing, however, give any monthly repatriation plan, beyond informing Control Council regarding arrival each shipment. Soviet member also stated his government has not and will never attempt recruit prisoners as certain western powers have done, to which US replied by emphasizing free character such recruiting, same time referring past recruiting labor from Germany under conditions unclear western powers (Comment: referring, of course, Soviets). Then Council agreed drop question from agenda.

Sent Department 172; pouch copies to Moscow, London and Paris.

Riddleberger

1  Not printed; it reported that the Coordinating Committee at its 144th Meeting on November 25, 1947, had failed to reach agreement on a British proposal to redistribute German refugees among the various zones of occupation. The British were particularly concerned at the overcrowding of refugees in their same of occupation (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2647).

The Coordinating Committee, whose delegates held the rank of general or equivalent, acted on behalf of the Allied Control Council in carrying out the decisions of the Council, exercised day-to-day supervision and control of the activities of German central administration, the coordination of problems calling for uniform measures in all zones, and the preliminary examination of matters to be considered by the Control Council.

2 Not printed; it reported that the Coordinating Committee at its 145th Meeting on December 8, 1947, discussed the preparation of a plan for the repatriation of German prisoners of war. A principal obstacle was Soviet reluctance to provide information regarding the rate at which Soviet authorities would repatriate prisoners still in their custody. The Soviets claimed that 150,000 prisoners of war had been repatriated between April and December 1947. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1147)

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–148: Telegram

[Document 519]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, February 1, 1948—1 p. m.

258. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson Eyes Only. At the end of today’s meeting the Control Council1 went into executive session to consider the US currency reform proposal.2 Marshal Sokolovsky read a prepared statement starting off with the remark that the US proposal was unacceptable to the Soviet delegation. He said that the Soviet delegation considers it necessary: (1) That the Allied Control Council adopt a resolution condemning plans for separatist currency reform on a zonal basis and also prohibiting publication of stories in the press on this subject;

(2) That ACC take a decision to establish a German central finance administration and central bank of issue;

(3) That present US proposal is only part of the total fiscal and monetary reform program now pending in the Finance Directorate and it cannot be carried out in part. As Finance Directorate has been working on plan for long time it should now be required to complete its work;

(4) In order to safeguard the currency and protect working classes in Germany an extraordinary property tax should be enacted. Sokolovsky stated that at Moscow Council Foreign Ministers session3 it was pointed out that monetary reform should be accompanied by an extraordinary property tax.

(5) For purpose of reaching agreement, Sokolovsky said, it is considered possible to authorize the printing of currency in Berlin under quadripartite supervision but the Saatsdruckerei should be isolated from the US sector (thus abandoning prior Soviet insistence on printing in Leipzig as well as Berlin).

Koenig for French delegation stated agreement in principle to US proposal adding that if discussion is carried much further he would have to propose certain conditions of technical character.

Robertson for UK delegation accepted US proposal in principle and added remarks described as of a subsidiary nature. UK might be in agreement with some of Sokolovsky’s remarks but he appeared to make quite definite one condition; namely, that condition precedent to currency reform should be establishment of central German finance department. As CFM debated this without success how could ACC succeed where CFM has failed. It would also be difficult to have one central department established divorced from all other German central government machinery. UK regards financial reform as something urgent and overdue. Robertson pointed out that merely to tell Finance Directorate to hurry up and produce proposal is not enough to deal with matter properly. ACC should decide on something like US proposal here and now.

Clay stated that further comment seemed superfluous. US proposal submitted on theory it contained points on which all were agreed. Apparently it is unacceptable. Under ACC rule where agreement is not possible zone commanders must proceed as they see fit. Clay stated he would study the question in this light and be prepared to advise his colleagues at next meeting of action US proposes to take.

Sokolovsky replied that it seemed to him that Clay might just as well have not submitted his ultimatum proposal and to have done as he wishes. Clay is member of ACC having same rights us others. Why should his proposal have such an ultimatum form without taking consideration of other points of view? USSR cannot understand Clay’s “ultimatum, he said. Sokolovsky added that at last meeting he listened attentively and said he would study US proposal. He did this and considers that Soviet statement made today merits just as much attention. Of course, he said, if General Clay’s statement had a different purpose that is another matter. In that case he should have warned ACC that US would stand on its position and carry out a separatist monetary reform according to its wishes.

Clay replied that as Soviet delegation had stated US proposal is unacceptable it could not be stated that US had issued an ultimatum. Sokolovsky stated as a condition that study could only be made if no zonal action was contemplated. It is the Soviet delegation that is issuing an ultimatum. Under original agreement that leaves only alternative to zone commanders to proceed independently in absence of ACC agreement.

Sokolovsky replied that Clay’s remarks merely confirmed first impression that Clay had made up his mind to carry out separate monetary reform. Sokolovsky’s statement, he said, did not reject US proposal and Soviet statement proves that USSR approaches quadripartite monetary reform with the utmost seriousness. USSR willing to make great concession as formerly it insisted on printing currency in both Leipzig and Berlin. While Soviet delegation very much desires uniform monetary reform evidently this is not US delegation’s taste and latter obviously wishes to carry out reform on unilateral basis.

Sokolovsky stated further that CFM took decision in Moscow and expected ACC to establish the five central German departments4 Therefore, CFM has nothing more to do with this, having given the necessary authorization. Soviet delegation made its proposal to establish central finance administration and bank of issue because it is not possible to carry out currency reform without these agencies. Finance Directorate has already come to agreement on creation of central German bank of issue. While currency is being printed in Berlin, Sokolovsky said, Finance Directorate could agree all these questions and no time would be lost. Sokolovsky requested finance advisers to give an opinion as to how long printing would take in Berlin and stated that he did not connect the creation of a central German Government or other central German departments with the present proposal as a condition. If there was a real desire to do so we could coordinate US and USSR proposals without difficulty. If my colleagues would have enough patience, Sokolovsky said, I would go through the US proposal point by point and it would be evident that US proposal is acceptable with some exceptions but we must insist that Soviet proposal be studied.

Robertson pointed out that at CFM Moscow there was agreement to set up central German agencies but subject to overriding condition of establishment of German economic unity and apparently that would be a long time in coming. French and US agreed with Robertson.

In reply to question whether USSR considered as a sine qua non the establishment of a central finance department, Sokolovsky refused to give further explanation. He asked that further study be given both proposals, adding that he would circulate Soviet delegation proposal in writing.

Clay stated that Soviet proposal not clear and pointed out that currency reform has now been debated for the past two years. In the meantime, German financial situation had gotten steadily worse. Present US proposal was taken from previously agreed directorate papers and is not essentially an American proposal. Clay stated that he hesitated to take step to break off quadripartite negotiations to reform currency. US however unwilling to continue with financial conditions existing in US Zone. In a final effort to prevent collapse of quadripartite negotiation Clay stated one more proposal. He suggested Finance Directorate should sit in executive session from now until next ACC meeting taking Soviet paper, French and British observations and US proposal and report to ACC in executive session at next meeting as to what Finance Directorate are able to agree or disagree. Then ACC would decide definitely whether there is or is not to be quadripartite monetary reform. French delegation accepted. Soviet delegation accepted stating that twenty days should be necessary but all delegations finally agreed that Finance Directorate report should be considered at February 10 meeting.

Session closed with Sokolovsky’s statement that he believed that new printed money is already in Clay’s pocket and made a further reference to General Marshall’s London statement on this subject.

There was a certain amount of sentiment on the part of US, UK and French delegations to break off negotiations on this subject at end of today’s session but as it did not seem to make much difference from an operational point of view it was considered more prudent to permit an additional ten days consideration of the question.

Murphy

1 This was the 78th Meeting of the Allied Control Council for Germany. The regular transactions of the meetings were reported upon in telegrams 261, 262, and 265, February 2, from Berlin, none printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–248). Topics discussed included a draft law for compulsory social insurance, the restriction and control of potentially dangerous personnel of the former German armed forces, and a proposed Soviet plan for the liquidation of German war potential.

2  In a letter of January 29, 1948, to Jacob D. Beam, Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs, not printed, Ambassador Murphy outlined the financial reform plan presented by General Clay to his colleagues on the Allied Control Council at the 77th Meeting, January 20: “1. Currency reform for Germany will be established at an early date.

“2. Area in which Staatsdrukerei Berlin is located will be removed from US Sector and placed under four-power guard and control.

“3. Reich debt shall be declared null and void.

“4. Monetary Commission shall be under Finance Directorate.

“5. Commission will be charged with preparation and issuance of currency and conversion of bank accounts as outlined in paper.

“6. Distribution of currency in amounts decided by Inter-Allied Currency Commission will be made through Central or Land Banks of respective zones. These banks will be required to surrender old currency within sixty days (with 10% of amounts issued). Amounts will be held by occupying powers at ratio of 10:1.

“7. Except as provided, no new money will be issued or distributed except by authority of the Control Council.

“8. Matter is to be kept confidential and is to be handled by the Control Council and not by Directorate.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/1–2948)

3 The Reference here is the Fourth Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers, March 6—April 20, 1947. Documentation on the session is presented in Foreign Relations, 1947, Volume II, chapter II.

4 For the Council of Foreign Ministers decision with respect to the form and scope of the provisional political organization of Germany, including the establishment of central administrative agencies, see document CFM (47) (M) 121, April 11, 1947, ibid., p. 436.

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–1248: Telegram

[Document 520]

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent Berlin, February 12, 1948—midnight.

342. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson (Eyes Only). Reourtel 258, February 11 Control Council held executive session at end of yesterday’s meeting2 to consider report of finance directorate on currency reform.3 The report showed no complete unanimity and the chairman asked if all the delegations maintained the positions taken in the directorate. Upon indication by the US and UK members that their positions were maintained, Sokolovsky then made explanatory statement along following lines.

Agreement had been reached in the directorate on some points and positions were not far apart on others, citing place of printing, rate of exchange, Reich debt, prices and wages. In opinion of Soviet Delegation it is therefore possible to start printing new currency in Berlin under quadripartite control. This printing will take some months which will give time enough to settle other questions on which agreement has not yet been reached. If agreement cannot be reached in Control Council on certain of these questions, they can be referred to the governments for decision. He would therefore make the following proposal:

With a view to hastening monetary reform for all Germany and in order to maintain uniform currency, finance directorate should be instructed (a) to begin printing of new German currency based on principle that it be prepared at the Staatsdruckerei in Berlin under quadripartite supervision, (b) to continue discussion on draft law on financial reform for purpose of presenting to Control Council in near future proposals on questions which require a decision by Control Council.

General Clay stated there was merit in the Soviet proposal but before accepting he wished to offer three amendments as follows: (1) In proceeding with printing of money a period of 60 days must be set within which agreement must be reached. This would give all the time needed to consult governments and work out disagreements. It would be useless to have the currency if we could not agree on principles under which it would be issued.

(2) US Delegation will not be prepared to establish a central German finance department unless by time agreement is readied on currency reform we have come to agreement on all the wider issues that separate the Control Council. General Clay held that these wider issues are not a deterrent to printing and issuing currency when ready.

(3) When Control Council has finished using Staatsdruckerei for this purpose it revert to US sector.

Robertson then stated that UK views coincided very closely with Clay on points (1) and (2). On amendment (1) it must be clear what Soviet proposal means. He understood it as a proposal to print a new currency and not one that resolves problem of financial reform. Printing of currency is only a means to an end and it is therefore necessary to have assurance that those ends will be reached. Discussions on these matters have been taking place for several years and agreements are infrequent. He cited recent failure to get agreement on price of coal. Under Soviet proposal disagreements would be referred to governments but Robertson doubted if issues of this sort can be settled quickly.

On second amendment offered by Clay, Robertson wanted to hear from Sokolovsky whether he withdrew his reservation currency reform could not be effected unless central finance agency is established. This reservation is not compatible with desire for rapid progress. Such a central administration obviously cannot be set up in absence of agreement on larger issue of economic unity. In conclusion Robertson accepted Clay’s proposal and felt that time allowed was generous.

Koenig accepted Clay’s first amendment and on second stated that French position in opposition to central agencies before economic unity and before other political problems are settled is well known.

In reply Sokolovsky stated that if delegations are serious in wanting uniform financial reform they can all make concessions when discussing unagreed questions. Only the Soviet Delegate has made concessions to date. He was disposed to agree with Clay that other questions should be settled within 60 days and thinks this period is long enough to make agreement possible if good will is shown.

Clay said he assumes Sokolovsky will approach all questions involved with an open mind as do the other delegations. He attaches great importance to uniform currency reform and therefore has only one position which is fixed, as explained in his amendment. If Soviet proposal permits Council to go ahead, then it can be done.

Koenig as chairman then suggested that the Soviet proposal as amended by US proposal be agreed and the secretariat should draft a resolution incorporating these points for approval at the next session. The finance directorate would be instructed to start the currency printing and to begin work on its report. This proposal was adopted.

Riddleberger

1  Supra.

2 This was the 79th Meeting of the Allied Control Council for Germany. Regular transactions of the meeting are reported upon in the following document.

3 The report under reference is not printed.

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–1248: Telegram

[Document 521]

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, February 12, 1948—4 p. m.

347. Under “other business”, Soviet member 79th meeting Allied Control Council held February 11 protested action western powers regarding both Kulturbund and Peoples Congress movement.

In discussing Kulturbund (mytel 304, February 61 ), Soviet member continued unwilling agree organization should apply Kommandatura for authorization, even though British and US members intimated application would receive favorable consideration. In view continued impasse, question withdrawn agenda.

Soviet member then referred protest addressed ACC by Peoples Congress permanent committee against prohibition this movement three western zones (refer my despatch 107, January 232 ). Soviet member praised this movement and suggested ACC authorize it throughout Germany. In reply, British member questioned Soviet claim that Peoples Congress enjoys support great majority German people, emphasizing that as regards British zone most Germans and most political parties regard movement as “political trick by one political party,” which explains British prohibition. US member emphasized that whoever Peoples Congress movement represents, it certainly doesn’t represent German people US zone. Debate ended with usual Soviet charges directed western powers, including alleged US opposition “all progressive democratic ideas”.

Sent Department 347; pouch copies Moscow, London, and Paris.

Riddleberger

1 Not printed; it reported that the Coordinating Committee, at its 149th Meeting, February 5, had had a fruitless discussion regarding the status of the Kulturbund (740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–648). The Kulturbund, a Communist-dominated intellectual and cultural organization, had been prohibited from functioning in the American, British, and French zones of Berlin pending its registration in accordance with an Allied Kommandatura decree of January 1947. The Soviet authorities insisted that such registration was unnecessary inasmuch as the Kulturbund had been in existence since 1945.

2 Not printed. The German Peoples Congress (Volkskongress) Movement was a Communist dominated mass organization called into existence in late November 1947. Although generally boycotted by non Communist German political forces, it quickly became a principal feature of political life in the Soviet zone of occupation. The announced aim of the Peoples Congress Movement was the achievement of German unity. It held its first national meeting in Berlin in December 1947. In late January 1948, American and British occupation authorities prohibited the Peoples Congress from functioning in their zones. Subsequent to that action, the Permanent Committee of the Peoples Congress addressed letters to the American, British, and French occupation authorities and to the Allied Control Council protesting the ban on the Movement in the western zones of occupation.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–2148: Telegram

[Document 522]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, February 21, 1948—4 p. m.

420. Extent to which Soviets now using quadripartite meetings as propaganda forum was further shown 80th meeting Control Council held February 20, when Soviet member1 referred discussion February 17 Coordinating Committee regarding implementation Directive 22 (item two mytel 390 February 182 ). Soviet member read a long prepared statement emphasizing unsatisfactory implementation directive 22 and refusal Western Powers discuss four point Soviet CORC proposal. In reply, British member stated unwilling discuss Soviet proposal on account same clearly false allegations which caused him refuse discuss Soviet demilitarization plan Control Council. US member followed with extremely effective statement, supporting British refusal discuss papers containing such wild charges, charges which were particularly tiresome because Soviets had been making them for last two years. Each occupation power entitled use such military installations as required its needs, and world would not be greatly disturbed by fact that a few underground structures not yet destroyed. In contrast, emphasized US member, we hear constant rumors of shipbuilding in Rostock, uranium mining in Soviet zone, and orders from Soviet zone placed US sector Berlin for delicate war instruments. Even tho these were only rumors, they impede quadripartite agreement this important question. Precisely in order eliminate such rumors, US proposed 1946 establishment quadripartite committee to inspect all zones freely. British and French accepted, but tho this proposal has been before Control Council two years now, Soviets have not yet accepted. If Soviet member seriously interested demilitarization question, he should accept now and “quit talking about few holes in the ground”. French member, subscribing US statement, also gave certain figures proving degree execution Directive 22 French zone. Soviet member replied in somewhat vague rambling statement, again charging British failure carry out demilitarization, and suggesting demilitarization question cannot be reduced to one of a commission travelling around. Such commissions have already travelled around, and British have just blocked CORC agreement regarding inspection naval bases by such commission. Control Council finally agreed CORC should endeavor bring together into one paper all outstanding questions regarding demilitarization.

Sent to Department as 420; pouch copies London, Paris and Moscow.

Murphy

1 Marshal Sokolovsky. Also attending this meeting of the Council were Generals Clay, Robertson, and Koenig.

2 The telegram under reference, not printed, reported that the subject of German demilitarization and a Soviet proposal for quadripartite inspection of the four zones of occupation to ascertain the degree of demilitarization actually achieved consumed much of the 150th Meeting of the Coordinating Committee held on February 17 (740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–1848).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–348: Airgram

[Document 523]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

confidential Berlin, March 3, 1948.

A–182. Reflection on the course of events at the Allied Kommandatura1 during first two months of 1948 seems to lead to the conclusion that Soviet tactics have again changed. Reference to the numerous airgrams from this Mission reporting Kommandatura meetings will show that following the breakdown of the London Conference there was a relatively harmonious period in which the atmosphere was comparatively friendly and agreement could be reached without too much difficulty on matters of second-rate importance. The friendly atmosphere continued through the first three weeks of January but the ability to reach agreement steadily decreased. Beginning roughly with the meeting of the Commandants on January 21 the atmosphere has steadily deteriorated and the Commandants have been brought to a point at which it appears that agreement is impossible on even the most routine questions.

The Soviet delegation now seizes upon every question on the agenda and every statement by any other delegation no matter how simple, how friendly or how innocent, to launch violent propaganda attacks on the other three delegations. It may be said that the attacks are directed against the U.S., British and French delegations in that order. Recently the French have received their full share of insults. It is impossible to discuss any question objectively or concisely. The last five sessions have lasted for from nine to eleven and a half hours.

We know that Soviet tactics frequently serve only a temporary aim and they may well be reversed tomorrow. Their present tactics, however, seem designed to irritate, confuse and tire the other three delegations with the possible aim of trapping them into unwise decisions out of sheer exhaustion and impatience, or to goad them into some precipitant reaction upon which the Soviets could seize as a pretext for breaking up the Kommandatura in a manner favorable to their propaganda.

It is perhaps not without significance that Soviet diatribes return again and again to one of three points. First, they continually charge the Western delegations with violation of multipartite agreements, frequently mentioning specific accords such as the Potsdam Agreement. Second, they continually charge the American and British delegations with the intention to disrupt quadripartite harmony and the quadripartite administration of Berlin. This was the burden of their charges on March 2 (see my airgram no. 181, March 32 ). Third, they allege that it is the intention of the other Allies to use Berlin as a means of interfering in the affairs of the Soviet Zone.

It has been demonstrated in the past that the Soviet Government (like the Nazi Government) charges the other person with those things which it itself intends to do. It is therefore pertinent to ask whether the constant reiteration of the above-mentioned three charges in sessions during the past five weeks presages a Soviet intention to break up the quadripartite administration of Berlin. It must be emphasized that there has been no explicit evidence at any level of such an intention. It may only be suspected as an implicit result of Soviet tactics.3

Murphy

1 The Kommandatura was the chief inter-Allied governmental organ for Berlin. It was composed of the four Allied Commandants for Berlin (Colonel Frank Howley—United States; Major General E. O. Herbert—United Kingdom; Brigadier General Jean Ganeval—France; Major General A. G. Kotikov—Soviet Union) and their advisers and assistants.

2 Not printed; it reported on the 5th Meeting of Allied Commandants for Berlin, March 2 (740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–348).

3 In a message of March 5 to Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Chamberlin, Director of Intelligence, Army General Staff (Forrestal Diaries , p. 387), General Clay warned that subtle changes in Soviet attitude suggested the possibility of a sudden outbreak of war in the near future.

Memorandum by Frank G. Wisner, Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas, to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) 862.515/3–1048

[Document 524]

Memorandum by Frank G. Wisner, Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas, to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)1

top secret [Washington,] March 10, 1948.

I. The Problem:

To review the present US position with respect to currency reform on a quadripartite basis in Germany.

II. Discussion:

The “Discussion” is set forth at Tab “A”.

III. Conclusions and Recommendation:

Although important points of difference continue to exist in the current quadripartite discussions, further concessions may be made by the Soviets. In brief, we may be approaching agreement in the ACC on quadripartite currency reform for all of Germany. The question arises whether this is desirable from the US standpoint, since quadripartite currency reform might enable the Soviets to frustrate further the economic recovery of western Germany by the use of obstructive and delaying tactics with respect to such a currency reform program. Furthermore, a quadripartite currency, as compared with a bizonal or trizonal currency, would deprive us of a very important monetary instrument for achieving the effective economic administration of the western zones and might impede the realization of some of the arrangements which we are now working out on a tripartite basis.

On the record, General Clay’s instructions still stand as favoring the achievement of quadripartite reform if attainable promptly. The progress in the negotiations in Berlin necessitates an immediate review of our position to determine whether it is still in our interest to have a quadripartite currency reform in view of the changes in the European situation which have occurred since the decision to propose such a reform.

It is considered that the institution of currency reform on a bizonal (or tripartite) basis, instead of on a quadripartite basis, would represent a very definite move toward recognition of the East-West partition of Germany but, at the same time, an important move toward much needed economic stability in western Germany. It is believed, therefore, that a decision in this regard is one which should be taken at the top level within the Department and after consultation with the Secretary or the Under Secretary of the Department of the Army.2

However, it is recommended that General Clay be instructed that the policy of this government is no longer to reach quadripartite agreement on currency and financial reform in Germany, and that, accordingly, his objective should be to withdraw from quadripartite negotiations not later than the end of the sixty day limit now agreed upon in ACC for discussion of quadripartite currency reform.3

IV. Concurrences:

This memorandum is concurred in by EUR, CE, L, OE, andE.

Frank J. Wisner

[Annex]

Tab “A”

II. Discussion:

It was agreed at a U.S. Delegation meeting in London, at the close of the CFM, that currency reform in Germany, particularly in the bizonal area, was an urgent matter. The Secretary authorized General Clay to make one final attempt to achieve quadripartite agreement to financial reform, including currency conversion, in the ACC. Accordingly, General Clay introduced a revised US plan on January 20 in the ACC. This proposal dealt with currency printing and conversion rather than the broader aspects of financial reform.4

On January 30, the Soviet delegate put forward a counter-proposal which differed from the United States proposal chiefly by envisaging immediate creation of a central finance department and bank of issue. General Clay took the position that such creation is premature pending the establishment also of other central administrative departments requisite to an integrated program for economic unity.5

On February 11, the ACC decided that an effort should be made within a time limit of sixty days to obtain agreement in ACC on a program of currency conversion, including the treatment of public and private debt; in the meantime, preparations should go forward for the printing of a new currency in the American sector in Berlin under quadripartite controls.6

The latest advice to General Clay with respect to the United States position on achieving a quadripartite agreement for currency and financial reform in ACC was set forth in Warx 95596 of February 9, as follows: “Policy objective is to reach quadripartite agreement provided attainable promptly.”7

While in Washington recently Ambassador Murphy got in touch with Mr. Draper and both of them felt some concern that a quadripartite plan might be forced upon us which would not fully protect the needs of the bizonal area and which might result in delaying tactics by the Soviets with consequent confusion in the bizonal economic program. Mr. Draper queried General Clay. The latter cabled a reply on February 13, the gist of which is that in view of Soviet agreement to the printing of a new currency in Berlin and their revised position that the creation of a central financial administration is not a prerequisite to ACC agreement, General Clay found it necessary to continue the negotiations since to do otherwise would cause it to appear that the US is making a move to partition Germany. Accordingly, General Clay agreed to the above-mentioned limited period in which further negotiations would go forward in the ACC. It is understood that General Clay also indicated on February 13 to Mr. Draper that preparations were being made so that a bizonal currency could be issued by June 1, in event of failure to achieve ACC agreement.

In a cable, dated March 7, to Mr. Draper, General Clay states that in Finance Directorate meetings, subsequent to the ACC meeting of February 11, the Soviets have again sought to make the main issue the creation of a Central Finance Agency and a German Central Bank of Issue. Meanwhile, the Soviets have been slow in discussions on arrangements for the printing of a new currency. Also, General Clay summarizes, under the following general headings, the important quadripartite discussions which have taken place from February 11 to date: capital levy, treatment of the Reich debt, funds of “active Nazis”, frozen bank accounts in the Soviet zone, funds belonging to government authorities (i.e., treatment of mark holdings of members of the Occupying Forces, and of German local, provincial and higher budgetary authorities), and funds belonging to Occupying Powers. General Clay states that he is by no means convinced of the sincerity of the Soviet offers and that it seems likely that the Soviets are playing for time and trying to put us on record as against economic unity. He adds that such action on their part does not affect his target date for bizonal or trizonal action.

1 Another copy of the memorandum, filed under 740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–1048, indicates that the memorandum was delivered to Under Secretary Lovett on the afternoon of March 10.

2  The source text bears Under Secretary Lovett’s following handwritten marginal notations opposite this paragraph: “(a) OK to consult with Army (& Treasury if necessary)

“(b) OK to change instructions to Clay after agreement with Army & (Treas if necessary)

“(c) Better act fast.”

3  Lovett approved this recommended change in policy on March 11. The matter was then taken up with the Department of the Army which sent a cable to Clay, notifying him of the change in policy. Clay concurred in the change and indicated that he had felt for some time that quadripartite agreement could not be reached. (Memorandum toy Charles Hilliard ofO, March 23, not printed, 862.515/3–2348.)

4 For an outline of the American plan under reference, see footnote 2, p. 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519].

5 Regarding the Soviet plan under reference in this paragraph, see telegram 258, February 1, from Berlin, p. 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519].

6 For the report on the Control Council’s meeting of February 11, see telegram 342, February 12, from Berlin, p. 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520].

7 The message under reference here is not printed.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.00B/3–1248: Telegram

[Document 525]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, March 12, 1948—5 p. m.

573. Despite prohibition western zones, German communism is continuing to promote Peoples Congress movement as one of its main current efforts to win popular support (remytel 474, March 2.1 Despatches 107, and 228, dated January 23 and February 172 ). Second National Peoples Congress, which will be held Berlin March 17–18, will evidently not only demand peoples referendum regarding German unity but will also elect so-called German Peoples Council (Volksrat) consisting 300–400 members, about 100 of which representing western zones, and headed by 29–man praesidium, which will claim to be the only real body representing German people.3

Though most Germans evidently remain rather apathetic towards Peoples Congress movement, its appeal to nationalist and PGO-unity sentiments may make it one of more successful Communist-Front movements to date. Some local observers fear that the Volksrat, which after Berlin Congress may also be constituted at lower local levels northeastern Germany, may develop into Communist-dominated action committees, which could later play role similar recent Czech developments. Another reason for continuing emphasis Peoples Congress movement may well be Soviet-Communist desire avoid having to hold elections due autumn 1948 Soviet zone, as it appears likely SED might do even less well than 1946.

Sent Department 573; repeated Moscow as 69, London as 71, and Paris as 67.

Murphy

1 Not printed; it reported that the Communist-organized Peoples Congress would hold its second national meeting in Berlin on March 17–18, coinciding with the celebration there of the one hundredth anniversary of the Berlin Revolution (862.00/3–248).

2 The despatches under reference are not printed.

3 The second Peoples Congress was held in Berlin on March 17–18 and resulted principally in the election of a Peoples Council (Volksrat), a Peoples Presidium, and a decision to plan for a national referendum on German national unity. Reports to the Department of State indicated that the Congress, the Council, and the Presidium showed even greater control by the Socialist Unity Party (Communist). For the texts of resolutions passed by the Congress, see Ruhm von Oppen, Documents on Germany, pp. 282–283. For the text of the statement made by the Secretary of State at the opening of his news conference on March 25 condemning the activities of the Peoples Congress, see Department of State Bulletin, April 4, 1948, p. 456.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–2048: Telegram

[Document 526]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret   niact Berlin, March 20, 1948—7 p. m.

651. Allied Control Council 82nd meeting, March 20, held at request Soviet chairman (comment: March 17 Coordinating Committee having found no regular business for ACC agenda), in order discuss further Prague declaration by Czechoslovakian, Polish and Yugoslav Governments on Germany as well as results recent London tripartite conference.1

Western delegates again refused discuss Prague declaration (mytel 519, March 72 ), emphasizing question handled at governmental level and its propaganda nature. Among other things, Soviet member charged this action again proved western powers do not seriously regard Control Council as quadripartite organ of government for Germany, but merely as suitable screen to hide their unilateral actions western Germany. Soviet member withdrew item from agenda.

Soviet member then demanded that colleagues should inform Control Council fully regarding decisions taken London Conference and directives they had received as result. Considerable discussion followed in which among other things British member charged Soviet with failure advise ACC of unilateral actions taken his zone, and both British and US delegates emphasized provisional nature London Conference and fact that it had only made recommendations to governments concerned, as result of which no “directives” had as yet been received. Soviet member was also assured he would be informed fully when such directives received.

Finally, Soviet member stated that, due refusal Western powers give information required regarding London Conference, he was forced to make statement (comment: reading prepared statement which presumably constituted real purpose call this ACC meeting).3 Sokolovsky then charged London decisions concerned questions within Control Council’s jurisdiction, and western powers refusal discuss them indicated desire avoid revealing tripartite agreement reached London, contrary Potsdam, which would prevent establishment peaceful democratic Germany. Situation is being created in which only Soviet delegate informs Control Council regarding his zone. Thus other delegates proving they have broken away from Control Council machinery on Germany, taking upon themselves responsibility for consequences. This proves he said Control Council no longer exists as organ of government. Actions resulting from unilateral London decisions cannot be recognized as legal. Stating that he saw no sense in continuing “today’s meeting,” Sokolovsky declared it adjourned. (Comment: at this point entire Soviet delegation left conference room, following which a short discussion occurred in which three western powers agreed chairman’s unilateral action terminating meeting was improper.)4

Sent to Department as 651; repeated to Paris as 109, to London as 82, to Moscow as 76.

Murphy

1 For documentation regarding the Praha Declaration of Foreign Ministers of February 18, see telegram 158, February 18, from Praha, pp. 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230] ff.

2 Not printed, but see the editorial note, p. 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239].

3 For the text of Marshal Sokolovsky’s statement, see The Soviet Union and the Berlin Question, pp. 18–20, or Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, pp. 574–575.

4 For General Clay’s account of this meeting, see Clay, Decision in Germany, pp. 355–357.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–148: Telegram

[Document 527]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, April 1, 1948—5 p. m.

746. Now that US representative has become chairman Control Council for April, whether Soviets will continue quadripartite meetings will be tested. The following are presumably main factors which have prompted them bring Control Council machinery to its present standstill (mytel 738, March 31, and previous1 ): (1) Since fusion British and American zones, and recent London conferences with respect of a fusion all three western zones, Soviet position and propaganda in Germany has given Kremlin increasing grounds for concern and dissatisfaction. Hence threat to regard Control Council as having been destroyed by actions western powers “behind its back” may represent bold Soviet effort to induce western powers to liquidate bizonal administration and terminate further discussions looking towards eventual establishment trizonal fusion.

(2) Charge that western powers have destroyed Control Council constitutes an important element in Soviet plan force all three western powers out of Berlin, in order liquidate this remaining “center of reaction” east of Iron Curtain. Next step may be Soviet denunciation of agreement of November 14, 19442 and demand for withdrawal western powers. In view prospect that such ultimatum would be rejected, Soviets may move obliquely endeavoring make it increasingly impossible or unprofitable for western powers to remain on, for example, by interfering with slender communication lines between Berlin and western zones, taking further action toward splitting up city, bearing down on non-Communist political parties in Soviet sector, et cetera (reference my despatch 445, March 223 ). In this connection, it is probably significant that current Soviet-Communist propaganda campaign regarding alleged invasion Soviet zone by organized bandits and refugee workers from western zones (reference my A–238 March 25 and A–247, March 29 and Moscow’s telegram 75, March 304 ) suggests Soviets may be forced, in order safeguard economic order northeastern Germany, to ensure “proper regulation and control” of railways and highways connecting Berlin and western Germany, “which pass through Soviet zone.” At same time, Soviets have in recent quadripartite discussions raised whole question of present air corridors into Berlin. In any case, our Berlin position is delicate and difficult. Our withdrawal, either voluntary or involuntary, would have severe psychological repercussions which would, at this critical stage in European situation, extend far beyond boundaries of Berlin and even Germany. Soviets realize this full well.

(3) A third reason for Soviet threat to break up Control Council may be Soviet desire, for propaganda reasons inside Germany and in order endeavor recapture initiative from western powers, to proceed with establishment of German government located Berlin and based on Peoples Congress movement and its “German Peoples Council.”5 They would thus give impression that these, as contrasted western powers, are promoting German self-government and eventual independence. Now that Communist regimes have been so firmly established in satellite states east of Germany, Soviet-Communist propaganda position there need no longer fear drastic Soviet step in Germany.

Sent Department as 746; repeated Moscow as 91; London as 94; and Paris as 120.

Murphy

1  Telegram 678, March 23, from Berlin, not printed, reported on this problem in summary as follows: “Several important Quadripartite meetings, including Deputy Commandants [of Berlin] still scheduled 24 March. It would seem Soviets desire continue quadripartite work in restricted fields, eliminating certain quadripartite bodies. In this connection Generals Clay, Robertson and Noiret agreed this afternoon to instruct their respective elements Allied Secretariat to inform Soviets that British, French and US elements would not send delegations to quadripartite directorate and committee meetings until Control Council shall have met again. Only Kommandatura excepted this ruling.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–2348)

Telegram 738 under reference here, not printed, reported that the Soviet chairman for March of the Control Council had not called the Council meeting that normally would have been held on March 30. It was further reported that the Soviet-controlled press in Berlin was placing the blame for the suspension of the Control Council upon the three western powers. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/3–3148)

2 For the text, pee United States Treaties and Other International Agreements (UST), vol. 5, (pt. 2), pp. 2063–2065. For documentation regarding the preparation in the European Advisory Commission during 1044 of the agreements on zones of occupation and control machinery for Germany, see Foreign Relations, 1944, vol. i, pp. 100 ff.

3 Not printed.

4 Neither printed.

5 Regarding the Peoples Congress movement, see telegrams 347, February 12 and 573, March 12, from Berlin, pp. 875 [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521] and 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 524 and Doc. 525].

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–148: Telegram

[Document 528]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent Berlin, April 1, 1948—6 p. m.

748. Pesronal for Saltzman and Hickerson (Eyes Only). My 739, March 31.1 General Clay had three telecons yesterday afternoon and evening with Royall, Bradley, Collins and Chamberlain re action to be taken as result of Soviet demand for more intensive control our military train service into Berlin. I understand matter was referred by Army to Joint Chiefs of Staff and the President. End result was authorization to Clay to maintain same number US soldier guards and same weapons carbines as heretofore. Clay had proposed doubling guards. Guards will be ordered to prevent Soviet military from entering US military passenger trains but not to shoot unless first fired upon. In case of passenger trains, train commandant would supply Soviet authorities with list of names of passengers. In case of freight trains number of guards will be same as heretofore with similar instructions and train commandant would supply Soviet military with a manifest of freight cars. In case of highway traffic between Berlin and Helmstedt we would submit to identification of passengers and vehicles.

Accordingly, reply was sent to General Dratvin’s letter received yesterday to effect we could not accept Soviet demand but that we would be willing to have train commandant in case of passenger trains supply Soviet military authorities with lists of names of passengers and in case of freight trains train commandant would supply Soviets with manifest of freight carried. Also, that we would not object to an identification of vehicles and passengers in case of highway traffic between Berlin and Helmstedt.

[For the remainder of this telegram, see page 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106].]

Murphy

1 Not printed: it reported that Lieutenant General Dratvin, Deputy Chief of the Soviet Military Administration for Germany, addressed a letter on March 30, 1948, to Major General Hays, Deputy United States Military Governor for Germany, explaining certain restrictive procedures on highway and railway travel for American personnel and cargo crossing the Soviet zone of occupation en route to Berlin. The new procedures were to go into effect on April 1 (800.515/3–3148). The texts of General Dratvin’s letter and Brigadier General Gailey’s reply of March 31, were transmitted in telegram 749, April 1, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–148). For the full texts of these letters, see Documented Chronology, pp. 87 and 89. For extracts from these letters, see Germany 1947–1949, p. 202.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–248: Telegram

[Document 529]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Berlin, April 2, 1948—8 p. m.

770. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson (Eyes Only). Reference mytels 7481 and 749 April 1.2

Few additional developments affecting our Berlin situation have occurred since our last message. Soviet authorities have requested we close down effective May 1 US aid station which is midway on only highway available Berlin–Helmstedt traffic. Soviet representative also called on Chief of Staff OMGUS yesterday with request that US Signal Corps personnel stationed Weimar for purpose maintenance three repeater stations required for our official telephone service from Berlin to be removed from Weimar. British received similar request to remove their signal corps from Magdeburg. These repeater stations are necessary for maintenance of telephone cable lines. Special security measures have been taken by Soviet authorities in Soviet sector Berlin and we understand circulation is to be restricted from 9 p. m. to 7 a. m. daily. It is rumored that by 15 April Berlin will be surrounded by numerous control stations and that many streets will be closed to traffic. Thus far automotive traffic only highway connecting Berlin with British zone has not been interrupted, but we believe it only question of time until further difficulties there will be encountered. We also believe Soviets will endeavor interfere with our air traffic via the single authorized air corridor Berlin via Magdeburg and that initially they will protest against US commercial air traffic now available for Germans.

General Robertson called on General Clay today for discussion re further action. He said London has not viewed favorably idea of instituting some form retaliatory action against Soviet ocean shipping such as restrictive regulations re bunkering, passage through Suez Canal and like measures.3 Apparently London felt this would create too provocative a situation.

Robertson also inquired whether it might not be well to feel out Soviet authorities Berlin for purpose ascertaining whether compromise solution would not be possible. His deputy, Brownjohn, called yesterday on Soviet deputy, Lukyantehenko, in order obtain clarification Soviet intentions back of present step. While he was politely received, he found no inclination modify travel regulations which have been reported mytel 749. General Clay and I took position that as our reply to Soviet request was only about 24 hours old it would be better wait reasonable time before indicating any willingness make concession. We feel it would be better test out Soviet intentions now. If their present actions are part of larger and more ambitious program there is in our opinion nothing to be gained by hasty offer concessions. Obviously our logistical situation in Berlin is unfavorable and British and French supply situation is thin. However, there has been no interruption thus far in CAD freight traffic to Berlin. Food for 2 million odd Berlin residents supplied by US/UK/French from west thus continues available.

Number of intelligence reports, coupled with Soviet press and radio statements, confirm tightening Soviet security measures along entire line of demarcation between Soviet and US/UK zones occupation.

General Clay has been in communication with Department Army re continuation of dependents in Berlin. There are approximately 3000 here. Evidently Army has been under some pressure from Congressional and other quarters to return dependents to US. I understand matter will be left in General Clay’s hands. If any statement were published in Washington to effect arrangements were being made evacuate US personnel from Berlin it would have undesirable effect on our local situation.

Sent Department 770, repeated London personal for Douglas 102, Paris personal for Caffery 128, Moscow personal for Smith 97.

Murphy

1  Supra.

2 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 748, from Berlin, supra.

3 Telegram 749, April 1, from Berlin, not printed, reported that Murphy had been informed that the British Government was actively considering possible retaliatory measures against the Soviet Union including a proposal to refuse bunkering facilities to Soviet shipping and the imposition of restrictive regulations against Soviet shipping passing through the Suez and Panama canals (740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–148).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Bogotá 710. J/4–248: Telegram

[Document 530]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Bogotá 1

top secret   us urgent Washington, April 2, 1948—6 p. m.

Telmar 21. Eyes Only for Secretary Marshall from Lovett. Clay indicated in a conference with Royall and Bradley this morning that the situation in Berlin has settled down considerably and that they are not facing any immediate crisis. Highway and air traffic conditions are normal today. Civil freight for the Germans is moving normally and military freight into Berlin appears to be normal and so far has been free from attempted search. Passenger trains are not moving and there has been no outward movement from Berlin of military freight in view of the Soviet action reported in Telmar 17.2

Clay states that they can continue under present conditions indefinitely and he strongly recommends that this course be followed, even though it will require a substantial increase in air passenger lift. He believes that any compromise proposal would play into Soviet hands and have a seriously adverse effect for the western powers throughout Europe. He does not favor the evacuation of dependents from Berlin. Despite the imaginative reporting of some correspondents in Berlin, Clay reports that the Americans are calm and continuing their everyday life normally.

Clay does plan to speed up the transfer of employees to Frankfurt, to remove gradually unessential employees and to allow dependents who are nervous to go home. Otherwise he believes we should sit tight for the time being and await the next Soviet move, which he anticipates within the next few weeks. He does not favor any governmental action at this time. The British show a partiality for seeking some compromise arrangement, though Robertson has personally given assurances he would stick with our position. The French are firm now but Clay fears they are not wholly reliable.

Lovett

1 The Secretary of State was in Bogotá as Chairman of the United States Delegation to the Ninth International Conference of American States.

2 Not printed; its report was based on telegram 748, April 1, from Berlin, p. 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528] (710.J/4–148).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–648: Telegram

[Document 531]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret   priority
niact Berlin, April 6, 1948—6 p. m.

799. Clay and I have had discussions with Robertson and Steel re shocking plane incident reported my 796, April 5.1 Steel showed me copy Robertson’s report to London following Robertson’s visit to Sokolovsky at Potsdam. From his report and our conversations, it appears that after delay of about 3½ hours necessary to trace down Sokolovsky, Robertson was politely received. Sokolovsky’s immediate line was that pilot of British plane was at fault and that he resented British radio reports of the incident which attributed malice to Soviet pilot. Sokolovsky indicated that incident was not intentional. Robertson took line that he had not come to discuss details of responsibility hut to propose proper inquiry which he felt should be on quadripartite basis under rules laid down by Air Safety Center Berlin. While Sokolovsky did not disagree, it was apparent he leaned toward a bipartite inquiry.

While not minimizing gravity of incident, Steel believed it might have salutary effect of discouraging further Soviet aggressive acts because he thought public reaction in England and US would be violent enough to shock even Russians. Both Robertson and he do not believe Soviet pilot was ordered to or did intentionally cause the collision and that no other incidents of buzzing of British transport planes by Soviet fighters have occurred since last January. Steel said there is no doubt that Sokolovsky is gravely disturbed and clearly on defensive.

While of course British do not regard Sokolovsky’s explanation as satisfactory, they have accepted Soviet assurances that British aircraft would not be molested in traveling Berlin corridor. Under circumstances, Robertson revoked previous order under which British planes would be accompanied by fighter escorts and General Clay took similar action.

According to Steel, Soviet pilot actually buzzed British plane about two miles away from Gatow Airfield but within so-called safety belt. British plane crashed within and near edge Soviet Zone near Gatow Airfield; Soviet plane and body of pilot crashed in British sector Berlin. Hours after the happening, Soviet authorities had not permitted removal of charred remains passengers which were under Soviet military guard. One British soldier was allowed to also stand guard.

British adopted similar tactics in surrounding wreckage of Soviet plane when Soviet military attempted remove body of pilot and some of plane wreckage.

According to information which British confirm, two American citizens were killed, together with British crew of five, and seven other British nationals, passengers. Soviet pilot of course was also killed. American citizens are Mrs. Frances Ruth Clough of OMGUS and T/3 Pasquale Pintus of 248 ordnance service platoon, Berlin Command, both of whom had been in London on visits. Clay is considering US protest to Sokolovsky as two American lives were lost in this incident.

Sent Department as 799; repeated London as 115; Moscow as 109; Paris 140.

Murphy

1 Not printed. On April 5 a British civil passenger aircraft approaching Gatow Airfield in the British sector of Berlin was struck in the air by a Soviet fighter aircraft. Both aircraft crashed. All the occupants of the British aircraft were killed.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman) 862.515/4–1348

[Document 532]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman)

secret and personal Berlin, April 13, 1948.

Dear Charlie: Yesterday after the meeting of the three Military Governors with the Benelux representatives,1 General Robertson called an informal meeting of General Clay and General Noiret which I attended. It developed that he wanted to discuss the attached draft2 which he had prepared regarding the possible issue of a new currency in Berlin. This was merely an informal suggestion and there was no agreement to it, but General Clay had not been warned of the meeting and was not prepared to discuss the paper with which, in any event, he does not agree. I mention the matter to you merely as an index of the lack of agreement which exists on the subject of currency reform generally. It seems to me, and I know that General Clay feels that way about it, that months of time have been lost in indecision. We started-off bravely enough and put up millions of dollars for the printing of new currency, but things have really not advanced very far beyond that point. General Clay said yesterday quite frankly that he thought we ought to be ashamed of ourselves for failure to progress in the midst of a critical situation.

The Berlin situation is peculiarly difficult, surrounded as Berlin is by the Soviet zone. If the SMA decides to issue a new currency for the zone, it will be, according to the technicians, practically impossible for the Western sectors of Berlin to operate on an independent basis.

The foregoing is for your confidential information.

Sincerely yours,

Robert Murphy

1 Regarding the meeting under reference here, see telegram CC–3854, April 13, from General Clay to the Department of the Army, p. 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119].

2 The paper referred to here is not printed. It outlined the steps which the American, British, and French Commanders in Chief in Germany would take should the Soviet Military Administration in Germany proclaim the issuance of a new currency in the Soviet zone of occupation of Germany.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–1348: Telegram

[Document 533]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]

top secret Berlin, April 13, 1948—8 p. m.

853. Personal for Hickerson. Your 635 April 10.1 I personally feel that Control Council is defunct organization. Soviet Union has taken first step toward its practical dissolution. If this assumption correct efforts on our part to revive and keep going the organization would be exploited by Soviet representative here. If latter would attend future meetings it would only be presumably to use Control Council as sounding board for additional harangue. We should take no steps to dissolve Control Council. It technically is badge of German unity. It would be preferable to let onus rest on Soviet Union for its dissolution.

In meantime Soviet Union undoubtedly will continue with series of strictures and annoyances which it has inaugurated affecting our continued presence in Berlin. Whether among this series will be included later some form of denunciation of the agreements under which we operate here remains to be seen. Thus far there is no indication of such intention. There is of course the practial feature of food supply of three western sectors of Berlin with population of about 2,300,000 who are now fed with food imported from the west. I am sure that USSR will avoid action to cut off this important item until last moment.

Only feature, frankly, which worries me about our Berlin position is strength of determination in Washington to maintain the position. What I fear is that, in view unfavorable logistics this situation, its expenses, and, assuming dissolution the Control Council, lack of specific purpose for our presence here may over the longer term combine to vitiate US determination to hold fast. Elimination of Control Council activity of course would automatically permit substantial reduction OMGUS personnel and some of this is already in progress. There will also unquestionably be reduction in number American dependents residing Berlin.

[For the remainder of this telegram, see page 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118].]

Murphy

1  Ante, p. 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116].

The United. States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–1548: Telegram

[Document 534]

The United. States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]

secret Berlin, April 15, 1948—9 p. m.

888. Yesterday at Frankfurt after regular fortnightly Bipartite Board Meeting I attended final meeting Military Governors Conference. General Koenig came to Frankfurt for this purpose, meeting having on its agenda only approval of final report to be submitted to London Ambassadors Conference on Germany. Text of report with two minor amendments is as reported in mytel 859, of April 13. Copy of report was sent by air today to London and is being mailed to Department.1

After this principal item of business was dispatched, there was discussion of Berlin situation about which French have evinced a certain nervousness during the past days. General Koenig raised the question stating that he would like views of his British and American colleagues on an idea, which he would discuss today at Paris, of approaching Sokolovsky informally in Berlin regarding a meeting of Control Council. He thought it might be useful to smoke out Soviet position and that such an informal conversation might bring out more clearly Russian position regarding traffic regulations in the corridor and general intent of SMA regarding the future in Berlin. Both US and UK representatives would not concur. We thought that it would be untimely to do so at this stage immediately prior to Italian elections and forthcoming London Conference. It would also be interpreted by Russians as sign of weakness because they would be certain that French representatives had been requested to undertake this action by us. I took this occasion to ask what private opinion of Robertson and Koenig is regarding status of Control Council. Both replied that they considered Control Council as finished and that for the rest it became question of tactics and timing. French of course are strong in view that onus for initiating action regarding establishment of German Government, issuance of separate currency, dissolution of Control Council, et cetera, should fall on Russians. Most of the French here have never liked the selection of Berlin as seat of Control Council in any event and would not go into mourning, I am sure, if Berlin were abandoned. Neither would they deplore the partition of Germany. Robertson privately feels that Berlin is, from our point of view, merely question of time, and that the bulk of our effort beginning possibly in June should be concentrated in Frankfurt.

[For the remainder of this telegram, dealing with the discussion of the establishment of a Western German Government, see page 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121].]

Murphy

1 The telegram under reference is not printed. For the text of the report of the Military Governors, see document MGC/P(48) 16, April 14, p. 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120].

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–1548: Telegram

[Document 535]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent Moscow, April 15, 1948—6 p. m.

696. Eyes Only. Since General Clay, and we understand General Robertson as well, have made public statements1 to effect that British and ourselves are going to remain in Berlin in accordance with previously reached agreements, I believe decision whether to send proposed joint note Soviet Government (Deptel 402, April 142 ), should be based on best Berlin estimate whether current provocations Berlin and Vienna are opening gun in all-out campaign to make our position Berlin and Vienna untenable or whether they consider reasonable agreement can be reached and that firm stand already taken will deter Soviets from pushing matter further.

(1) If believed situation is such that note should be sent concur in its despatch with following suggested change:

In dealing with Soviets one must of course always bear in mind that face plays an important part in their thinking. Therefore, believe that if decided make joint diplomatic démarche, proposed note, general tenor of which I approve, should end with paragraph leaving door open to an expression of Soviet views on how to work out general arrangements for our continued occupation Berlin and Vienna.

(2) On other hand if Berlin believes compromise can be reached I am of opinion despatch of note might hinder rather than help reaching solution.

Sent Dept 696. Dept pass Berlin 96, Vienna 7 from Moscow.

Smith

1 General Clay’s statement was made to the press on April 3. General Robertson’s statement was included in speech delivered in Duesseldorf on April 7.

2 Not printed; for the text of the note under reference here see telegram 1423, p. 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) 840.20/4–1748

[Document 536]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

top secret
personal London, April 17, 1948.

Dear Bob : I have had several visits with Churchill since my return, the last being on Thursday when he discussed the possibility of war with the Soviet.

You probably know his view, that when and if the Soviet develop the atomic bomb, war will become a certainty, even though by then Western Europe may have become again the seat of authority and a stable political part of the world. He believes that now is the time, promptly, to tell the Soviet that if they do not retire from Berlin and abandon Eastern Germany, withdrawing to the Polish frontier, we will raze their cities. It is further his view that we cannot appease, conciliate, or provoke the Soviet; that the only vocabulary they understand is the vocabulary of force; and that if, therefore, we took this position, they would yield.

You know better than I the practical infirmities in the suggestion. They cover quite a wide range, including the political.

Churchill believes also that if the Soviet try to inconvenience us in Berlin,1 we should retaliate by insisting upon a careful examination of the crews of every one of their ships putting into our ports, by annoying their shipping and their use of the Suez and Panama Canals, and by any other method which appears to be appropriate.

I, myself, doubt very much the wisdom of this policy, principally because it won’t cause enough inconvenience. It seems to me to wave the strand of straw, disguised as a club, would have no effect. On every score the other measures about which we have been talking, if taken reasonably soon, may present to our friends to the east such a demonstration of solidity and irresistible force that we may be able to deter the Soviet and to quash any ideas that they may have. I am inclined to think that such a demonstration, even though the Soviet may ultimately develop—if they have not already developed—the atomic bomb, may deter them.

I think there is much in what Churchill says; that we cannot appease, conciliate, or provoke the Soviet; that we can only arrest and deter them by a real show of resolution. Such a demonstration of determination, combined with the re-establishment of Western Europe as a center of power, may lead to a satisfactory settlement.

Kindest regards and best wishes.

Yours ever,

Lew

1 At this point Ambassador Douglas added the handwritten interpolation “(as they are doing)”.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/4–2248: Telegram

[Document 537]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, April 22, 1948—11 a. m.

1423. Personal for Douglas, Clay and Murphy. Brit support French desire to have Berlin situation considered in London and they suggest it be discussed by heads of delegations, assisted by respective Commanders-in-Chief.1 In Deptel 13972 we expressed opinion such review unavoidable and on the whole desirable.

For discussion and negotiation with Brit and French (not however as agenda item) revised draft of US note to Sov Govt is quoted below. Subject to Brit and French views expressed to you, we still believe joint approach might have a useful effect, particularly since inaction could lead to deterioration of western position in Berlin. Instead of producing drastic Sov reaction envisaged by Brit and French, joint approach might prevent the kind of measures they fear. If Brit and French feel strongly to the contrary, however, we will not insist on this point and you will of course endeavor to ascertain what line of alternative action they consider desirable. Request we be advised before final agreement on course of action is reached.

Begin revised draft. “In the light of recent developments in Berlin (and Vienna) the US Govt considers it necessary to make unmistakably clear to the Sov Govt its position in this matter. The rights of the US as a joint occupying power derive3 from the total defeat and unconditional surrender of Germany; the international agreements undertaken in connection therewith by the Govts of the US, UK, France and the Sov Union define the zones in Germany and sectors In Berlin which are occupied by these powers and establish the control of Germany and Berlin by these victor nations. The right of the US to its position in Berlin is fully as strong and valid as the right of the Sov Union to its zone of occupation in Germany. In order that the pertinent agreements might enter into effect, and in the expectation that they would be observed by the other signatories, the US withdrew its forces from Thuringia and Saxony in 1945.

It clearly results from these undertakings that Berlin is not a part of the Sov zone but is an international zone of occupation and the seat of Allied control of Germany. Understandings in good faith engaged in by the zone commanders and subsequently developed in the Allied Control Authority, as well as practices sanctioned by usage, guarantee the US, together with the other powers, free access to Berlin for the purpose of fulfilling its responsibilities in Germany. The US Mil Commander in Germany has been given strict orders to continue to participate in the joint occupation of Berlin and to take all appropriate action necessary for that purpose.

The foregoing considerations apply with equal force to the position of the US in Vienna.

The US Govt expects that the Sov Govt will not authorize or permit actions on the part of its Mil commanders inconsistent with the rights which the US Govt has exercised since its forces entered into Berlin and Vienna and which it is fully determined to maintain.”4 End revised draft. Army Department concurs.

Sent to London as 1423; repeated to Vienna for Yost and Keyes eyes only as 368.

Lovett

1 The reference here is to the London Six Power Conference on Germany which resumed on April 20, 1948.

2 April 20, p. 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126].

3 The draft of this note, transmitted in telegram 402, April 14, to Moscow, not printed, read as follows from this point: “… from the international agreements undertaken by the Govts of the US, UK, France and Sov Russia defining the zones in Germany and sectors in Berlin which are occupied by these powers and establishing the joint control of Germany and Berlin. In observance of these agreements and in the expectation that they would continue to be observed by the other signatories, the US withdrew its forces from Thuringia and Saxony.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–1448)

4 The final paragraph of the note transmitted in telegram 402, read: “The US Govt expects that the Sov Govt will not authorize or permit actions on the part of its military commanders inconsistent with the unquestioned rights which the US Govt is fully determined to maintain.”

The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin Department of Defense Files: Telegram

[Document 538]

The Department of the Army to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

top secret
priority Washington, April 28, 1948.

Warx 80633. From CSCAD cite Econ. Personal for Clay.

State, Treasury and Army have considered subj of currency for Berlin Western Sectors and to assist in your resolution of this problem there are described below some alternative procedures, each in relation to specified situation, for your consideration and comment. This is in no sense directive or final pos but intended to develop exchange of views and acceptable solution.

1. It would be most desirable to maintain uniform currency for Berlin which would circulate freely in all sectors. Unless Soviets carry out conversion in their zone, this objective can most easily be accomplished by continuing use of RM as common currency for Berlin, without regard to conversion policy followed in Western Zones.

2. If conversion of RM takes place in Soviet zone, it is probable that “Sov mark” (our designation for new Soviet currency) will circulate alongside RM in Berlin, and may in fact substantially displace RM in Berlin. This most likely to occur if Soviet convert in their sector Berlin.

3. To avoid possibility of Sov mark becoming de facto Berlin currency through default, and to avoid emergence of dual currency in Berlin through similar default, it would be desirable at time of projected Soviet conversion, to reach immediate agreement with Soviets on uniform currency for Berlin, and on conditions under which that currency will be made avail to all sectors. Possible course would be to reach agreements on sp Berlin mark subj to quadripartite control, since this would safeguard prestige and sovereignty considerations and enable us to exercise some control over circulation and availability of new mark.

4. It is considered here that, failing agreement with Soviets for use of sp currency for Berlin, agreement to use Sov mark would not be acceptable even on condition that provision were made for financing of our occupation costs, nor on condition that adequate currency sups and banking facilities would be made avail in Western Sectors. Agreement to use Sov mark would not appear acceptable politically because currency issuance is sovereign power and it would be necessary to define accordingly area of circulation of currency as legal tender. If Soviets should suggest use of Soviet currency in Western Sectors, it should be made clear that we do not agree thereto and that we stand ready to introduce sp currency for Western Sector of Berlin if acceptable agreement cannot be reached with Soviets on uniform currency for all of Berlin as mentioned in Para 3 above.

5. Should it prove impossible to reach acceptable agreement with Soviets on use of uniform currency for all of Berlin, recommendation is that perforated DM be used in Western Sectors of Berlin. Perforated DM could be quickly introduced simultaneously or following Soviet conversion and these DM could be readily differentiated from DM used in Western Zones. This would permit invalidation of DMs issued in Berlin should it become necessary. Realize difficulty of having two currencies in one city but this may be unavoidable.

6. If decision is made to introduce perforated DM in Western Sectors of Berlin, presumably on conversion terms similar or identical to those in Western Zones, issuance of perforated DMs in exchange for Sov marks presented for such exchange should not be officially undertaken in Western Sectors. Conversely, however, consideration should be given to devising means whereby German officials could make provision for outpmt [exchange?] of Sov marks on hand for perforated DMs presented for such exchange in Western Sectors. Further, Western Sectors should unofficially permit free circulation of both perforated DM and Sov marks irrespective of action taken by Soviets in their sector to control circulation of perforated DMs. Permission for Sov marks to circulate in Western Sector would, consistent with pos stated in 4 above, be extended unilaterally. This would be done in interest and for convenience of population of Western Sector. There is some danger that free circulation of Sov marks in Western Sectors would have inflationary effect, but it is believed that desirability of maintaining industrial and commercial unity in Berlin would override this consideration unless inflation becomes severe.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/4–2848: Telegram

[Document 539]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, April 28, 1948—3 p. m.

1794. For the Secretary’s and Lovett’s, Eyes Only from Douglas.

1. Discussed at lunch yesterday the Berlin situation. Strang and Robertson for the British, Clay, Murphy and myself for the US were present (Deptel 1423, April 221 ).

2. British have no objections to a clear statement of our position and our rights. They have, however, doubts on the following points: (a) Whether the statement of the position should be communicated in a formal note; or

(b) by oral representations through diplomatic channels in Moscow.

They interpret the last sentence of the suggested note to mean that we are prepared to go to war, or at least commit organized acts of war in the event that the Soviet do not, by their actions, recognize our asserted rights. They wonder whether first, this is precisely what we mean; and secondly, whether it is a wise position for us to take. On their part they would not be willing to add the scorpion’s sting to the assertion of our rights.

3. As to the British position, it can be summarized as follows: (a) If the Soviet commit organized military acts of war (as distinct from a series of incidents) against them and US, they would go to war.

(b) If the Soviets, by employing additional annoying tactics and resorting to additional measures aimed at further restricting our communications with Berlin, the British would be prepared to use force for the purpose of preserving communications, depending upon the nature and character of the measures taken by the Soviet. For example, the British would be prepared to use fighter escorts to protect communication by air with Berlin. They believe that while this might lead to a series of incidents, this would not precipitate war. On the other hand, should a situation arise in which they would have to use substantial force to prevent the Soviet from effectively carrying out some non-military action aimed at making it impossible for us to remain in Berlin, they would want to think two or three times.

(c) The British are not prepared to take the categorical position that under all circumstances and in all events, they will fight to maintain a position in Berlin.

Briefly, the above means British will go to war in event clear organized act of war is committed against them by Soviet. They probably would not commit organized act of war against Soviet to preserve position in Berlin.

4. This statement of British is informal. Will talk with Bevin and will discuss privately with British and French this afternoon (not an agenda item).

5. We interpret the last paragraph in the suggested note to the Soviet to mean that we will fight to maintain the rights which we assert. Would appreciate your advice as to whether this interpretation is correct.2

Douglas

1  Ante, p. 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537].

2  In telegram 1555, April 30, to London, Secretary Marshall and Under Secretary Lovett replied to Ambassador Douglas’ query as follows: “Last sentence of draft note means that we intend to stay in Berlin and that we will resist force with force. It does not spell out the point at which force would be used. We feel that this is neither necessary nor advisable at this time. We will not, however, initiate the application of force.

“We do not believe that the interpretation which British have placed on this sentence is warranted.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–2848)

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Chase) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–2948: Airgram

[Document 540]

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Chase) to the Secretary of State

confidential Berlin, April 29, 1948.

A–363. The following comments arising out of the 17th Meeting Allied Deputy Commandants of Berlin on April 29, may be helpful to Department in evaluating present trends. (See mytel 1010, April 29, and A–852, same date1 ). The Soviets have developed a new tactic to irritate and confuse. They now can be counted on to change without warning or adequate reason long-established Kommandatura procedure. Thus at 9th Meeting of Commandants, they suddenly revised existing practice of interpretation and forced each Commandant’s interpreters to put his remarks into the foreign languages where hitherto it had been practice for each Commandant’s interpreters to translate the foreign languages into his language. This occasioned lengthy but futile wrangle at 17th Meeting of Deputies. They likewise refused to agree to put on agenda items requested by other Commandants or Deputies. This courtesy has hitherto invariably been extended by each Deputy to others. This occasioned debate of one hour at 17th Meeting over item which Soviets contended was not on agenda. They then refused to agree that the discussion on this point of procedure should be recorded in the minutes. Furthermore, they now refuse to follow existing procedure in matter of approving schedule of Deputies and Commandants meetings month in advance. They insist they will now be able to approve meetings only one meeting in advance which naturally makes for confusion and uncertainty.

It would appear from these tactics and others referred to in our reports that the Soviets seek to create a situation which is so confused that eventually an opportunity will be created for the break-up of the Kommandatura in circumstances so obscure that the break-up cannot be laid to them. Our impression is that they have not been altogether happy over the results of their walk-out from the Control Council and they are seeking to avoid repeating that action at the Kommandatura in any manner which would so clearly show them as the initiators of the action.

Other sidelights are of some interest and significance when taken as a whole. Thus, until about a month ago, it was the invariable custom for the Commandants or Deputy Commandants to shake hands with each other in friendly and ceremonious fashion at the end of each session. This custom is rapidly falling into disuse. The insulting and provocative nature of Soviet statements is such that the other three Commandants frequently turn away without shaking the hand of the Russian representative. On the other hand, when the Soviet representative feels or pretends to feel insulted, he takes the initiative in cold-shouldering his colleagues. Thus, at the 17th Meeting, he appeared to be feeling particularly bitter against Colonel Babcock, the U.S. Deputy; he therefore ostentatiously shook hands with the British and French Deputies and ignored Colonel Babcock’s out-stretched hand.

Formerly, the Soviet Deputy listened attentively to statements of his colleagues and took extensive notes on which to base his replies. It has been noticed that now he takes few notes but covers pages with “doodles.” It seems clear that the Soviets have given up all intention of listening to or discussing points raised by their colleagues, but have rather come with prepared statements and rigidly fixed lines of argument from which they do not deviate.

The Soviet representatives are beginning to exhibit another characteristic which may be indicative of depth of personal feeling or recklessness or lack of any substantial arguments. They are beginning to resort to personal attacks against their colleagues which are not only, of course, entirely out of place, but entirely ineffectual. Thus, at the meeting under reference, Colonel Yelizarov became very agitated by Colonel Babcock’s remark that reactionary forces are in control in the Soviet Union and in territories under its control, and that he sympathized with the peoples of the Soviet Union who are being mentally enslaved by these reactionary forces. Colonel Yelizarov alleged that Colonel Babcock’s nervous system was going to pieces but that he should try to control himself in spite of this and keep his remarks in proportion and within bounds. This statement, coming on top of ten hours of constant Soviet insults against the US, brought a burst of laughter from the Western delegations, and particularly from Colonel Babcock, whose nervous system at this point seems destined to outlast Colonel Yelizarov’s.

It is repeated that these observations are in many instances of minor importance, but their sum total will contribute to giving a better picture of the completely farcical character of Kommandatura proceedings at the present time. Those proceedings can only be understood if it is clearly realized that Kommandatura no longer has the least significance as a governing body for Berlin, but is merely one segment of a much broader battlefield on which a war of nerves and a propaganda war is being waged. All statements at the Kommandatura are made now with an eye to the German newspapers of the next day.

Chase

1 Neither printed; they reported on the 17th Meeting of the Deputy Commandants for Berlin (Col. william Babcock—United States; Brigadier Benson—United Kingdom; Colonel Jean Le Bideau—France; Colonel A. I. Yelisarov—Soviet Union). The meeting was described as “stormy” and given over entirely to exchanges of protests and insults. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–2948)

Editorial Note [Document 541]

Editorial Note

In a message of April 30, transmitted to Secretary of State Marshall in a memorandum of the same date from British Ambassador Franks, Foreign Secretary Bevin set forth his views on the current political situation with particular respect to relations with the Soviet Union. Bevin found reason for special concern over Soviet aggressive policies in Berlin and Vienna. In a reply given to the British Embassy on May 10, 1948, Secretary Marshall expressed general agreement with Bevin’s analysis of the current situation, particularly the advisability of making clear to the Soviet Government the determination of the Western powers to remain in Berlin. The communications under reference are included among the reports of developments of significance within the Soviet Union of concern to relations with the United States and other countries in volume IV

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Glay) to the Department of the Army Department of Defense Files: Telegram

[Document 542]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Glay) to the Department of the Army

top secret
priority Berlin, May 2, 1948.

CC 4140. From CINCEUR Berlin Germany personal sgd Clay to Dept of Army for CSCAD Wash DC. Reurad April WX 80633.1

1. Agree it would be most desirable to maintain uniform currency for Berlin to circulate freely in all sectors. Fear, however, Soviet plans for Berlin might be based on political rather than economic factors. Do not believe maintenance of reichsmark currency in Berlin at all practical after Soviet Zone currency conversion: (a) Because people would be forced to repudiate currency by lack of confidence and flood of reichsmarks from other areas, and

(b) Because Berlin and surrounding areas so closely related economically.

2. While impressed by your arguments as to sovereignty and prestige consideration, consider establishment of separate western sector currency most difficult and probably untenable in long run. Defacement of Deutsche marks by perforation or otherwise psychologically inadmissable since it would be tacit admission that we plan to withdraw from Berlin and invalidate our own currency issue. If forced to issue currency separately in Western sectors, we would have to issue Western Zone Deutsche marks in absence of prepared separate currency.

3. Therefore propose when time comes to negotiate with Soviets for monetary union of Berlin with Soviet Zone, provided that issue of Soviet mark in Berlin is under Kommandatura agreement and control. This would provide for reaffirmation of existing 4-power Kommandatura sovereignty in Berlin. As in case of monetary union between Liechtenstein and Switzerland, sovereignty would not be questioned if such agreement can be obtained.

4. In event no satisfactory terms can be reached for monetary union of Berlin with Soviet Zone, we would have to issue Western Zone Deutsche marks in Western sectors. Agree unofficial circulation of Soviet mark in Western sectors would be tolerated but do not fear inflationary effect as long as no effort made to fix official rate of exchange between the two for such circulation and as long as Deutsche mark remains sole legal tender in Western sectors. In fact, assume tendency to hoard Deutsche mark both in Berlin and in surrounding Soviet Zone would more than counteract any inflationary effect, while free exchange rate would automatically reduce value of Soviet Zone mark if too great a supply flowed into Western sectors. Anticipate no difficulty over occupation costs as long as our large food imports into Berlin continue, irrespective of currency which circulates these [there?].

[ Clay ]

1 April 28, p. 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 862.515/5–2248: Telegram

[Document 543]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

2219. For Lovett (Eyes Only) from Douglas.
top secret
us urgent London, May 22, 1948—11 a. m.

1. Clay has this minute called me from Berlin to tell me that on his arrival there,1 he was informed by Koenig that the French, who had previously agreed to institute currency reforms on a certain date—according to my recollection June 10—had said that they must postpone the time for thirty days. The reasons for this change as given are economic and political. (Embtel 2214, May 212 ).

2. This may throw some additional light on the attitude of the French.

3. It is possible that Massigli, when he stated yesterday afternoon that his government was prepared to proceed with currency reforms according to the time schedule, did not know of the change in policy of his government. If, however, he had been informed, then Koenig’s communication to Clay throws doubt upon the good faith with which the French are negotiating.

It is not without relevance to point out that the French note3 to the British Government, a copy of which was sent to Washington, states quite categorically that the French Government is prepared to proceed with currency reforms “at once.”4

Douglas

1 General Clay had been in London as an adviser to the United States Delegation to the London Six Power Conference on Germany. For documentation on that conference, see pp. 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125] ff.

2  Ante, p. 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173].

3 Presumably the note under reference here is that transmitted to the Department in telegram 2724, May 21, from Paris, not printed. See footnote 2, p. 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173].

4  In a memorandum of May 22, 1948, to Charles Hilliard, not printed, Assistant Secretary of State Saltzman commented as follows in connection with this telegram: “As the effective date of proposed currency reform to the Western Zones grows imminent, I do not recall that we have yet received from the Army a clear indication of such of the elements of the proposed reform as we or other interested agencies such as the Treasury and the NAC should have. If this is the case, will you please on Monday find out from Army whether they can provide us with such information as we appropriately need in view of our policy responsibilities and if they are unable to do so, please request them to obtain such information as promptly as possible.” (862.515/5–2248)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–2948: Telegram

[Document 544]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, May 29, 1948—noon.

2002. For Douglas and Clay (Eyes Only) from Saltzman. French have tried a new end run by asking for postponement currency reform at least until July first on grounds French zone food shortage and delay completion their plans. If as claimed by French Emb postponement would remove last obstacle to London agreement we would favor such brief delay on understanding that western zone commanders would press forward with necessary preparations and would be ready to institute currency reform immediately following any Sov conversion measure adopted prior to July first. We have not discussed this with Army here since Acting Secretary first wishes to get your views.1 [Saltzman.]

lovett

1 In telegram 2353, May 29, from London, not printed, Douglas expressed his doubt that the question of currency reform had any influence on the French position at the London Conference. But he further stated that if it were absolutely certain that postponement of the currency reform would remove the last obstacle to agreement at the London Conference, then he would recommend such a postponement (740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–2948). Subsequently, Douglas recommended that the French be told that currency reform was a matter which must be settled by the Military Governors (Telegram 2362, May 30, from London, not printed, 740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–3048).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–2948: Telegram

[Document 545]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 1

confidential Berlin, May 29, 1948—5 p. m.

1253. Almost complete disintegration quadripartite government of Berlin pointed up yesterday as Allied Commandants wallowed for more than 15 hours in disagreement abuse charges and counter charges during their 11th meeting. Sole agreement reached was to schedule next commandants meeting Friday June 11 and General Kotikov refused commit himself even tentatively to date for subsequent meeting. One can only conclude Soviets have no intention use Kommandatura for any purpose other than propaganda sounding board as their position all questions remained completely inflexible. Session was marked by usual Soviet rudeness and for last two hours Kotikov went out of his way to bait British Chairman General Herbert. By 1 a. m. as tempers thinned it appeared [possible a serious incident might occur as Kotikov appeared] intent on provoking other members; At US suggestion meeting adjourned shortly thereafter. Soviets continued to refuse permit their member public safety committee attend meetings unless General Herbert agreed reprimand his member on committee for alleged misconduct, which Herbert of course still refuses to do. When evident that Kotikov would not withdraw from position Colonel Howley declared Soviets thus destroyed most important Kommandatura committee rather than admit responsibility Soviet committee member for protecting a known criminal (Schubert) in one of principal police positions Soviet sector. Comment: This final breakup of public safety committee presumably will lead to rapidly increasing development independent police organizations in Soviet and western sectors. Soviet attitude probably not unrelated to recent action western powers in placing liaison officers in central police offices located Soviet sector.

In finally answering British statement regarding parcel post holdup in Berlin Kotikov presented fantastic statement which twisted facts out of all recognition, charging fault lay with western sectors and not with Soviet zone and sector authorities. With straight face he added “In view our desire to help Berliners our zonal authorities have taken steps to improve the parcel post situation” whereas western sector authorities have done nothing. In effect acceptance and dispatch of parcels from Berlin to western zones now placed under control Soviet zonal authorities through their power to license post offices authorized to accept such parcels. All of latter now located Soviet sector. Howley pointed out that Soviet action in permitting German postal authorities Soviet zone to control unilaterally arrangements for all Berlin without consulting Kommandatura amounted to breaking of ACA and Kommandatura agreements and constituted “a very dangerous and lamentable step.” Discussion deferred to nest meeting. Report on other aspects commandants meeting follows by airgram.2

Department please pass Moscow as Berlin’s 197.

Murphy

1 A handwritten note by Ambassador Murphy, attached to the copy of this telegram in the files of the Mission of the U.S. Political Adviser, reads as follows: “Gen. Ganeval tells me Kotikov has a new Pol Ad [Panin] whom he describes as a ‘killer’ who sits at Kotikov’s elbow and leaves him no discretion whatever. Panin takes a back seat.” (USPolAd Germany Files, Telegrams)

2 Airgram 468, May 30, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/5–3048).

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) 862.515/6–448

[Document 546]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for occupied Areas (Saltzman) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

top secret [Washington,] June 4, 1948.

Subject: Financial Reform, Western Germany

For your information, General Clay, in a Top Secret cable of June 2 to the Under Secretary of the Army, states that the first step had been taken on June 2 in a program which will lead up to financial reform on June 20. Between now and the date of reform, the various commands, the rationing offices and the banks are to be briefed, and bank notes transported to necessary destinations in the three zones.1

The reform is to be divided into two stages. The first stage will be published on June 19 for implementation on June 20. This stage involves the surrender of old currency notes and the distribution of new notes on a per capita basis to the population. The second stage will be published on June 26 for implementation on June 27. In this stage the percentage conversion of old money holdings will take place and provision will be made for treatment of the private debt and other measures of reform. General Clay has especially warned of the secrecy of the second step as well as of the first in order to avoid premature publicity. He states that the three Military Governors have agreed to inform the Soviet Military Government by letter on June 18 of the reform to take place on June 20.2

Following is a summary of the principal features of the prospective currency reform: a. The general ratio of conversion of old money is 10% to be converted, 10% blocked and 80% canceled. Special provision will be made for a one-to-one conversion of 60 or 80 marks per physical person and per employee, as the case may be.

b. Private debt is to be treated at the same ratio as in a. above. Foreign Reichsmark creditors are to be given the choice of accepting a similar reduction or of awaiting settlement by peace treaty. Foreign exchange debts are to remain unresolved pending the conclusion of a peace treaty.

c. No redemption of or interest on the Reich debt to be provided for at this time. Appropriate blocking measures to be taken pending the determination of the fate of Reich obligations. Disposition of foreign holdings to be left to peace treaty.

d. The capital structure of financial institutions is to be adjusted to reflect new conditions under the policies of the Bank Deutscher Laender and the supervision of the Land Central Banks.

e. Laws required in connection with the first step of the currency reform on June 20 are now being drafted by German technicians, subject to Military Government approval. Legislation is also to be enacted by the German Economic Council, within 90 days after the initiation of reform, in order to provide for capital increment and equalization taxes; also for an equalization fund with the revenue of such taxation in order that the currency reform may be as equitable as possible. The German Economic Council is also to consider measures relative to compensation for loss of external assets and loss resulting from reparation deliveries.

f. General Clay is taking the necessary steps relative to the conversion of military holdings of marks and to funds for encashment of prisoner of war certificates and military payment orders.

The Military Governors are continuing to consider any points of reform not yet resolved and attention is being given by a State–Treasury–Army group to any further messages to go forward to General Clay in connection with the above subject.

Charles E. Saltzman

1 In the message summarized here, General Clay also reported that the process of currency conversion could not be stopped without great embarrassment and loss of prestige (Department of Defense Files).

2 In his message CC–4602, June 8, from Berlin, not printed, General Clay explained that it had been decided to notify Soviet authorities on June 18 of the currency reform because this was the shortest reasonable time to inform them of the serious consequences of the measure (Department of Defense Files).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–1748: Telegram

[Document 547]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

confidential
us urgent Berlin, June 17, 1948—11 a. m.

1384. The Soviet Delegate walked out of the 12th meeting of the Allied commandants of Berlin 13 hours after session had begun on June 16. Circumstances of this withdrawal which may mean breakup of Allied Kommandatura were as follows: At about 1045 p. m., Colonel Howley, US commandant, proposed ending fruitless discussion then going on concerning British proposal for general 20% wage increase in Berlin and further proposed that session be terminated at about 11 o’clock as he felt nothing useful could be accomplished after that hour. Colonel Yelisarov, who was representing General Kotikov in latter’s absence, rejected Howley’s suggestion as he insisted he should not be deprived of right already enjoyed by others to present items under “other business”. He thereupon introduced lengthy statement practically repeating Kotikov’s 14-point labor program of last October 31. There was some discussion by Generals Ganeval and Herbert. Howley then said he had had enough discussion for one day and in view of the lateness of the hour and a heavy schedule ahead of him for the next day he was going home and to bed. He said he would leave his deputy who could have the next day off and who could, there fore, remain to listen to the discussion and report to him the next day. He thereupon withdrew.

Colonel Yelisarov began gathering up his papers, at the same time making some rapid statements concerning Colonel Howley, which were not adequately translated in the confusion which ensued. He arose suddenly, shook hands with the other somewhat startled commandants and withdrew with his entire delegation. General Ganeval, the chairman, called after him repeatedly to ask whether he would not stay to discuss the date of the next meeting. Yelisarov halted briefly in the doorway to say “no”. General Ganeval then arose and said that the sitting was terminated, not because of the withdrawal of Colonel Howley who had left his deputy to serve in his place in a perfectly regular manner, but because of the withdrawal of Colonel Yelisarov and the Russian Delegation.

It is impossible to say whether the Soviet action was dictated by pique or whether it represents a decision to capitalize on an incident which could easily be misrepresented in the press as a walkout of the American commandant. It is also not possible to say at present whether this incident can be bridged or whether it represents the final breakup of the Kommandatura. I might add that General Clay who was himself engaged in a meeting with UK and French representatives re currency and tax reform throughout last night is not happy over Howley’s abrupt action.

A report of the substance of the session, which included an agreement to increase rations in Berlin, will follow by airgram.1

Sent Department 1384, repeated London 242, Paris 243, Moscow 219.

Murphy

1 Airgram 506, June 18, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–1848).

B. The establishment of the Berlin blockadeB. The establishment of the Berlin blockade

[548] Editorial Note

[549] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, June 19, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–1948: Telegram

[550] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 21, 1948—6 p. m.

811.20200(D)/6–2448: Telegram

[551] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, June 21, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2148: Telegram

[552] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, June 23, 1948—11 a. m.

862.515/6–2348: Telegram

[553] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, June 23, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2348: Telegram

[554] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, June 23, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2348: Telegram

[555] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, June 23, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2348: Telegram

[556] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, June 24, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2448: Telegram

[557] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

Berlin, June 25, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2548: Telegram

[558] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, June 26, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2648: Telegram

[559] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, June 26, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2648: Telegram

[560] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, June 26, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2648: Telegram

[561] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 27, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2748: Telegram

[562] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Beam)

[Washington,] June 28, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2848

[563] The Secretary of the Army (Royall) to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

[Washington, June 28, 1948.]

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2848: Telegram

[564] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 28, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2848: Telegram

[565] Editorial Note

[566] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, June 30, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048: Telegram

[567] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, June 30, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048: Telegram

[568] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, June 30, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048: Telegram

[569] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, July 1, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–148: Telegram

[570] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, July 1, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–148: Telegram

[571] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, July 2, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–248: Telegram

[572] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, July 3, 1948—2 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–348: Telegram

[573] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 3, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–348: Telegram

[574] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in France

Berlin, July 4, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–448: Telegram

[575] The Secretary of State to the Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin)

Washington, July 6, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–648

[576] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 9, 1948—1 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–748: Telegram

[577] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

Berlin, July 10, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1048: Telegram

[578] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, July 10, 1948—noon.

862.515/7–1048: Telegram

[579] The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] July 14, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1448

[580] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

Washington, July 14, 1948.

811.2340/7–1448

[581] Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen) to the Secretary of State

Washington, July 14, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1448

[582] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, July 17, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1748: Telegram

[583] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 20, 1948—1 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2048: Telegram

[584] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 20, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2048: Telegram

[585] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 21, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2148: Telegram

[586] Record of Teletype Conference Between the Department of State and the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 22, 1948—2 p. m. London, July 22, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048

[587] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, July 24, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2448: Telegram

[588] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, July 24, 1948—1 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2448: Telegram

[589] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, July 26, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2648: Telegram

[590] Record of Teletype Conference Between the Department of State and the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 26, 1948—5:30 p. m. London, July 26, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048

[591] The Secretary of Defense (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State

Washington, July 28, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2848

Editorial Note [Document 548]

Editorial Note

In a letter to Marshal Sokolovsky dated June 18, General Clay announced the terms of the currency reform for the western zones of occupation of Germany, effective on June 20, but not applicable to Berlin. General Robertson sent a similar letter to Marshal Sokolovsky on the same day. In his reply to General Clay on June 20 (also sent to General Robertson), Marshal Sokolovsky took the position that the currency reform was illegal and completed the division of Germany, and he warned that Soviet occupation authorities would be obliged to take actions to protect the economy of the Soviet zone of occupation. In a letter of June 21, General Clay denied an implication made by Marshal Sokolovsky that Berlin was a part of the Soviet zone of occupation. Soviet authorities were invited to send their experts to a meeting with American, British, and French experts in order to resolve differences arising over the currency reform.

The texts of the letters exchanged between General Clay and Marshal Sokolovsky are printed in Berlin Senate, Berlin, Quellen und Dokumente, pages 1334 and 1341–1343, and Documented Chronology, pages 108–110. For the text of General Robertson’s letter of June 18, see Cmd. 7534, page 17, and Documents on Berlin, pages 33–34. Marshal Sokolovsky’s reply of June 20 is printed in Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, pages 579–580, The Soviet Union and the Berlin Question, pages 25–27, and Documents on Berlin, pages 63–64.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–1948: Telegram

[Document 549]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent Berlin, June 19, 1948—5 p. m.

1413. Immediate Soviet reaction to announcement of currency reform last night in field of Berlin traffic and transport was to suspend all interzonal passenger traffic and incoming traffic on all roads, including Autobahn. According to latest information available, outgoing traffic on Autobahn is being permitted as usual and this is confirmed by announcement in Soviet licensed press in Berlin this morning. Soviet order states water transport permitted but only with special permits and thorough control. Pedestrian entry into Soviet zone prohibited every where.

With respect to incoming rail freight traffic, Soviet authorities have informed British that they will receive only one train at a time at Marienborn. As it takes three to four hours to check a train, this will obviously reduce the number per day. Soviet rejections of freight cars in bad condition is continuing although British have likewise been rejecting on basis of stricter inspection. Soviet authorities have also demanded right to inspect guards on military freight trains. Clay considering possibility of prohibition on coal trains to Soviet sector of Berlin in retaliation. Certain of these measures are not unreasonable in view natural defensive action to protect Soviet Zone from influx of old currency.

General Robertson telephoned General Clay this morning suggesting that a vigorous protest be made immediately regarding the new Soviet traffic regulations. Clay replied, it seems to me correctly, that it would be better to wait for two or three days because the regulations themselves are not immoderate, stating his opinion that were the situation reversed, we on our side would have been required to take rather similar precautions. Should a protest be necessary, it would be better to allow matters to precipitate for a few days thus giving us an opportunity to gauge the Russian attitude toward the eventual continuance of the Berlin Kommandatura and toward the Berlin situation in general.

Repeated to London as 251; Paris as 255; and to Moscow as 225.

Sent Department as 1413.

Murphy

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 811.20200(D)/6–2448: Telegram

[Document 550]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret
us urgent Washington, June 21, 1948—6 p. m.

2389. For the Ambassador. Please maintain closest contact Brit/French Govt with view to obtaining its comments interpretation and information re Berlin. We feel developments furnish us opportunity adopting strong propaganda line. For your info following is text of guidance directive cabled USPolAd, Berlin: “ICD OMGUS advised through joint State–Army guidance channels that considered urgent here to utilize all media in all-out effort to expose current Sov strategy, i.e., attempt to undercut power of Berlin Govt by series of steps which inevitably result in hardships on Berlin population; that gross irresponsibility of policy which resorts to cutting off supplies for more than 2½ million Germans in order to achieve its expansionist aims should be stressed; and that basic position western occupying powers remains unchanged.

While point not emphasized in guidance suggest ICD also stress food shipments from Western zones for Berlin waiting ready to move and only blocked by Sov obstructionist measures.

Dept fully supports view vigorous campaign urgently needed to offset Sov propaganda blaming western allies for Berlin situation. Berliners should not be left in doubt as to who responsible.”1

Sent London as 2389; repeated Paris as 2274.

Marshall

1 In telegram 1474, June 25, from Berlin, not printed, Murphy reported that ICD was already taking steps along the lines of this telegram and that the U.S. controlled media had been fully mobilized to show the people of Berlin who was responsible for the situation in that city (811.20200 (D)/6–2548).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2148: Telegram

[Document 551]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret Berlin, June 21, 1948—4 p. m.

1420. For Saltzman and Hickerson’s Eyes Only. General Clay, after appropriate advice to Soviet High Command yesterday, ordered a US military freight train to proceed to Berlin from US zone via regular authorized corridor Helmstedt–Berlin. At Soviet check point Marien-born last evening about 5 p. m., Soviet authorities refused permission for train which was in charge of US Major Lefevra to proceed further. When US officer in charge attempted to force train through, it was apparently prevented from proceeding further as section of rail had been removed or by other mechanical device. The US officer has not yet been able to communicate with Berlin, and we are in the dark re details.

US Chief of Staff Berlin called on Lt. General Lukyanchenko last evening demanding that train be permitted to proceed, but Soviet reply said matter would be investigated explaining that special precautions had to be taken to prevent illegal entry of currency, etc., into Soviet zone. Soviets would have been willing to allow train to proceed If US agreeable to inspection of cargo and train personnel.

It should be added that train crew and guards had strict orders to avoid shooting although US guards were armed. When contact has been established with US officer in charge train and facts are ascertained, decision will be taken re further representation to Berlin Soviet authorities and you will be informed.

Please treat foregoing as Top Secret as Clay desires this very closely held.

Murphy

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.515/6–2348: Telegram

[Document 552]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

[Extracts]

secret
us urgent Berlin, June 23, 1948—11 a. m.

1440. Personal for Saltzman and Hickerson. At the quadripartite meeting of the financial and economic advisers 22 June1 the attitude of the Soviet representatives was one of inquiry; whether the western representatives had any information to offer regarding their plans for currency in Berlin. After several hours of discussion it became apparent that the Soviet position is that in future there will be but one currency in Berlin and that that currency will be the same as the one current in the Soviet Zone of occupation/The US representatives made it equally clear that their instructions did not permit them to consider such a proposition; that quadripartite sovereignty in Berlin requires joint authorization and control of currency; and that the latter must be a separate currency for Berlin. The UK position supported the US although it would have permitted discussion of technical features such as the possibility that Soviet zonal currency would be accepted for the city subject to certain conditions regarding issuance and control of the currency by the quadripartite Kommandatura, and the attachment of certain conditions such, for example as guaranteeing communication and transport for the Berlin corridor. The French position was weak and French financial adviser indicated that he was to refuse no compromise solution but before taking any position he was obliged to contact Paris.

After about four hours of discussion it was agreed to suspend and resume at 8 p. m. The Soviet representative proposed that agreement to meet again should be conditioned on agreement to discuss only Soviet proposal of a single currency for both the Soviet Zone and Berlin but US insisted on agreement to meet without limitation. Meeting suspended without definite commitment from Soviet representative who obviously was operating under the strictest kind of instructions to make no concessions.

Upon resumption of meeting at 8 p. m. the US representative stated again the US proposal that a special currency be approved by the four powers for Berlin and that the body authorized to deal with this problem under international agreement was the Kommandatura. He was supported by the UK and French representatives. When it became evident that the Soviet representative was unable to consider this proposal, he was informed that in the absence of an agreement the western powers would find it necessary to introduce in the three western sectors of Berlin the new Deutschmark currency. While the meeting was in session the Soviet Military Administration issued its orders for currency reform in the Soviet Zone including Berlin and a letter was received from Marshal Sokolovsky by each of the western commanders-in-chief dated 22 June reading as follows:

[Here follows the text of Marshal Sokolovsky’s letter of June 22 and extracts from Soviet Military Administration Order No. 111 on the introduction of the new Soviet zone currency. For the text of Sokolovsky’s letter, see Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, pages 580–581. For the text of Order No. 111, see Ruhm von Oppen, Documents on Germany, pages 295–300.]

General Clay and General Robertson are replying this morning to Marshal Sokolovsky’s letter reaffirming point of view to the effect that the Kommandatura is the duly authorized agency in Berlin to deal with the question of currency reform, and stating that in view of our inability to obtain Soviet agreement it will be necessary to introduce western zone German currency in Berlin.2 The expression “Berlin” is used rather than the “western sectors of Berlin” because the Soviet proclamation also reads that way. Thus far the French are still awaiting instructions from Paris and are unable to concur.

The proclamation to be issued by the Military Governors of the three western zones regarding the introduction of the deutschmark in Berlin is now being revised iii the light of the Soviet action and it is anticipated that it will be broadcast sometime today.3 The French representative is awaiting definitive instructions from Paris before he can give his concurrence. The Department will note that the Soviet currency reform is effective 24 June and it is anticipated that the western reform under the circumstances will become effective 25 June.

Sent Department as 1440; repeated London as 260; Moscow as 234; Paris as 266.

Murphy

1 For the full record of the meeting of the Finance Directory described in this telegram, see Berlin Senate, Berlin, Quellen und Dokumente, pp. 1347–1362, or Documented Chronology, pp. 111–122.

2 For the text of General Clay’s letter of June 23, to Marshal Sokolovsky, see Berlin Senate, Berlin, Quellen und Dokumente, pp. 1368–1369, or Documented Chronology, p. 125; for General Robertson’s letter, see Cmd. 7534, p. 18 or Documents on Berlin, pp. 64–65.

3 For the full text of the proclamation under reference here, released to the press, June 23, 2:30 p. m., see Berlin, Quellen und Dokumente, p. 1370; for an excerpt, see Documents on Berlin, p. 65.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2348: Telegram

[Document 553]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

confidential Berlin, June 23, 1948—8 p. m.

1450. Political developments in Berlin as result of currency reform announcements appear rapidly moving toward climax. Following Sokolovsky’s announcement of currency reform for “greater Berlin”, Colonel Howley ordered municipal government late this morning not to apply unilateral Soviet order to US sector; Order in similar sense given by British commandant at same time and French issued similar oral order. Subsequently three western commandants informed city government of intention to introduce new western Germany currency in western sectors Berlin. Proclamations and orders effecting this will be signed at 5 p. m. and given to press at approximately 7 p. m.

Shortly after noon today Soviet liaison officer summoned Lord Mayor Schroeder and communicated Soviet order that city government should not be removed under any circumstances to US sector Berlin without unanimous quadripartite approval. Howley states there is no plan to move city government but if it is broken up by Soviet action we will continue to recognize present city administration as government over all Berlin and will offer quarters in US sector.

City assembly and magistrat have met several times today, parties caucused at 3 p. m. and city assembly is again in session at present writing. City administration confronted with dilemma in view conflicting orders of Soviet and western powers. They expect stand firm on legal position that they can only carry out orders in all Berlin which are quadripartitely approved. General opinion is city government in present form cannot long survive. Communist demonstration of some proportions now occurring outside city hall (in Soviet sector). Speculation centers on intention of Communist minorities to walk out of city assembly this evening and action by Soviets to bar non-Communist officials and deputies from city hall.

Murphy

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2348: Telegram

[Document 554]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, June 23, 1948—8 p. m.

1451. For Saltzman and Hickerson. Today US liaison officer delivering communication to Marshal Sokolovsky was received by Colonel Vyrianov, chief of SMA liaison and protocol. Vyrianov who ordinarily limits contact to official formalities in this instance insisted on offering champagne and engaging in general conversation during course of which he asked whether US did not consider that it was skating on very thin ice in respect of its recent actions in Germany. He developed this into a discussion of the danger of war and then made the suggestion which he carefully qualified as a strictly personal observation that possibly an adjustment of present zonal lines in Germany should be made with a view to eliminating the friction caused by US and Soviet contact in Berlin. Our officer inquired whether he meant our departure from Berlin and return to Thuringia and Saxony originally occupied by US forces. Vyrianov said he could not be that specific but that “some readjustment” might be a solution for present difficulties.

Attach significance to this Soviet voluntary comment because Vyrianov is close to Sokolovsky. It may indicate desire to bargain and disinclination to force the issue.

Murphy

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2348: Telegram

[Document 555]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

top secret Washington, June 23, 1948—7 p. m.

711. Following signal sent Army Dept by General Clay June 21: “Recent Sov actions restricting highway and railway travel to Berlin appear to make it essential that our Govt take its proposed step to protest through our Emb in Moscow. Of course, Sovs will reply that steps are necessary to prevent inflow of currency. That, however, we are prepared to prevent on our military transport. I believe we were prepared to protest but held back because Brit were not ready to join us. However, as matters now stand additional restrictions are being added and we have not as yet protested governmentally. I do not expect protest to change conditions but it seems to me it should be placed on the record.” Following is State-Army reply:

“Do not believe it is opportune to send note to Sovs at this time, particularly in view of previous Brit and French lack of support for this proposed step. (Your signal CC 4805.) Unilateral action our part would simply invite easy and obvious answer from Sovs and would reveal lack of unity. Deterioration in Berlin situation is being considered by State and Army in connection with over-all Sov policy; which may become apparent after Sov and satellite meeting being held under cloak of Cominform. We are following matter closely here and would welcome your further views and current info re essential Berlin developments.”

Marshall

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2448: Telegram

[Document 556]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

secret Paris, June 24, 1948—7 p. m.

3360. In conversations today De Leusse, chief of Central European Division, Foreign Office, expressed himself as very uneasy about the measures which might result from the Warsaw Conference.1 He stated that he had no knowledge of the nature of these measures nor did he expect any in advance of their announcement by the Soviets but he expected that decisions would be reached rapidly and would be of the gravest importance in relation to the situation in Berlin.

He stated that France was committed to follow the lead of US and the UK at Berlin, that he personally believed that a serious error had been committed by the Western powers when the Berlin crisis first arose by overstressing the importance of remaining in Berlin and announcing that we would remain there at all costs. He considered that Berlin was not in fact any more quadripartite than Western Germany in which quadripartite control had long since been abandoned.

The physical situation of Berlin was such that its effective incorporation into the Soviet Zone would be a comparatively easy matter, while the difficulties which confronted the Western powers not only In feeding but in maintaining the economic life of the western sections of the city would be almost insuperable in the face of an aggressive Soviet action. In such case the prestige of the Western powers in Berlin could only decline whether they maintain their military and governmental forces in Berlin, or not.2

Sent Department 3360; repeated London 579, Berlin 366.

Caffery

1 The reference here is to the Conference of the Foreign Ministers of the Soviet Union, Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Poland, Romania, and Hungary, held in Warsaw, June 23 and 24; see the editorial note, p. 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249].

2 In telegram 3372, June 25, from Paris, not printed, Ambassador Caffery reported having been told by Foreign Minister Bidault that he was not very happy about the Berlin situation, but that he would go along with the United States (862.515/6–2548).

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2548: Telegram

[Document 557]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

top secret
urgent Berlin, June 25, 1948.

CC 4875. From CINCEUR Berlin signed Clay to Dept of Army Personal and eyes only for Secretary Roy all and State Dept for Mr. Beam of Central European Division for his information.

I am discussing with Robertson today the feasibility of requesting a conference with Sokolovsky in which we would point out the seriousness of the present situation and suggest some practicable ways in which it might be resolved by way of trade agreements. Such a conference might develop more fully extent of Soviet intransigence and Soviet intent. I believe Robertson will accept such a proposal. I have no real hope of reaching a solution by a conference with Sokolovsky. However, no harm can come from the conference and our effort to meet with him will at least indicate a desire on our part to reach a solution which will prevent suffering by a helpless German population caught between us. In general, the solution which I would propose to Sokolovsky would involve a general trade agreement between Berlin and the western sectors in which payment would be made for western imports into Berlin in deutsche mark to extent deutsche mark are secured from Berlin exports to the west, but with the deficit to be paid with Soviet currency on a controlled exchange basis. Western currencies could be used at the central bank to purchase Soviet currency on an agreed exchange basis, but would not be used in general circulation. Issues already made would of course be used by the individual to purchase Soviet currency. If this agreement could be effected, it would permit an exchange of goods which would help the economy of the Soviet sector as well as the Soviet zone. It will also maintain the principle that western currency is being used in Berlin but would obviate the difficulties of two currencies in circulation. Obviously such an agreement would have to be accompanied by fresh Soviet guarantees with respect to keeping the Berlin corridors open.

This was our original approach to the problem which was precluded from consideration by our instructions. However, we have now maintained our right to issue a separate currency and can probably afford to compromise to prevent the severe punishment of Berlin without serious loss of prestige. I am not yet certain as to the timing of this move, although I think it too soon today. In any event, I would discuss proposal in advance with German leaders.

I do wish to make it clear, however, that I have little hope of this compromise proposal being accepted.

If our government is to protest Soviet action, it should insist in event of Soviet inability to reopen communications that it has the clear right to move in our troops to restore communications.

As matters now stand, the German population will begin to suffer in a few days and this suffering will become serious in two or three weeks.

I am still convinced that a determined movement of convoys with troop protection would reach Berlin and that such a showing might well prevent rather than build up Soviet pressures which could lead to war. Nevertheless I realize fully the inherent dangers in this proposal since once committed we could not withdraw.

[ Clay ]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2648: Telegram

[Document 558]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, June 26, 1948.

1487. For Saltzman and Hickerson. General Clay in cooperation with General Le May, Commanding General USAFE, gave orders this morning for the organization of air lifts between the Western Zones and Berlin on the basis of an estimated daily supply of 225 tons. 70 planes are immediately available which will make an estimated 100 trips daily. There is under consideration the question of adding an additional 30 planes which if brought into the service would enable the shipment eventually of up to 500 tons daily. For the supply of the UK and US forces only 50 tons daily are necessary. The balance will be devoted to the needs of the German population and Military Government is establishing a priority list of commodities. As a comparative figure, the daily food supply required for the population of the three western sectors of Berlin is 2,000 tons. General Clay also issued orders placing all US personnel on an austerity basis today with regard to supplies of food and the use of electric power, etc.

Murphy

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2648: Telegram

[Document 559]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, June 26, 1948—midnight.

1497. Personal for the Secretary. Mytel 1495, June 26,1 summarizes Soviet restrictive traffic measures and their effect on Berlin population and economy with indication of the danger inherent in a continuation of the existing pressure.

Mytel 1496, June 26,1 recapitulates current transport situation and analyzes original 1945 agreement regarding access to Berlin.

Moscow’s 1139, June 20 [19],1 analyzes Soviet attitude to Berlin situation and forecasts that USSR will create a condition of affairs which would leave western powers alternatives of withdrawal from Berlin or remaining with humiliation and loss of prestige exceeding that which would be involved in withdrawal now.

My assumption is that when western powers accepted Berlin arrangement they did so with knowledge of the possibility of Soviet pressure. The unfavorable logistical situation has been obvious from the start. It results from a defective agreement negotiated by Mr. Winant and others in 1944 in an outburst of faith and good will designed to induce the USSR to work in Germany with the US/UK in some form of organization however faulty. The Berlin question was discussed last December at London by your delegation to CFM. It was my understanding that your policy was determined then to stay in Berlin with the risk such policy entailed. Otherwise that would have been a favorable moment to stage a voluntary withdrawal because of Soviet failure to cooperate.

In the interval, presence in Berlin of Western occupants became a symbol of resistance to eastern expansionism. It is unquestionably an index of our prestige in central and eastern Europe. As far as Germany is concerned, it is a test of US ability in Europe. If we docilely withdraw now, Germans and other Europeans would conclude that our retreat from western Germany is just a question of time. US position in Europe would be gravely weakened, and like a cat on a sloping tin roof.

I concurred in Clay’s recommendation to Draper June 21 that US Government protest Soviet restrictions on movement of persons and goods between Berlin and the west. Draper has informed Clay that State and Army doubt whether it is opportune to send note to Soviets now, particularly because of previous British and French lack of support. Draper replied that unilateral action on our part might invite easy and obvious answer from Soviets and reveal lack of unity. He advised that Berlin situation was being closely studied by State and Army in connection with analysis of over-all Soviet policy.2

I recommend if action not already taken that French and UK Governments be contacted immediately for the purpose of ascertaining whether in light of Soviet prohibition on rail and road traffic cutting off Berlin from west, those governments would not now be willing to join US in protest over this violation of the right of western powers to occupy western sectors of Berlin and their obligations as stated by Marshal Zhukov in 1945 (mytel 130, July 7, 19453 ) to supply the western sectors with food and fuel. That protest should be coupled with the indication and the determination that the western powers intend to take such measures as may be necessary to insure the right of passage through the agreed corridor of the necessary passenger and freight traffic.

My reasons for this recommendation are: 1. The protection of US legal rights and obligations as an occupying power arising from the relevant agreements.

2. The political, economic and financial conditions which involve our European policy.

3. The protection of those Berlin elements who oppose and indeed manifest courage in preventing Soviet domination of the largest municipal area in Germany.

4. The encouragement of German resistance to Communist domination of the 18 millions residing in the Soviet zone outside Berlin.

5. Our retreat from Berlin would be tantamount to an acknowledgment of lack of courage to resist Soviet pressure short of war and would amount to a public confession of weakness under pressure. It would be the Munich of 1948.

6. Withdrawal from Berlin would have political repercussions far beyond the political battle for Berlin itself. It would imply that we would likewise withdraw from Vienna and from western Germany.

7. Withdrawal would raise justifiable doubts in the minds of Europeans as to the firmness of our European policy and of our ability to resist the spread of Communism, particularly in central Europe.

As unfavorable as our logistical situation in Berlin may be, the Soviets will be faced with the dilemma either of permitting supplies to come through from the west or of feeding the Berlin population. Mass starvation of this population would not seem to harmonize with present Soviet political aims in Germany. I believe that Soviet tactic is to frighten the German population into believing that they may starve, thus inciting them against the western occupants. Unrest, strikes and rioting might result but we could ride out the storm as long as we are physically in possession of the western sectors of Berlin. I believe the USSR will bargain in the end.

These are the conditions which face us. If we are determined, both in our minds and in our dealings with the UK and France, Soviet pressure tactics, no matter how skillful should not force us out of Berlin.

Sent Department 1497, repeated Moscow 251, London 287, Paris 283, Vienna 44, Rome 63.

Murphy

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

2 For the texts of the messages between Clay and Draper under reference herey see telegram 711, June 23, to Moscow, p. 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556].

3  Foreign Relations, The Conference of Berlin (The Potsdam Conference), 1945 vol. i, pp. 630–633.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2648: Telegram

[Document 560]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact London, June 26, 1948—midnight.

2822. For the Secretary and Lovett eyes only from Douglas. Before seeing Bevin this morning, I met with Strang who covered a number of separate items bearing upon the situation in Berlin (Embtel 2813, June 26, repeated Berlin as 2351 ).

I. He showed me a copy of a letter which General Robertson was delivering to Sokolovsky at 11:30 this morning, for publication by 5 p. m. this afternoon. While not as strong as it might have been it was nevertheless a clear protest against the various Soviet acts undertaken to cut off the lines of communication between the western zones of Germany and the three sectors of Berlin occupied by the Western Powers. The last paragraph of this letter reads as follows: “The interruption of essential freight cannot be held to be a measure necessary to protect the currency position in the Soviet Zone. I, therefore, request that arrangements be made by the Soviet Military Administration to restore the normal traffic communications to and from Berlin immediately. I wish to make it clear that, if they are not so restored and undue and avoidable suffering is thereby inflicted upon the German population it will be because I have been deprived by you of the means to sustain them.”2

II. There appeared in Tagliche Rundschau, the Soviet-sponsored newspaper in Berlin, and Neues Deutschland, a press mouthpiece of the Socialist Unity Party, a story to the effect that official British sources in London indicated that the Attlee Government was not prepared to remain in Berlin, and was discussing with the other two Western Powers the abandonment of Berlin. To this story HMG is authorizing the publication of the following denial: “Attention has been called to a report in Tagliche Rundschau which presumes to define the attitude of HMG to recent events in Berlin. This report is completely untrue and is very far from representing HMG’s real attitude. The statement that we intend to stay in Berlin holds good. The opinion of the whole world will condemn the ruthless attempt by the Soviet Government to create a state of siege in Berlin, and so by starving the helpless civilian population, to seek political advantages at the expense of the other Allied Powers.”

III. M. Blum, who was here in England for several days, gave as his estimate of the effect of the Warsaw communiqué3 on the French, that (A) it will not embarrass the Communists who take any lines from Moscow; (B) it may tend to refute the view previously held by some Frenchmen that negotiations should be had with the Soviet; and (C) neither the French Government, nor De Gaulle, would consistently agree to negotiate with the Soviet on the basis of the Warsaw communiqué.

IV. Strang then told me that next Wednesday Bevin would have to make a speech in the House of Commons. It would not be long. He would refer to the many efforts which the Western Powers had made to reach with the Soviet a reasonably satisfactory settlement of the German question, and would recite, too, the record of the consistently unbroken failures. He would refer to the situation in Berlin and, while unable at the moment to indicate the language in which his references would be couched, about which he wanted to confer with me on Monday, his line would be one of complete firmness, mixed with a calm denunciation of the ruthless and inhuman activities of the Soviet and the responsibility, which is theirs and theirs alone, for the consequences of their behavior on some 2–2½ million German people.

V. Strang and later Bevin, then went on to discuss the five major points which Bevin, in a very tentative way, had reviewed at length with me last evening. On the first four Bevin’s mind is clear. As to part of the fifth, he has not yet reached a conclusion. They are as follow: 1. Because of the close association which has been established during the course of the last several months between HMG and the US in London as a result of the talks on Germany; because he feels, in the light of experience that decisions can be reached more promptly by maintaining this close association than by the circuitous method of communicating directly with the British Embassy in Washington which in turn communicates with US; and because he feels that from here on we will be confronted with a series of issues on which, as promptly as possible, decisions must be taken, he suggests that in London there be a complete exchange of relevant information on Germany from the military governors and from other sources, and that discussions with him, based upon this information, be held here in order that a close association with our government may be continued and decisions reached as promptly as circumstances and the nature of the issue discussed permit. It is not suggested that any US representative in London be authorized to make decisions for the US Government, but rather that London be at least one place in which discussions of the issues that may arise out of the Berlin and the general German situation may be held. This procedure should on the one hand, include keeping General Clay fully and completely informed, and, on the other hand, keeping the State Department and the Department of the Army in Washington equally informed and placing them in full possession of the exchange of information between Robertson and London; similarly, Robertson, would be kept fully informed from London. This arrangement would thus provide for complete current information in three places; that is to say, London, Washington and Berlin, and would accordingly, make feasible discussions in these three places on the basis of complete information.

On Bevin’s side, he has one reason, in addition to those enumerated above, for suggesting this sort of an arrangement; namely, that it will give him a certain sense of personal and timely association through ability to discuss with a representative of the US Government.

2. Bevin believes that the Combined Chiefs of Staff in Washington should make a joint appreciation of the military situation in connection with the Berlin crisis. He has communicated with the British Chiefs of Staff in London to determine their thinking on this point.

While he believes that combined US–UK Chiefs of Staff should make the joint appreciation in the first instance, he is disposed to think that at some point the French should be brought in, particularly in the light of Section III of the London agreements on Germany stated in the Report on Security. In this connection Massigli, last evening, suggested that the procedure for three-power consultation under Section III of the Report on Security of the London Conference4 might be had most conveniently through French and British members of the Military Committee established under the five-power Brussels Pact. He recognized that for this purpose they might be joined by a US representative. Massigli was not, he made it clear, making a definite proposal, but merely a suggestion on which he would like the opinion of HMG.

3. Bevin believes that there should be made immediately by the Military Governors and by the Combined Chiefs of Staff, a joint survey of the logistic problem of feeding the civilian population of Berlin by air or otherwise. By way of amplification, he believes that all possible air transport should be promptly mobilized for the purpose of transporting as promptly as possible particularly for the women and children of the western sectors concentrated food stuffs, such as dried milk, dried eggs, and dried vegetables ‘as substitutes for similar natural foods formerly supplied by the Soviet and now, according to reports, cut off.

Bevin realizes that not enough food stuffs of this character can be carried by air to satisfy the requirements, but he believes strongly that it would be taken as a symbol of our determination, that it would provide some help, and that it could be used as a powerful instrument of propaganda. (Doubtless General Clay has already made a survey along these lines within the limits of the air facilities available to him.)

4. Bevin believes that the Combined Chiefs of Staff should examine the possibility of sending more heavy US bomber planes to Europe. He does not suggest this as an operation which, in a military sense, would be particularly effective. It would, however, be evidence which the Soviet would construe as meaning that we are in earnest. It would accordingly tend to refute the view held by the Soviet that we are not determined—a view which HMG believes, on the basis of such evidence as it has, is strongly held by the Soviet.

5. Bevin believes that we should exchange views as promptly as possible on our respective appreciations of the Warsaw communiqué to determine what, in our opinion, lies behind this statement of position. Bevin is inclined to believe that it may possibly be construed as a bid for a four-power conference on Germany, but has not reached any definite conclusion. (See Blum’s comments in Paragraph III above.)

If it does not reflect an effort on the part of the Soviet to obtain a CFM meeting, it may be an endeavor to invite bargaining on certain points.

Depending upon our appreciation of the Warsaw communiqué, the question of the wisdom of sending a note to Moscow will arise. There are three questions here involved: (a) Should any note at all be sent?

(b) If one is sent, what should it contain?

(c) If one is sent, when should it be sent?

On (a) and (b) Bevin is not clear. He wonders whether if a note is sent, it may lead to four-power negotiations and consequent delay in carrying out our program in western Germany which Bevin feels might very adversely affect our interests and general situation in western Germany.

On the question as to when a note should be sent, if it is decided to send one, I suggested that it should not be sent until our basic policy in regard to Berlin is determined; secondly, until the possible measures referred to above have been more clearly determined upon; and finally, until the meeting with the Ministers President, now tentatively scheduled for June 30,5 in regard to political organization has been held, thus assuring that course of action deemed essential by US is irrevocably commenced.

As to the substance of the note, if it is decided to send one, Bevin is considering something along the lines of the note which we proposed during the early stages of the London Conference on Germany.6

VI. I have read carefully the Warsaw communiqué, and with but few exceptions, find it repetitious of the same old Soviet line expressed at Moscow and again at London. The five points which the communiqué lays out, significantly do not include any mention, implicitly or otherwise, of economic unity; i.e., free movement of people, free movement of goods, cessation of delivery of current production from the Soviet Zone in the form of reparations. In London, and as I understand it, at previous CFM meetings it was consistently held by the US and UK that economic unification of Germany should precede preparatory measures for a peace settlement and political organization. It was because the Soviet refused to accept economic unification in London and insisted on discussion of political organization and the terms of the peace treaty, or, in other words, that the Soviet insisted upon discussing the shadow and not the substance, that the CFM meeting adjourned. Of this the Soviet must be fully aware. In the light of this background, the omission of reference to economic unity among the five points enumerated in the Warsaw communiqué make it, in my opinion, doubtful whether the Soviet intend the communiqué to be a bid for a four-power meeting. It is more likely that they intend it as a prologue to the establishment of their own regime in the eastern zone, and as a restatement for propaganda purposes of their position.

VII Bevin believes that our policy in Berlin should be one of firmness, for he believes that the abandonment of Berlin would have serious, if not disastrous, consequences in western Germany and throughout western Europe. In the appraisal I concur.

VIII. I realize you recognize the importance of formulating our policy in regard to Berlin as soon as possible in terms as precise as possible. In this connection General Wedemeyer suggests the basic political policy be determined and submitted to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for their military strategic and tactical appraisal and to give them appropriate policy guidance in discussions with British opposite numbers.

IX. Meanwhile, in accordance with Deptel 2389, June 24,7 an intensive propaganda barrage should be laid down on the Berlin community and Germany; every means available should be used—the radio should be pumping out the propaganda every hour of the day, if not more frequently. By building up complete understanding among Germans, potential allies, and among our own people at home of the Soviet’s responsibility for the suffering and privation that will follow on their actions, we could fashion a powerful instrument to induce them to modify their tactics, if not to retract.

X. Under-Secretary Draper, General Wedemeyer, Frank Wisner, and Wilkinson from Berlin are here. We have discussed the situation at length and are unanimous in agreeing on the first four points suggested by Bevin in Paragraph V, and concur in the view contained in Paragraph IX.

XI. In expressing his views, Bevin asked me to make it clear that they were tentative, for they had not been cleared by the Cabinet which will meet on Monday. I, however, have little doubt that, in substance, they will be confirmed.8

XII. I understand that Under-Secretary Draper and General Wedemeyer are sending tomorrow a separate cable to the Army.

XIII. Request copy this message be made available to National Military Establishment. Copy is being handed Secretary Draper and General Wedemeyer.

Sent Department as 2822; repeated Berlin (for Murphy and Clay) as 238.

Douglas

1 Not printed; it reported that Ambassador Douglas had a long conversation with Bevin, a résumé of which was to follow (740.00119 Control (Germany) 6–2648).

2 The full text of Robertson’s letter to Sokolovsky was transmitted in telegram 1501, June 27, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2748).

3 The reference here is to the Declaration of June 24, 1948 by the Warsaw Conference of the Foreign Ministers of the Soviet Union, Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Poland, Romania, and Hungary on the decisions of the London Six-Power Conference on Germany. See the editorial note, p. 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249].

4 For the text of the document under reference here, dated May 26, see p. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194].

5 Regarding the meeting of the Military Governors and the Ministers President at Frankfurt on July 1, see the editorial note, p. 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255].

6 See telegram 1423, April 22, to London, p. 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537].

7 Not printed.

8 In telegram 2847, June 28, from London, not printed, Douglas reported that the Cabinet had approved Bevin’s views (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2848).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2748: Telegram

[Document 561]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, June 27, 1948—8 p. m.

2429. For the Ambassador. Our general estimate is that the current supply situation in Berlin means that the zero hour there will not be reached for two to three weeks. We intend to utilize this period in every way possible to reenforce our general position and to keep the initiative in dealing with the Sovs.

We are in general agreement with the Brit thinking as regards the situation re urtel 28221 and 2788,2 and for our part are preparing to continue to maintain the present unprovocative but firm stand in Berlin, utilizing to the utmost the present propaganda advantages of our position. In this connection we agree para 9 your 2822; also see our tel to Berlin, today’s date.3

Army and State are currently considering what steps can be taken to reenforce this position, including the possibility of sending a strong Three-Power note of protest to Moscow, the timing of which will probably depend upon the results of Clay’s possible approach to Sokolovsky now under consideration. US decision expected as result of top level meeting tomorrow, including decision on whether to send note to Moscow. You will be fully informed. A note would in all likelihood include a reference to the President’s exchange of messages with Stalin in the middle of June 1945 in which the right of free access to Berlin was specifically mentioned.4 In this connection it is important for us to know whether Brit have similar assurances. Please telegraph this info urgently.5

As regards the five points mentioned by Bevin in urtel 2822, we agree that there should be full and complete exchange of relevant info in London and are asking that you be furnished copies of all messages on this subject. Copy of your message has been furnished Dept of Army.

Re para V 4 urtel 2822 you may inform Bevin there is possibility we may wish to send 2 or 3 B–29 bomber groups to Great Britain. Please ask him for clearance.6 Details can be worked out by US/UK air authorities. For your info Air is considering what proportion bombers available for despatch to Europe should be sent Great Britain and Germany. Sent London 2429, rptd USPolAd Berlin for Murphy 1119, Paris for Caffery 2322.

Marshall

1  Supra.

2 Telegram 2788, June 25, from London, not printed; in it, Ambassador Douglas reported on an appreciation of the Berlin situation by British Minister of State McNeil and British Permanent Under-Secretary of State Strang (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2548).

3 Telegram 1118, June 27, to Berlin, not printed, repeated to London and Paris, reaffirmed that it was essential for the propaganda campaign regarding the Soviet actions in Berlin to be continued and carried forward on an all-out basis (811.20200(d)/6–2748).

4 For the texts of the letters, exchanged between President Truman and Marshal Stalin, June 14 and 16, 1945, see Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. iii, pp. 135–137.

5 In telegram 2853, June 28, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas reported receiving information from Bevin on the 1945 agreements covering western access to Berlin. Bevin cited the 5th meeting of the Allied Control Council for Germany, September 10, 1945, agreeing upon document CONL/P(45) (27) which provided for rail and road transport of food supplies to Berlin; the 13th meeting of the Allied Control Council, November 30, 1945, agreeing to document CONL/P(45) (63) on air transport corridors; and the meeting of October 22, 1946, of the Air Directorate of the Allied Control Authority at which agreement was reached on document DAIR/P(45)71 Second Revise regarding night rules in the Berlin air corridor (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2848). For Ambassador Murphy’s reports on the two Allied Control Council meetings referred to by Bevin, see Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. iii, pp. 835–836 and 854–857. For the text of document DAIR/P(45)71 Second Revise, see United States Senate, Committee on Foreign Relations, Documents on Germany 1944–1970 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1971), pp. 67–77.

6 Telegram 2853, June 28, from London, not printed, reported that Foreign “Secretary Bevin had authorized the clearance of two or three B–29 bomber groups, one of which would remain in Britain and two of which would continue on to Germany. Clearances were also authorized for fighter aircraft. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2848)

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Beam) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2848

[Document 562]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Beam)

top secret [Washington,] June 28, 1948.

Memorandum for the Record

Mr. Lovett asked me to transcribe the following account he gave of the meeting on June 25 with the President in which he participated with Secretary Forrestal and Secretary Royall concerning the Berlin situation as of that date.1

The meeting discussed fully the record of the lengthy telecon of same date between General Clay and Mr. Royall (copy in CE 2 ).

It was agreed that General Clay should be advised not to make statements referring to the possibility of war over Berlin. Mr. Royall emphasized that if war were inevitable it should not take place over the question of the two separate currencies in Berlin.

There was a discussion of General Clay’s proposals regarding (1) outside retaliation; and (2) the dispatch of a US note of protest to Moscow. It was agreed that neither would be fully effective. Outside retaliation, such as closing of US ports and the Panama Canal would not substantially damage the Soviet Union, which was self-sufficient. Furthermore, such measures could lead to general economic warfare which would result in stoppage of Soviet supplies of Manganese to the United States. A unilateral US note might lead to a “typewriter war” and would be futile unless the approach had the full support of the British and French.

The meeting discussed at length US responsibility to the German civilian population. The situation should have to be evaluated in terms of the suffering caused the Berlin people and also from the standpoint of what would happen to our anti-communist supporters were the US to leave. Determined steps should be taken by the US to stay in Berlin.

It was agreed that an early meeting should be held with General Bradley to review the whole situation.

Reference was made to the fact that some material help to the US position might be found in the 1945 telegraphic exchanges between the President and Stalin.3

Note was taken of the informal and unofficial Soviet suggestion that a deal might be made exchanging Berlin for territory in Thuringia or Saxony (reference Ambassador Murphy’s telegram No. 1451 from Berlin).4

[ Jacob D. Beam ]

1 For an excerpt from Forrestal’s record of the meeting under reference, see Forrestal Diaries, pp. 451–452. The meeting apparently followed the Cabinet meeting mentioned in Truman, Years of Trial and Hope, p. 123.

2 Record not found in the files of the Department of State.

3 The exchanges under reference here are included in Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. iii, pp. 135–137.

4 June 23, p. 915 [Pg. 915 includes portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554].

The Secretary of the Army (Royall) to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2848: Telegram

[Document 563]

The Secretary of the Army (Royall) to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin 1

top secret [Washington, June 28, 1948.]

Reur CC 4875 of June 252 and telecon 9677 of June 26.3

Your proposal and telecon have been considered at highest level here. We are in full accord with your overall estimate situation. We agree that controversy over currency is probably just a phase in major Soviet effort drive Western Powers from Berlin. We agree with your doubts whether any approach to Sokolovsky on currency alone will accomplish any settlement of long duration if any settlement at all. Basic Berlin problem seems not currency but quadripartite authority.

We feel early discussion with Sokolovsky would be desirable to feel out present Soviet intentions with respect to Berlin. Therefore agree your proposal for a meeting with Sokolovsky.

1. Unless you have overriding reasons, suggest you make following points at meeting: a. Inform Sokolovsky that by agreement between the four powers, and at the request of the Soviets, the Western Powers are feeding the population of the western sectors of Berlin, and you are concerned that the present bans on rail and highway shipments if persisted in will raise major governmental questions.

b. Point out that statements have been made that traffic stoppage and other hardships on the population in the western sectors have been imposed as protective measures because of the currency situation. If the currency situation in Berlin is in fact the underlying reason, you will be glad to discuss that problem again looking toward a solution of the Berlin currency situation. Also point out some of the hardships imposed upon the western sectors were initiated during the time when old marks were still in use in the eastern zone; that situation is now changed with new currency in the eastern zone as well as in the western zones.

c. Make clear that agreement cannot be reached on currency except in conjunction with lifting traffic ban.

2. As you consider proper, in light of current situation you are authorized to use following as possible basis for discussion with Soviets: a. Trade arrangements: Trade arrangements for Western Germany—Berlin and for Western Germany–Eastern Zone as subjects of separate agreements. Agree your thought trade should be held as nearly equal as possible. Do not feel advantages of face saving gained from use of DM in Berlin–Western Zone trade are sufficiently great to outweigh confusion use DM for this purpose might make.

b. Berlin currency: Use of Soviet currency in Berlin with essential condition that Soviets guarantee free access to Berlin. Principles of quadripartite control and assurance of adequate supplies of currency and banking credit facilities for Western sectors are regarded here as important as is also establishment of satisfactory foreign exchange regulations and controls, but agreement these points left your discretion. Also important Western Powers retain full control over disposition Soviet marks acquired through sale all commodities imported Berlin by Western Powers.

3. Coordinate this with Robertson and French. State is repeating this message to Douglas who will be of such assistance with Bevin as you may require.

[ Royall ]

1 The source text was included in telegram 2440, June 28, to London (to Paris as 2342), not printed, with instructions to Ambassador Douglas to discuss the message with Foreign Secretary Bevin.

2  Ante, p. 917 [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 556 and Doc. 557].

3 The teletype conference under reference has not been further identified: it may be the conference described and briefly quoted in Clay, Decision in Germany, p. 366.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–2848: Telegram

[Document 564]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret
urgent
niact Washington, June 28, 1948—9 p. m.

2442. Personal for Douglas. We are authorizing Clay in concert with Robertson and if possible the French to meet again with Sovs locally and to sift out currency question to reveal whether this in any way is real issue (subject of separate telegram1 repeated to you).

After preliminary State/national Defence discussions with the President following is top level Departmental policy which will be recommended for Cabinet approval next 48 hours: (1) We stay in Berlin.

(2) We will utilize to the utmost present propaganda advantage our position.

(3) We will supply the city by air as a beleaguered garrison.

(4) Subject to final checking by the Secretary and the President we will further increase US air strength in Europe.

(5) Assuming no modification of present Sov restrictions, we and Brit, and French if possible, should send note to Sovs asserting our rights in Berlin and stressing Sov responsibility for, and callousness to threatened starvation of civilian population, particularly in light of our obligation to feed Berlin, assumed at Sov insistence. We see advantage in keeping Berlin situation before world attention by every feasible device of diplomatic exchange, publicity, and appeal, not excluding ultimate reference of case to UN at appropriate time. We are hopeful that war can be avoided by these means.

(6) We will cable you shortly draft of communication which we would like to see presented by three Govts to Sovs and published shortly thereafter. Please inform Brit FonOff and say that we would welcome their suggestions. We consider note should not over-stress legalistic approach but should be based on inhumanity Soviet action in causing suffering to civilian population as well as threatening peace.2

We are considering best means soonest to back up publicly British determined stand.

When Brit clearance given bomber groups we suggest public answer to press enquiries be that aircraft are proceeding to England after consultation and agreement Brit Govt. Sent London 2442, rptd Berlin 1124, Paris 2354.

Marshall

1 Under reference here is the telegram from Royall to Clay, June 28, supra.

2 For the text of this draft, see telegram 2384, June 30, to Paris, p. 933 [Pg. 933 is part of Doc. 567].

Editorial Note [Document 565]

Editorial Note

On June 30, 1948, Secretary of State Marshall issued a statement affirming the intention of the United States Government to remain in Berlin and to make maximum use of air transport to supply the civilian population of that city. For the text of the statement, see Department of State Bulletin, July 4, 1948, page 54. In his press conference on July 1, 1948, President Truman confirmed that Secretary Marshall had expressed the official position of the United States Government; for the text of the President’s Press Conference, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Harry S. Truman, 1948 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1964), pages 391–394.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048: Telegram

[Document 566]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent Berlin, June 30, 1948.

1555. Sokolovsky’s reply to Robertson (text in mytel 1543, June 301 ) can obviously be considered as preparation for Soviet reversal of Berlin blockade. It is, however, typical Soviet example of vague and implied promises and is well equipped with escape clauses. It is clear that if German interzonal travel is restored, the arguments for restrictions on Autobahn based upon currency reform are untenable. Furthermore, third paragraph by no means indicates conditions under which rail traffic would be reopened and what conditions would be attached to movement of military personnel and freight. Thus letter cannot be considered to give satisfactory guarantees in its present form.

UK officials in Berlin are adopting a reserved and cautious attitude toward this reply, as is indeed the sentiment in OMGUS.2 The letter is probably being discussed today between Generals Clay and Robertson, both of whom are in Frankfurt. OMGUS position this afternoon is that until it is demonstrated that rail traffic will be resumed in such manner to enable shipment of all supplies that are needed, OMGUS will continue its present airlift schedule.

Sent Department as 1555; repeated to London as 298, to Paris as 297, to Moscow as 263.

Murphy

1 Not printed; it transmitted the text of an apparently conciliatory letter of June 29 from Marshal Sokolovsky to General Robertson. For the text of Sokolovsky’s letter, see the New York Times, June 30, 1948. For a summary of the letter, see Cmd. 7534, p. 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7].

2  Telegram 2884, June 30, from London, not printed, reported that General Robertson’s comments on the Sokolovsky letter of June 29 had been received in London. While Robertson accepted the letter as undoubted preparation for a Soviet withdrawal from their current position in the Berlin crisis, he strongly recommended that the Soviet move be received with the utmost reserve and that preparations for the air supply of Berlin and staging of a show of force be strongly pressed until full communications to Berlin for Allied and German personnel had been restored and the quadripartite control administration of the city resumed. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048)

Telegram 2882, June 30, from London, reported on Foreign Secretary Bevin’s views on the Sokolovsky letter as follows: “Bevin feels very strongly that this apparent softening of the Soviet position in regard to lines of communication between the west and Berlin should not abate our vigorous efforts to build up air lift to Berlin as rapidly as possible and in a volume as great as possible. Bevin feels that Sokolovsky’s letter is ‘on all fours’ with the report on the barges and is characteristic of the sort of Soviet tactics which we may expect for the purpose of giving us a sense of false assurance as to the future, thus inducing us to relax our efforts.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048: Telegram

[Document 567]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

secret
us urgent Washington, June 30, 1948—5 p. m.

2384. For the Ambassador. The following draft note was sent Douglas this morning with request that he urgently seek British approval and support with French. Douglas will discuss note with Massigli but you are requested at the same time to urge French Govt to agree to and to join with this approach. You should indicate to French that we greatly prefer three power note but in view of necessity of stating case to American people and to the world, failing agreement we would have to send note or make equivalent statement alone. Text of draft note follows:

“The US Govt wishes to call to the attention of the Soviet Govt the extremely serious international situation which has been brought about by the arbitrary and illegal actions of the Soviet Govt in instituting a blockade against the sectors in Berlin occupied by the United States, Great Britain and France. Irrespective of whatever relatively minor difficulties may have arisen in the administration of the city of Berlin, the US Govt regards these measures of blockade instituted by the Soviet military authorities in Germany as an arbitrary and dangerous violation of existing agreements concerning the administration of Germany by the four occupying powers. The US Govt urges immediate joint effort to remove these hazards which we believe neither our Govt nor the Soviet Govt can view without extreme concern.

The rights of the US as a joint occupying power in Germany and in Berlin derive from the total defeat and unconditional surrender of Germany. The international agreement undertaken in connection therewith by the Govts of the US, UK, France and the Soviet Union defined the zones in Germany and the sectors in Berlin which are occupied by these powers, and established the control of Germany and Berlin by the victor nations on a basis of friendly cooperation which the Govt of the US earnestly desires to continue to pursue.

The right of free access to Berlin was clearly and unavoidably implicit in these arrangements and has long been confirmed by usage. It was directly specified in a message sent by Pres Truman to Marshal Stalin on June 14, 1945,1 which agreed to the withdrawal of US forces to the zonal boundaries, provided satisfactory arrangements could be entered into between the military commanders, which would give access by rail, road and air to US forces in Berlin. This proposal was accepted by Premier Stalin in his reply on June 16.2 Nothing has ever occurred to alter this pattern. The US withdrew its forces from Saxony and Thuringia in June 1945 in order that the agreement on the occupation of Germany and Berlin could enter into effect. The right of the US to its position in Berlin thus stems originally from precisely the same source as the right of the, Soviet Union. It is impossible to recognize the latter and deny the former.

It clearly results from these undertakings that Berlin is not a part of the Soviet zone but is an international zone of occupation. Undertakings in good faith engaged in by the zone commanders and subsequently developed by the Allied Control Authority, as well as practices sanctioned by usage, guarantee the US, together with the other powers, free access to Berlin for the purpose of fulfilling its responsibilities in Germany. Any other contemplation would shock all rules of comity and reason.

In order that there should be no misunderstanding whatsoever on this point, the US Govt categorically asserts that it is in occupation of its sector in Berlin as a matter of established right deriving from the defeat and surrender of Germany and confirmed by formal agreements among the principal allies. It further declares that it will not be induced by threats, pressures or other actions of the Soviet Commanders in Berlin to withdraw from the city. It is hoped that the Soviet Govt entertains no doubts whatsoever on this point.

If there are disagreements between the Soviet Government and the Government of the United States in respect to any phases of this situation, they should not be settled by attempts at duress. They should be settled at the council table in keeping with our mutual pledges as copartners in the United Nations. It is for these reasons that we propose immediate consultations to seek a friendly settlement which shall do full justice to the rights of all concerned.

This Government now shares with the Governments of France and the United Kingdom the responsibility for the physical well-being of 2,400,000 persons in the western zones of Berlin initially undertaken at Soviet request on July 7, 1945. Restrictions recently imposed by the Soviet authorities in Berlin have operated to prevent this Government and the other western occupational powers from fulfilling that humane responsibility in an adequate manner. The local reasons vouchsafed by the Soviet Command in Berlin for these restrictions are obvious pretexts which cannot be given serious credence against the far weightier considerations so clearly involved.

The responsibility which this Government bears for the physical well-being and the safety of the German population in Berlin subject to its authority is outstandingly humanitarian in character. This population includes hundreds of thousands of women and children, whose health and safety are dependent on the continued use by the western occupation authorities of adequate facilities for moving food, medical supplies and other indispensable items in the maintenance of human life in the western zones of Berlin. It involves the most elemental of those human rights which both our govts are solemnly pledged to protect. The US Govt is sure that the Soviet Government will agree that it is intolerable that the helpless people of Berlin should be made the victims of an inhuman blockade arbitrarily imposed by the actions of one of the occupying authorities.

This Government is therefore obliged to insist that either the arrangements which have prevailed heretofore for the movement of freight traffic from the western zones of Berlin be re-established on the old basis and restored to full efficiency of operation, or new arrangements be made immediately available which would permit the western powers to fulfill their responsibilities in the Berlin area. This Government feels that there can be no question of delay in the restoration of these essential services. The needs of the civilian population in the Berlin area are imperative and must be met at once by other than expedient recourses. It is equally imperative in the view of the Government of the United States that this situation should not be allowed to deteriorate into a threat to the peace. It is confident the Soviet Union will share our anxiety to remove these potential hazards in the Berlin area.

Holding these urgent views regarding its rights and obligations in the American zone of occupation in Berlin, yet eager always to resolve its controversies in the spirit of fair consideration for the viewpoints of all concerned, the Government of the United States submits the following proposal to the Soviet Union.

(1) Formal access to the city of Berlin shall be immediately restored and maintained, and the population of Berlin shall thus be relieved from the dangers and threats to its existence brought on by these methods of blockade. When this is done we shall proceed to negotiate on any matter relating to the quadripartite administration of the city of Berlin which the Soviet Government feels is in dispute between the occupying authorities.

(2) These negotiations shall proceed through the Council of Foreign Ministers with the understanding that if the Council fails to agree within a reasonable and stated time, the disagreement shall be referred to the Security Council of the United Nations for a decision.

(3) If the Soviet Government prefers, we shall jointly submit the situation immediately to the United Nations for decision under the applicable terms of the United Nations Charter.”3

Sent to Paris as 2384; repeated to USPolAd Berlin and to AmEmbassy Moscow for the Ambassador adding that this note is sent for your information and not for delivery yet since it is being discussed in London as a three-power draft.

Marshall

1  Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. iii, pp. 135–136.

2  Ibid., p. 137.

3 In telegram 2493, July 1, to London, not printed, the Department offered the following substitutions for paragraphs 2 and 3, after receiving the British comments in telegram 2907, infra: “2. These negotiations shall proceed through the Allied Control Council in Berlin. 3. If, after a reasonable and stated time, there is still in dispute in the Allied Control Council any question pertaining to the, rights of the occupying powers in the Berlin area, the US Govt would be prepared to join with the other occupying powers in referring such matters’ still in dispute to the appropriate organ of the United Nations for consideration and decision.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–148)

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048: Telegram

[Document 568]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, June 30, 1948—midnight.

2907. For the Secretary and Lovett (Eyes Only) from Douglas. Reference telecon conversation June 30,1 saw Bevin and Attlee late this afternoon. There emerged from the discussion with them the following:

1. Instructions are being sent to Robertson not to shoot down balloons on his own initiative, but only after receiving specific authorization;

2. Bevin and Attlee agree that before shooting balloons is authorized, joint US–UK governmental decision must be taken. Moreover, they agree that neither US nor UK should, if it is avoidable, commit any act without prior governmental approval which would involve the other in a war;

3. Bevin and Attlee agree, in principle, that a note should be sent, and will support the principle with the French. They are studying the terms of the proposed draft2 which I have submitted to them. They tentatively, however, have two reservations: (a) They suggest that instead of sending the note within 24 hours as suggested in the telecon conversation, another 24 hours should elapse, that is to say, a total of 48 hours in order that we, that is US–UK, may have an opportunity to assess Soviet reaction to the Secretary’s statement issued this afternoon in Washington, and to Bevin’s and Eden’s speeches made before the House of Commons. Moreover, they think this additional time should be taken in order that we may know further about the developments that may follow upon Sokolovsky’s letter to Robertson of yesterday.

(b) At first blush, they question the wisdom of the last two paragraphs of the proposed note draft in which the proposal is made, [that] the negotiations shall be held in the Council of Foreign Ministers, et cetera, or if the Soviet prefer, that the situation should be submitted to the UN for decision, et cetera. Their doubts as to these two portions of the draft note stem from the following considerations: (1) They think it preferable not to bypass the military governors, but on the contrary, to give them every support and to reinforce their position.

(2) They believe that the quadripartite machine for the government of Berlin should, if possible, be reassembled and clothed with the authority which it was agreed by the Soviet, ourselves, and the UK it should possess.

(3) They believe that we should not initiate the possibility of a CFM meeting or a UN disposition of the Berlin question, because Sokolovsky’s letter to Robertson implies that the Berlin controversy may be disposed of through the quadripartite machine: We should not, accordingly, suggest any other channel for consultation or discussion until it is clear that this has been closed.

4. My own comments, such as they are, on the same paragraphs of the proposed draft are as follows:

I appreciate that there probably may be at home among our own people a prevailing wonderment as to why the Berlin situation is not being submitted to the UN, and therefore from a purely internal political point of view, it may be desirable on this account to suggest the UN as a suitable forum for the settlement of the issue. On the other hand, it seems to me that after having proposed to the Soviet that we are prepared to negotiate with them on any matter relating to the quadripartite administration of Berlin, on the condition that they restore and maintain our access to the city, we should let the Soviet make the next move in suggesting how and where the negotiation should be held.

Moreover, were we to take the initiative in suggesting a CFM meeting for this particular purpose, we can be reasonably certain that the Soviet will construe it as a sign of weakness, will therefore snap at it, and will extend the area of discussions far beyond the domain of the controversy in Berlin. Any evidence of softness on our part may at this particular juncture when there is evidence of Soviet irresolution, react to our serious disadvantage.

It may be that the Soviet will suggest a CFM meeting in response to a naked proposal that negotiations be held. We can then deal with their suggestions as to the forum for negotiations.

If, on the other hand, we initially suggest a CFM, it is reasonably certain that we will not be able to confine the area of negotiations to the Berlin issue, and that we will not be able to avoid discussion of broader German question. At this particular moment, when we are meeting with the Ministers President and trying to put into effect the program in Western Germany, if a CFM meeting is held in which much, if not all, of the whole German question would be under discussion, the Soviet would use it as a platform for propaganda which might adversely affect German response to our program in western Germany. This might impair our influence in western Germany, if not possibly defeat our objectives.

I realize that a person sitting in one part of the world without possession of all of the considerations cannot give a wholly objective judgement derived from a comprehensive understanding of all the considerations and factors bearing upon the issue. With this caveat in mind and the knowledge that my knowledge is limited, I doubt the wisdom of going beyond Paragraph One of the proposal, for in negotiating with a power whose purposes are at best obscure, whose aims are at worst unfriendly even hostile, it is not, I believe, wise to propose more than may be necessary. To suggest a CFM meeting at this juncture, I believe is going further than the situation requires.

5. The British are studying the draft text and will make suggestions, if they have any, of changes in language tomorrow morning.

6. My preliminary examination of the text indicates that in several instances the language should be modified so that it is applicable to the position of the three western powers instead of to the US alone. It may be that you have in mind a note from each of the three western powers instead of a joint note from the three powers collectively.

7.I suggest that if the draft text of the note has been sent to Paris, through Caffery, that he be instructed to withhold the Paragraphs Two and Three of its concluding part, until the British and ourselves resolve the doubts which the British entertain. Otherwise, even though the British and ourselves might agree to delete we may have trouble in persuading the French, thus delaying unduly the dispatch of the note.

Have been urging you for urgent replies. Here is another one.

Douglas

1 The reference here is to a telecon between Washington and London, June 30, the transcript of which is not printed.

2 The reference here is to the draft note transmitted to Embassy Paris in telegram 2384, supra.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–148: Telegram

[Document 569]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact London, July 1, 1948—4 p. m.

2915. I have just come from long meeting this morning with Strang and Massigli, at which I had first opportunity to show draft text of note1 to latter. I told Massigli that my government thought that joint action by France, UK, and US on the note should be agreed upon as soon as possible. Massigli immediately pointed to the last two paragraphs of the suggested note and remarked that he could only express his personal opinion. He felt that the inclusion of these paragraphs would eliminate the possibility, which Sokolovsky’s letter2 suggested, of any local settlement being made by the military governors in Berlin. He said he felt sure it would open the door to the discussion of all German affairs, that the Soviet would use the CFM as a forum for this purpose, that the effect in western Germany would be most serious, and that we would find ourselves back where we were in November. Strang was in agreement with these observations, and added that Bevin felt it important that the discussion of the present problems should be had among the military governors, at least until this avenue was closed, that the subjects discussed could not be confined to Berlin situation if they were submitted now to CFM. Massigli expressed opinion that our note, as presently drafted, indicated no hope of settlement among the military governors. Massigli is sending his strong views to Paris and will receive word later today.3

After further discussion, Strang and Massigli felt that before a note to Moscow is dispatched, Robertson should send a reply to Sokolovsky’s letter, and determine what, if any, accommodation of the Berlin situation could be arranged among the military governors.

Meanwhile, consideration and modification of the draft note could proceed with all possible speed so that it would be in final form and agreed in the event its dispatch became necessary. In this I, personally, concurred, for I feel that it would be hasty for us to send a note to Moscow until Sokolovsky’s letter has been dealt with. The Foreign Office is sending the following to Robertson for discussion with Clay and Koenig who meet at 1:30 today: “United States and French Ambassadors and Sir W. Strang have been considering the line which might be taken in drafting a reply to Marshal Sokolovsky’s letter to General Robertson of the 29th June. They would suggest that the reply should be sent by General Robertson who should make it clear that it has the agreement of his two colleagues. General Robertson might deliver his letter in person, with or without his colleagues, taking the opportunity to explore the situation with the Marshal. Actual drafting would be left to military governors who might like to take the following suggestions into account.

“General line of the reply would be, while abating nothing of our established rights, to follow up Sokolovsky’s approach without challenging the pretext under which he has covered his actions. It is under cover of these that we may hope that he will complete his withdrawal of these restrictions.

“As regards communications, while taking note of Sokolovsky’s statement about the reestablishment of movement of the German population and his foreshadowing of resumption of rail traffic between Berlin and Helmstedt, we might say that we confidently expect that there will be an immediate and full restoration of communications by rail, road, and water between Berlin and the Western zones to which we have by agreement and long usage an established right. As regards freight traffic between the Eastern and Western zones, this could at the same time be reopened, on the understanding that the question of the settlement of the wagon debt between the Eastern zone and the Western zones could be dealt with through normal channels.

“As regards the currency question, the reply might take note of the difficulties to which Marshal Sokolovsky has referred. It might say that the military governors of the Western zones are willing to cooperate to the full in reaching agreement on the mutually fair measures necessary to protect the currency of the Eastern zone. As regards currency for Berlin, the reply might refer to General Robertson’s letter to Marshal Sokolovsky of the 23d June (Berlin’s telegram No. 11534 ) in which General Robertson said ‘I was and am prepared to consider any reasonable arrangements for the use of a single currency in Berlin under quadripartite control, not excluding the possibility of this being the same as that in use in your zone’. This offer still stands and we are prepared for Eastern currency to circulate exclusively in Berlin provided that the issue is under Four Power control. It would be indicated that the three military governors hoped that agreement should be quickly reached on this problem, and, subject to the restoration of communications, would hold themselves at the disposal of Marshal Sokolovsky to discuss it with him.” (This has Bevin’s approval.)

Since time is of the essence and did not permit putting this to you, I had no other course than that indicated. Meanwhile, will press on with discussion of note.

If the Department may have felt it imperative to send the note as drafted, because of the reported Soviet balloon barrage, this reason no longer exists since it has been determined to be untrue (see Embtel 2901, June 305 ). The Department is, of course, aware from my cable 29076 that Robertson has been instructed not to shoot down balloons on his own initiative. Accordingly, immediate danger of serious developments on these scores has abated.

British public, as a result of Bevin’s statements in the House of Commons, has been informed of the significance of the Berlin situation and the history leading up to it, including the agreements from which our right to be in Berlin is derived. Is there no way in which American public opinion can be correspondingly informed in the immediate future, either by a statement issued by the President or by the Secretary, instead of through the medium of a note to Moscow? I ask this question in the event that HMG and the French Government believe that joint note should not be sent forthwith.

It might be desirable dispatch note to the Soviet at about same time that Robertson delivers his reply to Sokolovsky.

Department’s comments and further instructions are urgently requested.7

Sent Department as 2915; repeated USPolAd Berlin 266, Frankfurt as 22, Paris as 337.

Douglas

1 The text of the draft note under reference here is contained in telegram 2384, June 30, to Paris, p. 933 [Pg. 933 is part of Doc. 567].

2 Regarding Marshal Sokolovsky’s letter of June 29 to General Robertson, see telegram 1555, June 30, from Berlin, p. 932 [Pg. 932 is part of Doc. 566], and footnote 1 thereto.

3 In telegram 3484, July 1, from Paris, not printed, Caffery reported that the French Government was sympathetic to the U.S. draft note but had reservations about the final two paragraphs. The French wanted to start quadripartite conversations in Berlin and hold the Council of Foreign Ministers in reserve. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–148)

4 Not printed; it transmitted the text of General Robertson’s letter of June 23 which is printed in Cmd. 7534, p. 18 and Documents on Berlin, pp. 64–65.

5 Not printed.

6  Supra.

7 In telegram 2513, July 1, to London, not printed, the Department of State advised Douglas that Ambassador Franks had called with a message along these same lines. The Department agreed to one more approach to Sokolovsky and suggested that the three military commanders see the Marshal July 2, and ask whether he was in a position to remove the blockade measures. If Sokolovsky’s reply did not indicate the immediate removal of restrictions, the draft note would be sent on July 3. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–148)

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–148: Telegram

[Document 570]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent Berlin, July 1, 1948—10 p. m.

1565. In surprise move, Soviets ended their participation in Allied Kommandatura. Soviet chief of staff requested other chiefs of staff to meet at noon today and read official statement as follows: “Well-known behavior of Colonel Howley and lack of reaction on part of British and French representatives to protests made by Soviet authorities as well as separate actions of French, US and British authorities in introducing currency reform of Western Zones into Berlin, city which is part of economic system of Soviet Zone, have resulted in fact that the quadripartite meetings in the Allied Kommandatura cannot take place any longer. In connection with this, Soviet representatives will no longer participate in the quadripartite meetings of the bodies of the Allied Kommandatura in Berlin.”

Subsequent questioning elicited statement by Colonel Kalinin that “Allied Kommandatura discontinues its work. In other words, there is no Allied Kommandatura.”

Small staff will temporarily continue to work in Kommandatura building, apparently preparing to remove archives. Soviet flag continues flying and Soviet guard still on duty. In reply to question Kalinin said past decisions and orders of Kommandatura remain valid and “since all decisions were taken on basis of mutual agreement, these agreements and these decisions are valid for us.”

Consequences of this unexpected action on municipal government are not yet known.

Sent Department 1565; repeated London 301, Paris 301, Moscow 266.

Murphy

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–248: Telegram

[Document 571]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact London, July 2, 1948—4 p. m.

2937. For the Secretary and Lovett from Douglas.

1. Saw Bevin at noon today. He approves text of draft note sent Embtel 2929, July 2,1 with following comments and reservations: (a) Draft text makes reference to correspondence between President Truman and Stalin. He would like, urgently, to see the language of Stalin’s reply,2 since, as reported in Embtel 2853, June 28,3 Stalin’s reply to Churchill 4 was completely noncommittal. If Stalin’s reply to President Truman indicates a recognition of our right to communications with our forces in Berlin, British will adjust the language of the identic UK note by making reference to President Truman’s correspondence with Stalin, and by saying that correspondence in a similar sense was had between Churchill and Stalin. If, however, Stalin’s reply to President Truman is as noncommittal as Stalin’s reply to Churchill, Bevin wonders whether it is wise to expose ourselves to a refutation.

(b) As to the final paragraph of the draft note, Bevin feels that in the event the military governors are unable to resolve disputes among themselves, it would be inadvisable to hurdle the CFM. This machine, he said, had been established and although it had not worked satisfactorily, he was reluctant to take the first move to bury it. He believes, therefore, that in the event the military governors find it impossible to reconcile their differences, it would be preferable to substitute the following language for the last paragraph of the draft note: “If, after a reasonable and stated time, the military governors, in spite of their local knowledge and experience, are still unable to reach agreement, the questions still in dispute shall be referred to the Council of Foreign Ministers.”

I can see that his view is not without logic. I suggested, however, that the draft note would, in the US, be stronger and satisfy, what from this distance I sensed was public opinion at home, if some reference were made to the possibility of submitting the Berlin issue to the UN. I therefore suggested language along the following lines as ma addition to the substitute language which he suggests, and which is quoted above: “In the event of failure by the CFM to reach agreement after a reasonable and stated time, the governments concerned will consider what further steps should be taken, aimed at a peaceful settlement of the Berlin question, including possible reference to the appropriate organ of the United Nations.”

This procedure will make a record of our concern for established machinery and our anxiety to use every rung of the ladder leading to peaceful settlement, i.e., military governors, CFM, and finally, UN. Moreover, since issue now under draft note language, clearly limited to Berlin and time factor can be defined, there is some defense against dangers of CFM meeting (Embtel 2907, June 30,5 and Embtel 2915, July 16 ).

Bevin is considering this suggestion, and I think will give a favorable answer this afternoon.

Massigli concurs in Bevin’s view expressed in regard to the last paragraph, and is disposed to favor the suggested addition.

2. ReEmbtel 2915, Bevin is instructing Robertson, in concert with Clay and Koenig, and if Koenig or his deputy are unwilling or unavailable, with Clay alone, to prepare a letter in reply to Sokolovsky along the lines of Embtel 2915, unless they think it should follow different lines, and to deliver it this afternoon. His instructions also include releasing the letter to the press as soon as it reaches Sokolovsky’s hands, and to arrange for a meeting, preferably in company with his colleagues, with Sokolovsky tomorrow, Saturday, morning.

3. As to the timing of the dispatch of the note, Bevin feels that a decision on this point should be reserved until we have had an opportunity to learn of Sokolovsky’s response and attitude. He is inclined to think, in the light of the situation as it exists today, which of course may be quite different on learning of Sokolovsky’s attitude, that it would be better to postpone the dispatch of the note until the 5th or 6th, but not later than the 6th. His reasons are as follows: (1) To dispatch a note before knowing of Sokolovsky attitude would be going over his head to the Kremlin.

(2) There may be differences in the Polit Bureau which Robertson’s response to Sokolovsky may require some time to resolve.

(3) Members of the Polit Bureau may be away over the week-end, and that, accordingly, to dispatch the note before they have had an opportunity to consider it might aggravate the situation.

(4) Bevin feels that if the note is put forward at approximately the same time as the letter to Sokolovsky is under discussion, it may harden the Soviet reaction.

(5) Bevin believes that the world press will give reply to Sokolovsky a favorable reception and thus build up public opinion in our support.

To most of the reasons Bevin advances for delay, there are obviously counterconsiderations which I impressed on him. He finally replied that he would prefer not to make commitment as to timing until he had a clearer view of Sokolovsky’s attitude and response.

Massigli agrees, generally, with Bevin’s view as to this.

Sent Department as 2937, repeated Berlin (for Clay and Murphy) as 273, repeated Paris as 340, Moscow (for Ambassador) as 117.

Douglas

1 Not printed; differences between the draft note under reference here and the text of the note handed to Ambassador Panyushkin on July 6 are indicated in annotations to the latter, p. 950 [Pg. 950 includes portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575].

2 The text of Stalin’s message to Truman of June 16, 1945 ( Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. iii, p. 137) was transmitted in telegram 2548, July 2, to London, not printed, for delivery to Foreign Secretary Bevin (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–248).

3 Not printed.

4 For the text of Stalin’s message of June 17, 1945 to Churchill, see Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the U.S.S.R., Commission for the Publication of Diplomatic Documents, Correspondence between the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R. and the Presidents of the U.S.A. and the Prime Ministers of Great Britain During the Great Patriotic War of 1941–1945, vol. i, Correspondence with Winston S. Churchill and Clement R. Attlee (July 1941–November 1945) (Moscow: Foreign Languages Printing House, 1957), p. 366.

5  Ante, p. 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568].

6  Ante, p. 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–348: Telegram

[Document 572]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact London, July 3, 1948—2 a. m.

2961. For the Secretary, Lovett, et al from Douglas.

I. Am sorry that the telecon conversation1 consumed so much of your time and proved to be partially ineffective.

The reason I have not transmitted further comments is that immediately after the abandonment of the ill-fated telecon, Clay from Berlin had a telecon conversation with me in which there was repeated his conversation with the Army.2 This conversation ended at about 10:45 London time. I immediately saw Bevin. The results of this conversation with Bevin are repeated in the following telecon conversation with Clay. My remarks to Clay: “I can assure you Bevin feels the urgency of events. Because Sokolovsky’s letter3 was addressed to Robertson and therefore to Bevin, and because Bevin, during the recent debate in the House of Commons made the commitment that His Majesty’s Government would study Sokolovsky’s letter and reply to it, Bevin feels that in order to discharge his obligation to the House of Commons and to comply with the decision of the Cabinet, Robertson must respond in writing to Sokolovsky. Bevin is, therefore, without implicating US or the French in any way and upon his own initiative and as a result of his own decision, instructing Robertson to deliver tonight to Sokolovsky a written reply. You doubtless know the substance of the first and major part of this letter.4 The latter parts implying consultation with and agreement of Robertson’s colleagues have been deleted. The following language has been substituted. (With such minor changes as Robertson may deem wise to make.)

“ ‘The first objective, however, must be the restoration of recognized movement facilities of all sorts between Berlin and the western zone and the resumption of the full flow of trade, thus enabling the people of Berlin to be adequately sustained in the normal way. In order to facilitate this, I should be ready to meet you forthwith to discuss times and methods of reopening communications.’

“I made it clear that the decision to send this letter must be his own and that we could not be implicated in any way since we were opposed on our account to the sending of any letter. Bevin asked me to explain to you that he did not want to be in the position of letting us down but that he had his commitments to the House of Commons which he had to discharge.

“After the letter has been sent he will be free to cooperate with us to the fullest extent. His attitude is one of firmness and complete helpfulness.”

Clay’s answer: “I just talked with Robertson who showed me his letter. While I had rather it not be sent, we really cannot quarrel with its context. I am cabling Washington that my liaison officer will call on Sokolovsky’s headquarters early tomorrow and ask orally for appointment with him for the afternoon to meet Robertson, Koenig, and myself. French will go along although they think meeting premature. We will ask Sokolovsky when he intends to reopen traffic. If reply is evasive or unpromising, that will end conference. If he states he will open traffic under certain conditions, we will discuss latter to extent permissible under our discretionary authority. I will report promptly if meeting is accepted and also results and will send copy to you.”

This, I hope, disposes of the question of the letter to Sokolovsky and a meeting of the Military Governors of the western powers with him.

II. Two questions remain in regard to the draft note: 1. Stalin’s reply to President Truman’s letter (see Embtel 2937, July 25 ) which the British are most anxious to receive; and

2. The question of substitute language for Paragraph 3.6

Bevin understands the full significance of the language “pertaining to the rights of the occupying powers in the Berlin area” as it is related to the jurisdiction of the United Nations.

Bevin feels that in the event of failure of the negotiations among the Military Governors as contemplated in Paragraph 2 of the conclusion of the note, the next step should be the Council of Foreign Ministers. He agrees to the suggestion that “in the event of failure by the Council of Foreign Ministers to reach agreement after a reasonable and stated time, the governments concerned will consider what further steps should be taken, aimed at a peaceful settlement of the Berlin question, including also reference to the appropriate organ of the United Nations.”

He thinks that the reference to any question pertaining to the rights of the occupying powers in the Berlin area should be inserted in the above quoted last paragraph, in order to cover the points which you make. I would appreciate your guidance in this respect.

III. In that part of Paragraph 1(B) in which Bevin’s substitute language is quoted, he suggests the deletion of the word “local” and after the phrase “to reach agreement” the insertion of the following: “on these matters affecting Berlin.”7

Sent Department 2961, repeated Paris Caffery 341, Berlin 274 for Murphy and Clay, Moscow 120 for Ambassador.

Douglas

1 The record of the teletype conference of July 2, under reference here, is not printed.

2 No record has been found of the teletype conference under reference here.

3 Regarding Marshal Sokolovsky’s letter of June 29 to General Robertson, see telegram 1555, June 30, from Berlin, p. 932 [Pg. 932 is part of Doc. 566], and footnote 1 thereto.

4 General Robertson’s letter of July 3 to Marshal Sokolovsky noted with satisfaction that the measures imposed by Soviet authorities on the movement of the German population across the borders of the Soviet zone were temporary measures. Robertson also noted that Sokolovsky was doing everything possible to remove the technical difficulties which prevented the movement of trains between Berlin and Helmstedt and that the full movement on this line would be resumed before the supply position in Berlin became serious.

5  Supra.

6 The reference here is to a substitute paragraph transmitted in telegram 2493, July 1, to London, not printed, which read: “If, after a reasonable and stated time, there is still in dispute in the Allied Control Council any question pertaining to the rights of the occupying powers in the Berlin area, the US Govt would be prepared to join with the other occupying powers in referring the matters still in dispute to the appropriate organ of the United Nations for consideration and decision.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–148)

7 The reference here is to Bevin’s suggested text for the final paragraph of the draft note, submitted in telegram 2937, supra.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–348: Telegram

[Document 573]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, July 3, 1948—7 p. m.

2555. The joint report of the three military governors on their visit to Marshal Sokolovsky 2 just received now requires that the three governments approach the Soviet Union without delay. We strongly urge therefore that the text of the note be agreed and presented simultaneously to the Soviet representatives in London, Paris and Washington not later than 12 noon Washington time, July 5. Any further delay will only benefit Soviets.

With the exception of the reference to the CFM, we can agree to the changes suggested in your 2929, July 23 and 2963, July 3.4 It is not clear from your last telegram under reference whether Massigli’s agreement to this language supersedes or is modified by the text of the note received from Paris in Caffery’s 3523, July 3, repeated to London as 608,4 which eliminates proposals two and three. In order to avoid any misunderstanding we are sending you by separate telegram5 the text upon which we understand agreement has been reached, down to numbered paragraph three, still in disagreement.6

It is clear from Sokolovsky’s reply that the Soviet Govt, intends to utilize the Berlin situation to reopen entire German question and any proposal on our part which suggests meeting of CFM would only invite a Soviet reply bypassing the military governors, accepting the CFM and then at meeting agreeing to lift blockade on condition we suspend operation of the London recommendations. This, of course, is out of the question. Furthermore, any suggestion on our part looking to a meeting of the CFM could be utilized by the Soviets for propaganda purposes which might easily affect German response to our program in western Germany. We had earlier agreed with Bevin to eliminate the CFM for the reasons set forth in your 2907 and with the French who had expressed grave doubts as to meeting and whose latest proposal omits all reference to it. Sokolovsky’s statements seem to us to make it clearly inadvisable to mention CFM in note. Please urge strongly upon British and French that we avoid what seems to us to be a serious tactical mistake.

It is important that we reach an early meeting of minds on this subject so that note can be promptly delivered. If reference to CFM is omitted, is text of paragraph three as contained in our 2514 acceptable?7

Although we recognize that Sokolovsky’s attitude apparently precludes any hope of agreement except on basis of reopening entire German question and probably forecasts nature of Soviet Government’s reply, we do not believe this should change present character of note. We must, however, face this situation when reply received.

We should welcome expression of Brit and French views regarding publicity to be given the note as it is delivered. One possibility is that in order to avoid appearance joint notes constitute ultimatum, notes should not be published until a reasonable time is granted Soviets to formulate reply. When they are delivered, it could be explained to Soviet representatives that because of gravity of question at issue, the three governments do not intend to publish their communications until Soviet Govt, has had reasonable opportunity to reply. As a precautionary measure we should hold the text available for instantaneous release in event the Soviets were tempted to publish distorted version either in connection or prior to their reply. It would, of course, be necessary to inform the press that the notes had been delivered and that reasonable time would be allowed to elapse before publication. Please reply soonest.

Marshall

1 This telegram was repeated to Paris as 2467, Berlin as 1180, and Moscow as 761.

2 See telegram 309, July 4, from Berlin, infra.

3 Not printed; differences between the draft text under reference here and the final note delivered to Ambassador Panyushkin on July 6 are indicated in annotations to the latter, p. 950 [Pg. 950 includes portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575].

4 Not printed.

4 Not printed.

5 Telegram 2556, July 3, to London, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–348).

6  Ante, p. 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568].

7 Telegram 2514, not printed. Telegram 2972 from London, undated, not printed, reported that both Massigli and Strang opposed the inclusion of any reference to the CFM in the draft note (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–448); telegram 1606 from Berlin, July 4, not printed, stated that Clay and Murphy also concurred in Douglas’ preference for the omission of reference to the CFM as well as reference to the United Nations. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–448)

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–448: Telegram

[Document 574]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in France

top secret Berlin, July 4, 1948—2 p. m.

309. Personal for Caffery. Your 395, July 3, second paragraph.1 Chauvel seems to be laboring under some misapprehension regarding meeting of four commanders-in-chief. Meeting was arranged in complete agreement among the three west representatives who also agreed on the joint report of the meeting, the text of which follows for your personal information:

“Generals Robertson, Noiret and Clay visited Marshal Sokolovsky at his headquarters at 1700 hours by appointment. We were met with courtesy. General Clay opened the conversation by stating that the three west military governors were concerned over the transport situation into Berlin. We have been flying all of our supplies in for some days, and this is indeed a serious situation. We therefore determined to meet with Marshal Sokolovsky to frankly discuss the transport situation. General Clay pointed out further that we wished to be advised as to what we could expect with respect to the resumption of traffic.

General Robertson then stated that he wished to speak in connection with his exchange of notes with Marshal Sokolovsky in which the latter had stated the traffic was held up due to technical difficulties.2 This had continued for ten days and it should now be possible for Marshal Sokolovsky to know what the technical difficulties were and he should be able now to assure us that traffic could be resumed at an early date, and when General Robertson pointed out further the seriousness of the present situation to the German population Berlin, and also the increased effect of the blockade on public opinion. He further drew attention to the fact that no alternative routes had been made available.

Marshal Sokolovsky in his opening remarks stated that General Robertson had raised the question which was important to us and wanted it treated alone, whereas there were other questions which were important to him. Marshal Sokolovsky then made a significant remark to the effect that he had never said that traffic on the railway was held up for other than technical reasons, and that these technical reasons still applied although he could not foretell what further developments might be. Marshal Sokolovsky then went into a fairly lengthy explanation of how the Western Allies had created economic disorders in the Soviet zone which made it impossible to provide alternative routes. Marshal Sokolovsky then stated that these economic disorders had been created by the London Conference at which he was not a party and therefore he could not be blamed for the results which should have been foreseen by those engaged in the London Conference. This is of considerable significance because Marshal Sokolovsky made no special reference to the currency situation in speaking of the conditions at Berlin which made it difficult for him to answer our questions, and thus for the first time related the Berlin situation to the London Conference as a whole. He made it quite clear that he was not prepared to answer any question on the resumption of traffic unless the results of the London Conference were also to be discussed. General Robertson specifically attempted to pin him down on this question. In reply, Marshal Sokolovsky again referred to the technical difficulties the railway but without specifically answering General Robertson’s question, accepted the latter’s interpretation that the question of transport was related to the total German problem. In view of these statements, General Robertson stated that Marshal Sokolovsky had raised very broad questions indeed and therefore he has nothing more to say.

General Noiret then stated that he had proposed to discuss the question of resumption of the movement of military freight but that in view of Marshal Sokolovsky’s answer to General Robertson’s query, he had nothing further to say. Marshal Sokolovsky then stated once again that he had never said that traffic would be stopped bringing in food for the Berlin population, and that the present stoppage was for technical reasons although he could not guarantee that when these technical difficulties had been cleared, others might not occur elsewhere. When Marshal Sokolovsky made this statement, General Clay stated that no further discussion appeared useful and thanked Marshal Sokolovsky for the meeting. Generals Robertson and Noiret did likewise and at 1730 hours the three west military governors left his office.

The three west governors are agreed that Marshal Sokolovsky is under instructions which permit him no latitude in negotiating the transport question alone or even in connection with other subjects unless there is a complete discussion of the German problem. He deliberately related the Berlin situation to the London Conference. From this, the three west military governors are of the opinion that the Soviet Government at this moment has no intent [intention] to settle the Berlin problem except as a part of the settlement of the German problem. It is clear that further action here by the three west military governors would serve no useful purpose.

In order to prevent Soviet breaking of news we have each advised our press that the three of us met with Sokolovsky at 1700 hours to ask for assurance with respect to the reopening of traffic; that we received no assurance; and that the situation thus remained unchanged. The press was advised that the meeting was called as a result of spontaneous desire of all three military governors to attempt to find a solution here.”

Sent Paris as 309; repeated Department as 1601.

Murphy

1 Not printed; in it Caffery reported a statement by Chauvel that Robertson had sent his letter to Sokolovsky without indicating that he was supported by French and Americans and that the three Western Powers had not agreed on the time of the meeting with Sokolovsky. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–348)

2 Regarding Marshal Sokolovsky’s letter of June 29 to General Robertson under reference here, see telegram 1555, June 30, from Berlin, p. 932 [Pg. 932 is part of Doc. 566], and footnote 1 thereto.

The Secretary of State to the Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–648

[Document 575]

The Secretary of State to the Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin)1

secret Washington, July 6, 1948.

Excellency: The United States Government wishes to call to the attention of the Soviet Government the extremely serious international situation which has been brought about by the actions of the Soviet Government in2 imposing restrictive measures on transport which, amount now to a blockade against the sectors in Berlin occupied by the United States, United Kingdom and France. The United States Government regards these measures of blockade as a clear violation of existing agreements concerning the administration of Berlin by the four occupying powers.

The rights of the United States as a joint occupying power in Berlin derive from the total defeat and unconditional surrender of Germany. The international agreements undertaken in connection therewith by the Governments of the United States, United Kingdom, France and the Soviet Union defined the zones in Germany and the sectors in Berlin which are occupied by these powers. They established the quadripartite control of Berlin on a basis of friendly cooperation which the Government of the United States earnestly desires to continue to pursue.

These agreements implied the right of free access to Berlin. This Fight has long been confirmed by usage. It was directly specified in a message sent by President Truman to Premier Stalin on June 14, 1945,3 which agreed to the withdrawal of United States forces to the zonal boundaries, provided satisfactory arrangements could be entered Into between the military commanders, which would give access by rail, road and air to United States forces in Berlin.4 Premier Stalin replied on June 165 suggesting a change in date but no other alteration in the plan proposed by the President. Premier Stalin then gave assurances that all necessary measures would be taken, in accordance with the plan. Correspondence in a similar sense took place between Premier Stalin and Mr. Churchill. In accordance with this understanding, the United States, whose armies had penetrated deep into Saxony and Thuringia, parts of the Soviet zone, withdrew its forces to its own area of occupation in Germany and took up its position in its own sector in Berlin. Thereupon the agreements in regard to the occupation of Germany and Berlin went into effect. The United States would not have so withdrawn its troops from a large area now occupied by the Soviet Union had there been any doubt whatsoever about the observance of its agreed right of free access to its sector of Berlin. The right of the United States to its position in Berlin thus stems from precisely the same source as the right of the Soviet Union. It is impossible to assert the latter and deny the former.

It clearly results from these undertakings that Berlin is not a part of the Soviet zone, but is an international zone of occupation. Commitments entered into in good faith by the zone commanders, and subsequently confirmed by the Allied Control Authority, as well as practices sanctioned by usage, guarantee the United States together with other powers, free access to Berlin for the purpose of fulfilling its responsibilities as an occupying power. The facts are plain. Their meaning is clear. Any other interpretation would offend all the rules of comity and reason.

In order that there should be no misunderstanding whatsoever on this point, the United States Government categorically asserts that it is in occupation of its sector in Berlin with free access thereto as a matter of established right deriving from the defeat and surrender of Germany and confirmed by formal agreements among the principal Allies. It further declares that it will not be induced by threats, pressures or other actions to abandon these rights. It is hoped that the Soviet Government entertains no doubts whatsoever on this point.

This Government now shares with the Governments of France and the United Kingdom the responsibility initially undertaken at Soviet request on July 7, 1945, for the physical well-being of 2,400,000 persons in the western sectors of Berlin. Restrictions recently imposed by the Soviet authorities in Berlin have operated to prevent this Government and the Governments of the United Kingdom and of France from fulfilling that responsibility in an adequate manner.

The responsibility which this Government bears for the physical well-being and the safety of the German population in its sector of Berlin is outstandingly humanitarian in character. This population includes hundreds of thousands of women and children, whose health and safety are dependent on the continued use of adequate facilities for moving food, medical supplies and other items indispensable to the maintenance of human life in the western sectors of Berlin. The most elemental of these human rights which both our Governments are solemnly pledged to protect are thus placed in jeopardy by these restrictions. It is intolerable that any one of the occupying authorities should attempt to impose a blockade upon the people of Berlin.

The United States Government is therefore obliged to insist that in accordance with existing agreements the arrangements for the movement of freight and passenger traffic between the western zones and Berlin be fully restored. There can be no question of delay in the restoration of these essential services, since the needs of the civilian population in the Berlin area are imperative.

Holding these urgent views regarding its rights and obligations in the United States sector of Berlin, yet eager always to resolve controversies in the spirit of fair consideration for the viewpoints of all concerned, the Government of the United States declares that duress should not be invoked as a method of attempting to dispose of any disagreements which may exist between the Soviet Government and the Government of the United States in respect of any aspect of the Berlin situation.

Such disagreements if any should be settled by negotiation or by any of the other peaceful methods provided for in Article 33 of the Charter in keeping with our mutual pledges as copartners in the United Nations. For these reasons the Government of the United States is ready as a first step to participate in negotiations in Berlin among the four Allied Occupying Authorities for the settlement of any question in dispute arising out of the administration of the city of Berlin. It is, however, a prerequisite that the lines of communication and the movement of persons and goods between the United Kingdom, the United States and the French sectors in Berlin and the Western Zones shall have been fully restored.6

Accept [etc.]

G. C. Marshall

1 This note was handed to Ambassador Panyushkin by the Secretary of State on the morning of July 6. On the same day, the British Government transmitted an identic note to the Soviet Ambassador in London, and the French Government presented its separate note to the Soviet Ambassador in Paris. For the text of the French note, see Cmd. 7534, pp. 49–50.

2 In the draft note agreed upon by Strang, Massigli, and Douglas and reported upon in telegram 2929, July 2, from London, not printed, the remaining portion of this paragraph read as follows: “… instituting a blockade against the sectors in Berlin occupied by the United States, Great Britain and France. The United States Government regards these measures of blockade instituted by the Soviet military authorities in Germany as a clear violation of existing agreements concerning the administration of Berlin by the four occupying powers.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–248)

3  Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. iii, pp. 135–136.

4 In the draft cited in footnote 2 above the text read as follows from this point: “This proposal was accepted by Premier Stalin in his reply dated June 16, 1945. In accordance with this understanding, the United States, whose armies had penetrated deep into Saxony and Thuringia, parts of the Soviet zone, withdrew its forces to its own area of occupation in Germany and took up its position in its own sector in Berlin. Thereupon the agreements in regard to the occupation of Germany and Berlin went into effect. The United States would not have so withdrawn its troops from a large area now occupied by the Soviet had there been any doubt whatsoever about the observance of its agreed right of free access to its sector of Berlin. The right of the United States to its position in Berlin thus stems from precisely the same source as the right of the Soviet Union. It is impossible to assert the latter and deny the former.”

5  Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. iii, p. 137.

6  In the draft cited in footnote 2 above, the text had four paragraphs instead of this final one. They read: “Such disagreements, if any, should be settled by the peaceful method of negotiation in keeping with our mutual pledges as copartners in the United Nations. It is for these reasons that the Government of the United States submits the following proposal: 1. Full communication between the United States, United Kingdom and French sectors of Berlin and the western zones for allied and German personnel and freight shall be restored. When this has been done, we shall be ready to negotiate on a four power basis for the settlement of any question arising out of the administration of Berlin, particularly the question of currency, which may be in dispute among the powers.

2. These negotiations shall proceed through the Military Governors in Berlin.

3. If, after a reasonable unstated time, there is still a dispute among the Military Governors any question arising out of the administration of Berlin, the United States Government would be prepared to join with the other occupying powers in referring such matters still in dispute to the appropriate organ of the United Nations for consideration and decision.”

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–748: Telegram

[Document 576]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, July 9, 1948—1 p. m.

2635. For Douglas. With purpose in view stated last para urtel 30331 we had already begun study of alternatives which Sov reply may present. Given below in inverse order of probability is our preliminary survey of these alternatives concerning which we would appreciate comments yourself, Brit and French and addressees this message:

1. Sovs accept proposal contained in parallel notes. Our objectives in ensuing negotiations would then be to obtain confirmation and precise definition of rights of free access and communication to Berlin.

2. Sovs flatly reject notes by refusing to lift blockade and proposing no negotiation. We would continue to supply Berlin by airlift, which is obviously not a solution. Our first step would be to reiterate our demand for lifting of the blockade and at the same time to propose that, if this is done, the question of Berlin rights be referred to International Court of Justice. In event of refusal contemplated next step would then be to bring Sov blockade to attention of Security Council with or without further efforts at negotiation, reserving, however, the right of such action as may prove necessary for the supplying of Berlin.

3. Sovs agree to lift blockade provided CFM would be convened to consider entire German question, including actions of western powers determined by London tripartite conference. Element of duress might be less significant in sense that Sovs might not require abandonment western German program as pre-condition for CFM meeting. While acceptance could cast uncertainty on western German Govt plans, proposal in this form might prove difficult to reject outright since such rejection could imply refusal to negotiate under any circumstances. Western allies might consider offering counter-proposal accepting a CFM meeting dealing initially with subjects relating to Berlin city administration and allied rights connected therewith, discussion of further questions relating to Germany to be dependent on agreement on Berlin issues; if this proposal unacceptable to Sovs, Sov agreement would be requested to refer Berlin question to International Court of Justice.

4. Tenor Sokolovsky’s remarks to Mil Govs and line of Soviet-licensed press indicate probable course of Sov action may be somewhat as follows. They may deny the blockade as such exists, stating that temporary suspension of traffic has been caused by technical difficulties and counter-measures necessitated by protection of Soy zone economy against unilateral “illegal” actions of western powers following London CFM. Sovs might therefore propose CFM meeting be convened to consider Berlin situation and its preliminary cause, namely, western German program. Sov proposal might make no reference to past actions which on both sides presumably would remain in force or it might suggest that western powers suspend western German program while Sov Govt for its part would likewise suspend measures in Berlin area. Sovs might possibly exclude abrogation western German currency reform from their demands on theory the quadripartite discussions of currency reform for all of Germany could be resumed. In summary, however, their proposal would be that entire German question including Berlin situation be considered as a whole and that duress of the blockade would be continued until situation in Germany prior to London talks on Germany was restored.

Our first course of action under this heading should be to re-submit our demand for the lifting of the blockade and to point out that Sov measures against Berlin represent an inhumane form of coercion which cannot be treated on the same basis as political questions affecting the different zones. With respect to our western German program we should insist that this was forced upon the western allies by Sov obstruction on all aspects of the German question in the discussions of the Allied Control Council and other pertinent international meetings. As to the unilateral character of the western German program which was undertaken to preserve the areas of Germany under western authority from complete chaos, we should refer to Sov unilateral steps destructive of German economic and political unity which the Sovs themselves have claimed were no business of the Control Council or the other allied powers. The western nations in their reply should reiterate their willingness to negotiate all matters in Berlin affecting four-power interests and should suggest that in the event of Sov refusal these matters be referred to the International Court. At that stage, namely immediately after dispatch of the western nations’ second note, western nation proposal should be notified forthwith to the United Nations in order that the Security Council should be advised of action taken under Article 33.2

5. Above represents tentative estimate and views based chiefly on speculation and without prior knowledge of nature Sov reply. Two considerations seem important: (a) we should not negotiate under direct duress; (b) lifting of blockade would go far in achieving our initial objective. Although we appreciate advantage of endeavoring to secure assurance that blockade will not be re-instituted, we are doubtful if we could make such assurance a condition to talks. If Sovs abandon blockade and propose a meeting to discuss entire German problem, we should consider very carefully whether we should refuse such a meeting and the conditions under which it could best be used to reach agreement and avoid open conflict.

6. Re your inquiry about barrage balloons, you will recall agreement stated our telecon 3 that no counter-action should be taken without governmental consultation and approval. We envisage that an immediate protest would be made to Moscow demanding removal of the balloons. We are of the opinion that any steps of a kind involving possible overt military action should be taken up by Govts with Sovs and at the same time notified to United Nations in accordance with Art 33 of the Charter.4 Sent London as 2635; repeated Paris 2538; Berlin 1210; Moscow 779.

Marshall

1 Not printed; it asked for the Department’s views on the possible contents of a Soviet reply (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–748).

2 The four alternatives presented here were part of a memorandum prepared by Bohlen on July 6, and sent to Lovett (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–648).

3 The transcript of this telecon is not printed.

4 In telegram 3033, July 7, from London, not printed, Douglas speculated that there were many alternatives open to the Soviets, two of which were asking for a CFM and sending a stiff reply. Three days later he reported that a discussion with Strang and Massigli on the possible Soviet replies had proceeded along the lines of this cable (telegram 3109, July 10, from London, not printed (740.00119 Control (German)/7–748 and 1048)). Ambassador Smith speculated that the Soviet reply would be an unyielding rebuttal, denying the existence of a blockade, but concluding with a statement of willingness to negotiate. Flat acceptance or rejection, he considered unlikely (telegram 1294, July 11, from Moscow, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1148)). Ambassador Caffery indicated the expected Soviet reply would be along the lines of paragraph three or four of this telegram and doubted whether the United States would be able to avoid the convoking of the CFM (telegram 3649, July 12, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1248)).

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1048: Telegram

[Document 577]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

top secret
urgent Berlin, July 10, 1948—5 p. m.

CC–5118. From CINCEUR Berlin now repeated to State for info. Action to Dept of Army personal for Bradley from CINCEUR personal from Clay. Reurad W–85475.1

I have studied the State Department’s proposed alternatives with care. I agree fully to the conclusion that we should not negotiate under direct duress; that is, during the period in which the Berlin blockade continues. If the Soviet Government believes that it has gone as far as it dares at this time, it will probably be willing to negotiate in Berlin on currency reform which would provide a face-saving compromise, and in accepting such negotiation it would state that the technical difficulties now causing the blockade have been or are being cleared up.

I consider that such a Soviet reply is unlikely as the Soviet Government is not yet convinced of the determination of the Allied stand and hence believes it can go further.

Therefore, the Soviet Government may take the course of reopening traffic subject to our agreement to a conference at governmental level to consider the entire German question. I am sure they will neither propose nor consent to such discussions at Berlin level. If this does develop, I believe that we should state our willingness at that time to discuss the entire German question, but that our course of action in western Germany, which has been made necessary by Soviet intransigence, will not be changed or delayed pending such a conference. We should insist on a specific agenda prior to the meeting and a preliminary exchange of views on the subjects of the agenda through diplomatic channels before definite commitment to a meeting to ascertain if it could serve any useful purpose. I believe that to refuse flatly to meet to consider the entire question would put us in a bad light which would be capitalized to the full by Soviet propaganda. On the other hand, unless there is a real change in Soviet position, such a meeting would be for propaganda purposes only. I would like to emphasize through repetition my belief that a refusal to discuss the German problem as a whole if the blockade is lifted first would adversely affect our moral position in that it would be exploited to (show that we do not desire to reach an agreement. Such a meeting is not likely to record any real accomplishments, and it should not be permitted to delay our plans for western Germany.

If the Soviet Government does not agree to lift the blockade or should exact as conditions thereto the suspension of our plans for western Germany, we should refuse to even consider such suspension and should proceed promptly as suggested by the State Department to refer the question to the International Court with notification to the United Nations.

However, it would seem to me that we have not as yet gone far enough in determining our future course of action. Reference to the International Court and to the United Nations, while desirable, do not necessarily lead to results and in fact could consume many months before it can be demonstrated that no results will be forthcoming. During this period, our Berlin situation could deteriorate materially, particularly if it should continue into the winter months.

I am still convinced that the Soviets do not want war. However, they know that the Allies also do not want war and they will continue their pressure to the point at which they believe hostilities might occur.

Recognizing fully the commitment implied, but convinced that the Soviets will avoid hostilities, I am strongly of the view that if the blockade is not lifted with technical difficulties still alleged as the reason, we should advise the Soviet Government that we are prepared to overcome these technical difficulties, and that we propose on a specific date to send in a convoy accompanied by the requisite bridge equipment to make our right of way into Berlin usable. There is, of course, an inherent risk in this course since once this convoy crosses the border it is committed to the movement to Berlin. In my own mind, I am convinced that it would get to Berlin and that the technical difficulties would cease to exist. If the USSR does intend war, it is because of a fixed plan. Hostilities will not result because of action on our part to relieve the blockade unless there is such a fixed plan. If there is such a fixed plan, pressures will continue elsewhere even if we leave Berlin until the Western Allies are provoked into war. Berlin, in itself, does not represent a sufficient asset to USSR to risk war unless it is committed to war.

It also seems timely to develop now what economic embargoes or other countermeasures we might employ to support our Berlin position, and at what stage of negotiations we would apply them.2

[ Clay ]

1 Not found in Department of State files; apparently it contained the same set of alternatives as set forth in telegram 2635, supra.

2 On July 11, in telegram 1662, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1148), Murphy expressed views similar to Clay’s. He supported the idea of further negotiations with the Russians, but felt they were no longer adequate. The United States should exercise its rights in Berlin or it would lose them, and Murphy thought the best way to do this was to send guarded convoys, reinforced with troop’s and engineers, through the Soviet Zone to Berlin. This idea had almost universal support among British, French and German opinion in Berlin and ran no greater risk of war than remaining in the city. Douglas discussed the Soviet response with Clay and Murphy and advanced another alternative: that the Soviets might not reply in the near future. He then expressed his belief that alternative four of telegram 2635 (supra) was the most probable answer to the note of the three Western Powers (telegram 3165, July 13, from London, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1348)).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.515/7–1048: Telegram

[Document 578]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

confidential Berlin, July 10, 1948—noon.

1655. Following are developments in negotiations concerning Berlin currency reform:

After negotiations between Soviet finance committee representative and US/UK and French committee representatives undertaken by Berlin city treasurer Magistrat passed resolution quoted below, to which Soviet finance representative made no objection and which was accepted by other Allied representatives. Translation is of resolution extraordinary session city administration (Magistrat) 7 July subject financing public economy Greater Berlin as follows: “1. The entire public economy of the territorial corporation Greater Berlin, including directly operated units and city owned corporations (public enterprises) “will be conducted, as prior to the currency reform, as a unit in a single currency.

“2. All public receipts and disbursements will be booked in the currency valid in the Soviet occupation sector (Reichsmark), will be brought to one place, main cashier’s office and Berlin city bank (Stadtkontor) and will be administered according to the budget and economic plans.

“3. If Deutschemark sums are received or disbursed in the American, British, and French occupation sectors on the basis of regulations passed by the authorized military governments concerning currency reform, such sums are to be exchanged by an office subject to the military governments in question, in order that the public exchequer will receive and disburse only R-marks. The money required for such exchanges, in particular the D-mark, will be provided by the affected military governments. In exchange one D-mark will be equal to one R-mark.”

In accepting Magistrat resolution, Soviet representative promised release 25 million city funds in Soviet marks, making possible payment city payroll. Funds hitherto withheld allegedly because Magistrate violation Soviet order against recognition any currency except Soviet. Magistrates resolution which was accepted by four powers thus represents compromise whereby Soviets gain recognition Soviet mark as sole mark for Berlin city bookkeeping and western Allies obtain implied acceptance D-mark as supplementary currency in Western sectors, also avoidance of position having forced split in Magistrat and maintaining basis for continued quadripartite negotiation, emphasized as desired in recent communications to Soviets.

Funds released represent about one-quarter monthly city budget and one-half monthly payroll all sectors. Soviet representative promised city treasurer additional 15 million soon.

Subsequent to Soviet oral promise to release funds manager finance department, city Berlin, received following Soviet letter: “According to instructions of the finance administration of SMA you are prohibited to make following expenditures in Reichsmarks or Rentenmarks with pasted coupons (Soviet marks): “(1) All kinds of occupation costs for American, British, and French occupation powers, including maintenance costs for German personnel, the Black Guards, displaced persons, etc.

“(2) All expenditures in connection with American, British, and French occupation powers, among others the maintenance of the Magistrates departments for occupation costs in the western sectors.

“(3) Maintenance costs of administrative courts in the British and American sectors (none in French).

“(4) Maintenance costs for the German office for notification of deaths to the next of kin of former members of the Deutsche Wehrmacht and the office for registration of war victims.

“(5) Maintenance costs of the patent office.

“(6) Maintenance costs of the Institute for Physical Chemistry and Electrical Chemistry, the Physical and Technical Reichsanstalt, and the material Pruefungamt. Signed Lt. Colonel Rubanisty.”

Estimated monthly occupation costs personnel payroll approximates 8.5 million. Treasurer now attempting renegotiations with Soviets in Western sectors. Soviet prohibition would appear contradict Soviet assent to paragraph two Magistrat resolution in sense occupation costs always considered portion budget.

US/UK finance advisers agreed 9 July to found German organization to purchase Berlin products for sale Western zones. Purchases either in Soviet or deutschemarks. Proceeds and credit accruing from sales to finance further sales and purchases and reduce indebtedness to zones. Agree also establish revolving fund to finance trade with Western zones through Currency Commission acting as Landeszentralbank for Berlin, granting credit up to 90 percent against commercial papers discounted and credited to account of Bank Deutscher Laender, which furnishes initial deposit with Currency Commission.

In effort establish both Soviet and D-mark credit facilities in West independent of Soviet control and to prevent unwarranted drain on currency to Soviet sector finance advisers agreed recommend all transfers of funds of city bank branches to central banks on other than on Magistrate account be subject prior approval by Western military governments. Right to place liaison officers in central office of city bank (Stadtkontor) to ensure nondiscrimination in bank loans also under consideration. If Soviets object, flow of funds Western sectors to central bank could be blocked.

Murphy

The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1448

[Document 579]

The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) to the Secretary of State 1

[Translation]

[Washington,] July 14, 1948.

Mr. Secretary of State:

1. The Soviet Government has familiarized itself with the note of the Government of the United States of America of July 6, 19482 in which the situation which has been created at the present time in Berlin is described as a result of measures taken by the Soviet side. The Soviet Government cannot agree with this statement of the Government of the United States and considers that the situation which has been created in Berlin has arisen as a result of violation by the Governments of the United States of America, Great Britain, and France of agreed decisions taken by the four powers in regard to Germany and Berlin which (violation) has found its expression in the carrying out of a separate currency reform, in the introduction of a special currency for the western sectors of Berlin and in the policy of the dismemberment of Germany. The Soviet Government has more than once warned the Governments of the United States of America, Great Britain and France in regard to the responsibility which they would take upon themselves in following along the path of the violation of agreed decisions previously adopted by the four powers in regard to Germany. The decisions adopted at the Yalta and Potsdam Conferences and also the agreement of the four powers concerning the control mechanism in Germany have as their aim the demilitarization and democratization of Germany, the removal of the base itself of German militarism and the prevention of the revival of Germany as an aggressive power and thereby the transformation of Germany into a peace-loving and democratic state. These agreements envisage the obligation of Germany to pay reparations and thereby to make at least partial compensation for the damage to those countries which suffered from German aggression. In accordance with these agreements the Governments of the four powers took upon themselves the responsibility for the administration of Germany and bound themselves jointly to draw up a statute for Germany or for any areas including Berlin which were part of German territory and to conclude with Germany a peace treaty which should be signed by a Government of a democratic Germany adequate for that purpose.

These most important agreements of the, four powers in regard to Germany have been violated by the Governments of the United States of America, Great Britain, and France. Measures for the demilitarization of Germany have not been completed and such a very important center of German military industry as the Ruhr district has been taken out from under the control of the four powers. The execution of decisions concerning reparations from the Western zones of occupation of Germany has been interrupted by the Governments of the U.S.A., the U.K., and France. By the separate actions of the Governments of the U.S.A., Great Britain, and France the four power control mechanism in Germany has been destroyed and the Control Council as a result thereof has ceased its activity.

Following the London meeting of the three powers with the participation of Benelux, measures have been undertaken by the Governments of the U.S.A., Great Britain, and France directed towards the division and dismemberment of Germany including preparations which are now in progress for the designation of a separate Government for the western zones of Germany and the separate currency reform for the western zones of occupation carried out on June 18th of this year.

In as much as the situation created in Berlin as well as in all Germany is the direct result of the systematic violation by the Governments of the U.S.A., Great Britain, and France of the decisions of the Potsdam Conference and also of the agreement of the four powers concerning the control mechanism in Germany, the Soviet Government must reject as completely unfounded the statement of the Government of the U.S. to the effect that the measures for the restriction of transport communications between Berlin and the western zones of occupation of Germany introduced by the Soviet command for the defense of the economy of the Soviet zone against its disorganization are allegedly in violation of the existing agreements concerning the administration of Berlin.

2. The Government of the U.S. declares that it is occupying its sector in Berlin by right arising out of the defeat and capitulation of Germany, referring in this connection to agreements between the four powers in regard to Germany and Berlin. This merely confirms the fact that the exercise of the above mentioned right in regard to Berlin is linked to the obligatory execution by the powers occupying Germany of the four power agreements concluded among themselves in regard to Germany as a whole. In conformity with these agreements Berlin was envisaged as the seat of the supreme authority of the four powers occupying Germany, in which connection the agreement concerning the administration of “Greater Berlin” under the direction of the Control Council was reached.

Thus the agreement concerning the four power administration of Berlin is an inseparable component part of the agreement for the four power administration of Germany as a whole. After the U.S.A., Great Britain, and France by their separate actions in the western zones of Germany destroyed the system of four power administration of Germany and had begun to set up a capital for a Government for Western Germany in Frankfurt-am-Main, they thereby undermined as well the legal basis which assured their right to participation in the administration of Berlin.

The Government of the United States in its note points out that its right to be in Berlin is based also on the fact that the United States withdrew its forces from certain regions of the Soviet zone of occupation into which they had penetrated during the period of hostilities in Germany, and that if it (the United States Government) had foreseen the situation, which has been created in Berlin, it would not have withdrawn its forces from those regions. However, the Government of the United States well knows that in removing its troops to the boundaries of the American zone established by agreement of the four powers concerning zones of occupation in Germany it was only carrying out an obligation which it had taken upon itself, the execution of which could alone accord the right of the entry of the troops of the U.S. into Berlin. An examination of the letter referred to in the note of the Government of the U.S.A. of President Truman to Premier Stalin of June 14, 19453 and the letter in reply of Premier Stalin of June 16, 19454 confirms the fact that, thanks to the agreement then reached, the forces of the U.S.A., Great Britain, and France were given the opportunity to enter not only the capital of Germany Berlin, but also the capital of Austria Vienna, which, as is known, were taken only by the forces of the Soviet Army. In addition, it is known that the agreements referred to concerning the question of Berlin and also of Vienna were only a part of the agreements concerning Germany and Austria upon the fulfillment of which the Soviet Government continues to insist.

3. The Government of the United State declares that the temporary measures put into effect by the Soviet Command for the restriction of transport communications between Berlin and the western zones have created difficulties in supplying the Berlin population of the western sectors. It is impossible, however, to deny the fact that these difficulties were occasioned by the actions of the Governments of the U.S.A., Great Britain and France, and primarily by their separate actions in the introduction of new currency in the western zones of Germany and special currency in the western sectors of Berlin.

Berlin lies in the center of the Soviet zone and is a part of that zone. The interests of the Berlin population do not permit a situation in which in Berlin or only in the western sectors of Berlin there shall be introduced special currency which has no validity in the Soviet zone. Moreover, the carrying out of a separate monetary reform in the western zones of Germany has placed Berlin and the whole Soviet zone of occupation as well in a situation in which the entire mass of currency notes which were cancelled in the western zone threatened to pour into Berlin and the Soviet zone of occupation of Germany.

The Soviet Command has been forced therefore to adopt certain urgent measures for the protection of the interests of the German population and also of the economy of the Soviet zone of occupation and the area of “Greater Berlin”. The danger of the disruption of the normal economic activity of the Soviet zone and of Berlin has not been eliminated even at the present time, in as much as the United State, Great Britain and France continue to maintain in Berlin their special currency.

Furthermore, the Soviet Command has consistently displayed and is displaying concern for the well being of the Berlin population and for assuring to them normal supply in all essentials and is striving for the speediest elimination of the difficulties which have arisen recently in this matter. In this connection, if the situation requires, the Soviet Government would not object to assuring by its own means adequate supply for all “Greater Berlin”.

With reference to the statement of the Government of the United State that it will not be compelled by threats, pressure or other actions to renounce its right to participation in the occupation of Berlin, the Soviet Government does not intend to enter into discussion of this statement since it has no need for a policy of pressure, since by violation of the agreed decisions concerning the administration of Berlin the above-mentioned Governments themselves are reducing to naught their right to participation in the occupation of Berlin.

4. The Government of the United State in its note of July 6 expresses the readiness to begin negotiations between the four Allied occupying authorities for consideration of the situation created in Berlin but passes by in silence the question of Germany as a whole.

The Soviet Government, while not objecting to negotiations, considers, however, it necessary to state that it cannot link the inauguration of these negotiations with the fulfilling of any preliminary conditions whatsoever and that, in the second place, four-power conversations could be effective only in the event that they were not limited to the question of the administration of Berlin, since that question cannot be severed from the general question of four-power control in regard to Germany.

Accept [etc.]

A. Panyushkin

1 The source text-translation, which was prepared in the Department of State on July 14, also is printed in The Berlin Crisis, pp. 8–10 and Cmd. 7534, pp. 50–52. Another translation, which was prepared in August 1948 by the Division of Language Services at the request of Jacob Beam and varies slightly from the source text, is filed with Ambassador Panyushkin’s original, Russian-language note in file 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1448. For an English translation prepared by Soviet authorities, which varies in many minor details from the text printed here, see The Soviet Union and the Berlin Question, pp. 42–46. The original Russian text of the note printed here, which appeared in the Soviet press on July 15, is printed in the Russian-language edition of The Soviet Union and the Berlin Question and in Vneshnyaya Politika Sovetskogo Soyuza, 1948, Part II, pp. 22–26. Identic notes were presented to the British and French Governments.

2  Ante, p. 950 [Pg. 950 includes portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575].

3  Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. iii, pp. 135–136.

4  Ibid., p. 137.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) 811.2340/7–1448

[Document 580]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

top secret Washington, July 14, 1948.

Participants: The British Ambassador

Mr. Lovett

Mr. Reber, EUR

The British Ambassador called on me this afternoon to give us Bevin’s preliminary impression of the Soviet reply1 to the joint [identic] note on the Berlin situation.2 Bevin holds the strong opinion that we should not hurry our reply or publication of the note. As an indication of our position we should step up the air lift in the meanwhile. He suggests that Douglas, Strang and Massigli should jointly consider the note and advise the three Governments with respect to the timing of publication and the nature of our reply. It is important in Bevin’s opinion that we do not give any impression of concern or fuss about the note which is in all likelihood only the opening of a protracted operation. I explained that we had a similar message from Douglas this afternoon and that the latter had urged us to add as many C–54’s as possible.3 This matter was now in the hands of the air force.

With respect to sending the B–29’s, the National Security Council at its meeting tomorrow would consider this matter in the light of the Soviet note.4

The Ambassador then gave me the substance of a further message from Mr. Bevin on the Subject.

The substance of which is contained in the attached memorandum. In this connection I said it was impossible to forecast the decision of the National Security Council but that the question of timing was the only real matter of substance to be discussed tomorrow.

The British Ambassador then handed me a copy of the Soviet reply to the British note which differs from the one we received in that it leaves out certain paragraphs relating to the situation in Berlin itself but this may be an omission in transmission as the British note is identical in other respects.5

[ Robert A.] L[ovett]

[Attachment]

Message From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Bevin), as Transmitted by the British Ambassador (Franks), July 14, 1948

Mr. Bevin feels that the fact of the arrival of the Soviet reply and its character do not in any way lessen the desirability of sending the bombers across the Atlantic. He believes that their dispatch is all the more important so that it will be clear that the receipt of the Soviet note was not the occasion of the decision to send them. He is also of the opinion that we should go ahead with all the necessary steps in building up our position while we determine on what lines reply should be made to the Soviet note. Among these steps, he considers that the arrival of the bombers ranks as highly important. He believes also that it is desirable that the bombers should arrive before the meeting of the Consultative Council (of the Brussels Pact), which is due to be held at The Hague on Monday.

So far as publicity is concerned, Mr. Bevin abides by his view, already expressed, that the ordinary language of “routine training flights” should be employed to cover the movement of the bombers.

1  Supra.

2 July 6, p. 950 [Pg. 950 includes portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575].

3 The reference here is to a telecon between Washington and London at 2 p. m. Washington time in which Douglas repeated his hope that Clay would be sent more C–54’s (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048).

4 At its 15th meeting July 14, the National Security Council “agreed, subject to reservations by the Secretary of the Army, that the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense should recommend to the President that the United States proceed with the dispatch of B–29 bombers to the British Isles.” (NSC Action 77, Executive Secretariat Files) Douglas was notified of this action in telegram 2757, July 15, to London, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1548).

5 Subsequent comparison of the Soviet notes revealed that the British and U.S. versions were identical.

Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1448

[Document 581]

Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen) to the Secretary of State

top secret Washington, July 14, 1948.

I went to see the President, as you requested, this afternoon to bring him up to date on the latest developments in the Berlin situation. He had a copy of the note,1 which he read, and said he considered it as a total rejection of everything we had asked for. I told the President that we were studying the note and that there were several aspects to it, but that his conclusion was the same as we had reached as to its main substance.

I outlined for the President the status of the B–29s and told him of the telecon talk with Ambassador Douglas this afternoon.2 I told him that although the British, after having held back and missed what we regarded as the psychological moment, were now eager to have these planes come to England, but that we thought the matter required further consideration in view of the Soviet note, and it therefore was to be discussed tomorrow at eleven by the National Security Council for recommendation to him.

The President said he was completely in agreement with this course of action and felt that the question of dispatching these planes should be most carefully considered in the light of the Soviet note.

Charles E. Bohlen

1 The reference here is to the Soviet note of July 14, p. 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579].

2 Transcript not printed; see footnote 3 to memorandum of conversation by Lovett, supra.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1748: Telegram

[Document 582]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, July 17, 1948—7 p. m.

3249. For Lovett (Eyes Only) from Douglas.

I.

It seems to me that, among others, there are six major alternatives from which we can select our proposals in response to the recently received Soviet note:1

1. We can agree, when the duress of the blockade has been removed, to discuss the entire German question, either commencing with the Berlin situation and proceeding to other matters after there has been an exploration of the specific subjects and the relative general positions of the Soviet, or plunge directly into the whole of the German problem, meanwhile postponing the application and putting into effect of the London agreements. This course would probably have the effect of putting off the establishment of a German political organization in the western areas for an indefinite period, probably, because of the intervention of winter, for approximately a year. In view of (a) The history, extending over three years, of Soviet expressed or implied refusal to take the steps necessary to achieve economic unity;

(b) The Soviet unwillingness to agree to the creation of a German Government based, generally, on the federal principle;

(c) Soviet exaction of reparations from current production;

(d) The type of social, economic, and political organization of the Soviet zone;

(e) Soviets’ obvious ambition to participate in the control of the Ruhr;

(f) Soviet disruption of the Allied Control Council; and

(g) Soviet apparent liquidation of the Kommandatura;

it is most unlikely, if indeed it is not certain that the discussions will produce no more of a solution than the many discussions which have been held in the past, excepting possibly currency in Berlin and frontier currency controls. Moreover, the failure of such discussions to formulate a solution would, unless our rights to be in Berlin and to enjoy access to the western sectors were acknowledged, expose us to later reimposition of the blockade. An advantage to acquiescing in discussions of this character would be to convince some of the “doubting Thomases” like Leon Blum in France, that the German problem cannot be resolved by negotiation with the Soviets. Time might be gained, if time is an advantage.

2. We can agree to the holding of discussions, as outlined in Paragraph 1 above, without postponing the application and putting into effect of the London agreements. It is as unlikely, if indeed not as certain, that discussions under this alternative would be as futile as under Paragraph 1 above. The failure of them to provide a settlement would, unless our rights had been in the meanwhile recognized, make us equally vulnerable to the reimposition of the blockade. An advantage to acquiescing in such discussions under these circumstances would similarly be to convince the “doubting Thomases” that this course of action is hopeless.

3. We can follow the line, somewhat liberalized, as to the discussions and deleting reference to specific date of receipt of the Soviet reply, suggested in Embtel 3217.2 This course, if it is practicable, might lead the Soviet to lift the blockade or at least give us a more solid legal base from which we might attempt to exercise our rights of access. Even, however, were our legal rights to be reinforced by international affirmation of them, the attempt to enjoy them might precipitate, if not a war on a grand scale, a series of armed conflicts.

4. We can follow the course of alternative 1 or 2 above, and simultaneously take the question of rights to be in Berlin and enjoy access to the western sectors to the appropriate organization of the UN for determination if this is practicable. This alternative might meet with opposition from the Soviet, or at least stiffen their position in any discussions. It would, however, provided our rights were affirmed, tend to make it more difficult, although, of course, not impossible for the Soviet to reimpose the blockade after the failure of the discussions.

5. We can abandon Berlin. The effect of this course of action, however, would, I think, be a calamity of the first order. Western European confidence in us, in the light of our repeated statements that we intend to remain in Berlin, would be so shattered that we would, with reasonable expectancy, progressively lose Western Germany, if not Western Europe. Fear, uncertainty and lack of faith in us would weaken the determination of Western Germans and the people of Western Europe, and would probably cause failure of the European Recovery Program, if it would not cause the beneficial effects, which we hope it will produce, to evaporate like water on a hot stove.

If, however, we are to abandon Berlin, we should soon begin to set the stage for it and be prepared to make spectacular commitments and to take unmistakably impressive acts designed to restore confidence among the Western Germans, and the Western Europeans in our unflinching resolution. These commitments and acts should include definite and irrevocable participation in a military alliance which might take the form of (a) A regional pact or some other form; they might include also,

(b) The reinforcing, if this practicable, of our ground forces in Germany;

(c) The substantial building up of our air force in Western Europe;

(d) Such other steps as would restore a broken faith; and

(e) The evacuation by air of such Germans in the western sectors as choose to migrate to the western zones. The naked abandonment of Berlin, unaccompanied by truly spectacular commitments and really impressive actions would probably be disastrous.

6. We can propose to the Soviets, in accordance with the suggestion in their note that they carry the responsibility of providing the essential foodstuffs and raw materials for the German population of the western sectors of Berlin. This course would, unless associated with or followed by redress of the present situation, mean, I think, at least a partial surrender of our position, and might lead, ultimately, to our evacuation of Berlin.3

II.

1. If we are to abandon Berlin, an advantage of holding discussions under I 1, 2 and 3 above, is that we would gain time during the course of the summer months before winter sets in, in which to condition public opinion for abandonment and to take the spectacular steps with which it should be associated.

2. Since it is almost a certainty that discussions will produce no agreement with the Soviet in regard to Germany, except on very limited matters, we must, I think, ultimately face one of three probable alternatives: (a) Abandon Berlin as a naked act and risk losing Europe;

(b) Abandon Berlin under the circumstances referred to above; or

(c) Be prepared to attempt, through the employment of all the devices at our command to enjoy our rights to be in Berlin and to have free access to our sectors, facing the risk of war. These alternatives outlined above may have been painted in shades that are too black and white; there may be a series of shadowy grays.

III.

Provided always that we are not placed in the position of discussing or negotiating under duress, I believe that the wise course of action is to agree to discussions commencing with the situation in Berlin, but without slamming the door to discussion of such other matters as may seem to be appropriate in the light of Soviet behavior during the discussions on the Berlin situation and in the light of exploration of the additional items the Soviet indicate should be included on the agenda and their positions on them.

Without having the opportunity of exchanging views and of examining the proposal with qualified members of the legal profession (to which low level I have not yet sunk, or to which high level I have not yet risen) I think the alternative suggested in Item 4 may be worth serious consideration. It is remotely possible, but I think very unlikely, that such discussions might develop agreement on one or two specific items having to do with currency reform and the mutual protection against the effect of separate currencies in the two zones. It is even more remote and more unlikely that they would produce some sort of a modus Vivendi.

IV.

I presume you have explored the possibility and the advisability of some oral representation to the Kremlin to obtain some indication as to whether it is the Soviet intention to resolve the issue by forceful means.

V.

Is it possible to have some indication of the line of thought prevailing in the Department? It would be very helpful here.

Sent Department 3249, repeated Berlin for Murphy and Clay as 336.

Douglas

1 Reference here is to the note of July 14, p. 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579].

2 Not printed; In it Douglas gave his view of the problem confronting the three Western Powers. He felt they needed the confirmation of their right to be in Berlin from an appropriate international agency. Once this was obtained, any interference with that right would be an act of aggression by the Soviet Union. From this point of view the question of Berlin should be submitted to the Security Council as soon as possible. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1548)

3 In telegram 1335, July 15, from Moscow, not printed, Smith expressed his feeling that the Soviet note was even more uncompromising than he had expected, and felt that the Soviet offer to supply Berlin with food undercut humanitarian arguments of the western powers’ note. The danger of armed conflict had become greater and the sending of an armed convoy to break the blockade would run serious risk of precipitating war. In view of this Smith wanted to explore the situation further through a second note (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1548). Caffery also suggested the sending of a second note, but wanted to sound out the Soviets with a deal whereby the blockade would be lifted simultaneously with the announcement of renewed quadripartite negotiations (telegram 3715, July 16, from Paris, 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1648).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2048: Telegram

[Document 583]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, July 20, 1948—1 a. m.

no distribution no stencil

2819. Eyes Only for Douglas. High-level conferences over the weekend and today, including discussions with Foster Dulles and ending with confirmation by the President himself, have resulted in a firm determination of U.S. policy in the Berlin matter. It is that the United States is resolved to maintain its position in Berlin and to take all measures necessary for the exercise of its rights, including the fulfillment of supply of the population of its sector.

In the pursuit of the foregoing policy, this Government is prepared to use any means that may be necessary.2 However, careful analysis of the Soviet note does not support the view that the Politburo is definitely determined upon a course of action leading to war. We do not feel, up to the present, that the Soviet Government has committed itself so irretrievably to maintain the blockade as to preclude the possibility of some face-saving retreat on their part. In these circumstances, precisely because we are firm in our determination to carry this matter through to the end, we feel we should explore every possibility which might lead to an agreed solution.

We therefore believe that prior to the dispatch of a formal note, which might elevate the matter further into the realms of prestige considerations, an effort should be made to approach Stalin directly. This, however, could only be done on an agreed three-power basis with the senior Ambassador in Moscow speaking for the three Governments, and on the understanding that the French and British Governments share our determination in this matter.

If the idea of an approach to Stalin, in accordance with the above procedure, would be acceptable to the British and French Governments, the Ambassador representing the three powers might be instructed along the following lines:

Begin. 1. The Ambassador on behalf of the three Governments should inform Stalin of the extremely serious view which the three countries take of the situation created in Berlin as a result of the restrictions on communications between the western zones and the western sectors of Berlin. The reasons given in the Soviet note do not justify action of this nature and therefore cannot as such be accepted.

2. The U.S., U.K. and France are in Berlin as a matter of unquestioned right. Under no circumstances will they withdraw from Berlin under duress, whatever methods may be employed by the Soviet Military Commander.

3. The Governments of the U.S., U.K. and France consider that by international agreement they have an occupational duty with respect to the supply of the western sectors of Berlin and that they will take all measures which may prove necessary to assure the supply of their forces in Berlin and the discharge of their responsibilities towards the civilian population of these sectors.

4. The three Governments do not wish for war and assume that the Soviet Government holds the same view. However, the three Governments cannot tolerate indefinitely actions of the Soviet military authorities which constitute a grave encroachment upon the military positions of the three Governments and an attempt to prevent their military forces from performing occupational duties laid upon them by an international agreement to which the Soviet Government is a party. Methods of coercion, irrespective of their motivation, obviously can lead to war if the Government applying such methods continues to pursue them to the end.

5. In so far as negotiations are concerned, the three Governments have never refused to discuss German matters in the appropriate place and in the appropriate manner. In fact, the three Governments are entirely prepared to discuss any question affecting Germany or any matter in dispute concerning the European settlements which fall within the agreed competence of the Council of Foreign Ministers.

6. The question of negotiation is therefore not the issue. The difficulty lies in the measures still in force in Berlin which restrict the right of communication between the western zones and the western sectors of Berlin. The Soviet Government must understand that, irrespective of any questions of negotiations, we cannot tolerate the continuation of this situation with respect to the supply of Berlin.

7. The Ambassador should state that it is not clear to the Governments of U.S., U.K. and France exactly why the admitted restrictions on communications between Berlin and the western zones have been put into effect by the Soviet Government and would appreciate clarification on the following points: (a) If as indicated in the note these measures are genuinely caused by the currency problem or by any technical difficulties, they are obviously insufficient to justify the nature of the Soviet counter action since such causes could have been and can be adjusted by the representatives of the four powers in Berlin.

(b) If these measures are designed to bring about negotiations with the three western powers, they are entirely unnecessary since at no time did these countries refuse a straight-forward proposal to negotiate on any subject within the competence of the four powers.

(c) If, however, the real but undisclosed purpose of the blockade is either (a) an attempt to force the western powers to withdraw from Berlin, or (b) an attempt to compel them to abandon the measures they have been forced to take in the administration of the western zones in the absence of general German settlement, then Stalin must understand that these efforts cannot and will not succeed.

8. The Ambassador should state that on the assumption that it is not in the interest of the Soviet Union any more than it is in those of the three western powers to allow this situation to move in the direction of war, it should be possible for the four Governments to find some way of getting around the difficulties in order to bring to an end the highly dangerous situation that has developed in Berlin as a result of the Soviet measures.

9. In the event that Stalin’s reply to this inquiry should indicate that the measures in Berlin are caused by either “a”or “b”of 7, the Ambassador should invite his views as to the means of overcoming the difficulties and would be prepared to discuss with Stalin some practical arrangement which would provide a resolution of the Berlin situation without loss of prestige to either side, possibly along the lines of re-opening of the communications by rail, road and water to Berlin with a simultaneous announcement of an agreement to resume negotiations in Berlin at an agreed later date or an announcement of a four-power meeting to consider broader questions. End.

The Ambassador would not be authorized to commit the three Governments in regard to any arrangement proposed by Stalin or worked out in the discussion but would report fully to the three Governments the results of his visit for consideration by them.

It is our thought that this diplomatic step, which would be kept secret as long as possible, would be taken before any reply were sent to the Soviet note. If Stalin’s reaction were negative, we would not only reply to the note but would take the matter to the United Nations with a view to assuring our rights in Berlin.

We would like you to get Bevin’s views at once on this approach. In view of the French Governmental crisis, we do not propose to take it to the French until we have heard from Mr. Bevin.3

Marshall

1 This telegram was repeated to Paris as 2719, Moscow as 823, and Frankfurt as 39.

2 At this point in the source text, Bohlen had crossed out before transmission the following: “whatever the consequences. However, we do not feel that there are any grounds for assuming that the Russians have definitely determined to pursue their methods of coercion to the point of war. Apart from general considerations”.

3 In telegram 3786 from Paris and, 1373 from Moscow, July 20, neither printed, Ambassadors Caffery and Smith both expressed their agreement with the policy set forth in this telegram (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2048).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2048: Telegram

[Document 584]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

top secret Washington, July 20, 1948—8 p. m.

2842. For Douglas. We are concerned that in discussion of various courses of action regarding Berlin, focus may become distorted concerning our primary objective, which is lifting of intolerable land blockade urtel 3276.2 This still remains our primary purpose and is not affected by Sov announced offer to furnish food.3 While announcement may be chiefly propaganda device it may have double-edged significance if implemented since it might relieve to some extent immediate pressure of Berlin food problem but at the same time facilitate Sov domination of the city. In any event purported offer does not solve question of raw materials or land blockade against Allied forces.4

We still hold to advisability of direct oral approach to Moscow. Written reply at present juncture presents two risks. On the one hand, a note containing indispensable outspoken refutation of Sov charges could harden Sov prestige position to point of inflexibility. On the other hand, a conciliatory note which ignores these charges and obscures issue of illegal Sov blockade would offer impression of weakness. For your own info we consider latest Brit draft falls within latter category. Besides the objections you cite, draft note in para 7 appears to propose negotiations under continuing duress of blockade.5

We still strongly believe that possibility of solution should first be explored through direct oral approach (see Deptel 2819, July 196 ). If our approach is rejected by Soviets, we should then reply by disclosure of intent and nature of action taken in Moscow, together with statement of our case along lines of first Brit draft submitted to us. We think it may then be absolutely necessary to take the matter to the United Nations as soon as possible in order that the next successive steps be carried out without delay. We are at present considering what action in the nature of retaliation outside of Germany, sanctions or use of armed convoys might be required to maintain our position in Berlin in event UN action unsuccessful in lifting blockade.

Marshall

1 Repeated to Paris as 2745 and Moscow as 827.

2 Not printed.

3 On July 20, the Soviet Union announced that it had decided to place 100,000 tons of wheat and similar quantities of other products at the disposal of the Soviet Military Administration in Berlin.

4 In telegram 3313, July 21, from London, not printed, Douglas replied as follows: “Regret that I may have given the impression that our primary objective, i.e., the lifting of the land blockade against the western sectors of Berlin, was in my own mind becoming lost in or distorted by discussions of various courses of action. I can give you every assurance that this is not the ease, and I very much doubt that it is in Bevin’s mind.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2148).

5 Following the receipt of the Soviet note, Douglas, Massigli and Strang worked out the text of a draft reply. The reference here is to the first draft, transmitted in telegram 3255, July 18, from London, not printed. Ambassador Franks delivered a second draft (not found in the Department of State files) which Douglas thought was not relevant to the issues and did not protect western rights in Berlin. The last draft of the note was transmitted in telegram 3320, July 21, from London, not printed.

6  Supra.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2148: Telegram

[Document 585]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, July 21, 1948—7 p. m.

2867. For Douglas Eyes Only. Brit Emb presented urgent communication to us from Bevin along lines your 33111 this afternoon. We fail to comprehend Bevin’s “strong dislike” to oral approach.

Regarding objection (a) we consider matter is of sufficient gravity to justify this kind of appeal. Highest authorities here are aware of implications of this step. Furthermore an approach to Stalin is not a new departure and has sometimes produced results in the past.

Regarding objection (b) we would retain control of place and manner of subsequent discussions since procedures and proposals would be submitted by senior ambassador to three western governments ad referendum. Objective on which he would concentrate would be to insure that agreement to subsequent discussions would result in lifting of blockade.

Regarding objection (c), susceptibilities of Soviet Foreign Office seems to us of minor importance.

We still oppose suggestion of delivery of written note prior to, or concurrently with any approach in Moscow. In our view, latest British draft2 is redolent with appeasement and we fail to see how necessary expression of determination could be conveyed in Moscow discussion in conjunction with presentation of a note of this character which, whatever outcome of such discussion, would do us great damage when published. In any communication for the record we simply cannot let Soviet charges against us gain acceptance by failure to reply or to emphasize intolerable interference with our occupation rights and responsibilities in Berlin. Furthermore oral approach in all likelihood will produce a more rapid answer and enable us to evaluate situation whereas note may not be answered for some time, thus prolonging delay in clarifying situation.

Please impress upon Bevin the necessity of a coordinated plan of action to be worked out step by step. The difficulty with his proposal is that it does not envisage what would follow possible Soviet rejection of note. As we see it our program involves successive steps. First, the oral approach which gives needed flexibility and safeguards in present situation whereas written communication at first step may well freeze Soviet position. If this approach through diplomatic channels without publicity fails in solution we should then have recourse to strong note rejecting Soviet arguments and placing problem before UN. We consider it essential to utilize to the maximum UN procedure although we appreciate that it would in all likelihood involve Soviet veto and probably reference to a special sesion of the Assembly called for the purpose before taking the necessary action to continue supply of Berlin which might have to take the form of armed food convoys. Substance foregoing given to Brit Emb this afternoon together with suggestion that as previously agreed negotiations be centered in London.

We concur with Bevin that press reports of Soviet intention to furnish food and possibly electricity, presumably on their terms, does not alter basic issue of our position and rights in Berlin, although it is undoubtedly intended to influence our air lift and may provide pretext for insistence upon cutting down this method of supply. In separate telegram tomorrow we are replying to your inquiry regarding UN procedure.

Marshall

1 Not printed; in it Douglas reported that he had discussed the substance of telegram 2819, July 20 (p. 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 583]) with Bevin who still felt very strongly that an oral approach to Stalin at this time would be a mistake. Bevin gave the following reasons for his feeling: “(A) It would constitute a removal of diplomatic and political maneuvers from the hands of the Foreign Ministers, and would, necessarily, prematurely place the responsibility in the heads of states. (B) It would put Stalin in the position, which Bevin is confident he would take, of agreeing to discussions, suggesting Moscow as the seat of them and defining the agenda in accordance with his own desires, thus putting Stalin in the position of being able to dictate to the three western powers where the negotiations were to be held and the subjects to be discussed. (C) It might have an adverse effect and aggravate prejudices in the Soviet Foreign Office.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2148)

2 The reference here is to the draft submitted in telegram 3320, July 21, from London, not printed. See footnote 5 to telegram 2842, supra.

Record of Teletype Conference Between the Department of State and the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048

[Document 586]

Record of Teletype Conference Between the Department of State and the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

[Extracts]

top secret Washington, July 22, 1948—2 p. m.
London, July 22, 1948—7 p. m.

Conferees

Washington London

Under Secretary Lovett Ambassador Douglas

Ambassador Murphy 2 Mr. Keith

Mr. Saltzman

Mr. Beam

Mr. Reber

[From Washington]

Subject 1:

At National Security Council meeting today presided over by President and attended by high military officers and cabinet members, it was decided to increase air-lift materially by adding C–54’s.3 It was the strong feeling of the Council that oral approach should be made along lines of our 28194 for reasons paralleling those given in our earlier telecon today.5

[From London]

Answering your Subject 1 Bevin has some objections to the line suggested in Deptel 2819.

[From Washington]

Subject 2:

A.P. London dispatch in this afternoon’s Star is headlined “West reported ready to grant part of Berlin demands” etc. Article starts “The western powers were reported by a British official today to have agreed tentatively to widen negotiations over Berlin to include several other German problems”. Cannot something be done to stop this type of talk which because of its volume is leading us to conclusion they are trying to prejudge case and force our hand.

[From London]

Answering your Subject 2. I shall take this matter up again with both Bevin and Strang.

It has been a source of worry for a considerable period. On each occasion that I have mentioned and discussed similar report emanating from an official British source both Bevin and Strang have denied that anything has been given out from the Information Center or the FonOff Press Agency.

That is all for the moment from this end.

[Here follow the texts of questions and answers exchanged in the House of Commons during a discussion of the German situation.]

[From Washington]

Subject 3:

To get this subject back on the rails the basic question with us is whether the British note6 is a backdown or not. It seems to us that the technique of handling is secondary. The main thing is that we now sense in Bevin since his return from The Hague7 a definite weakening. We think his note is very damaging and that it fails or any public note fails to accomplish the purpose aimed at in the oral route and misses the main point hoped for in the stronger version of note.

[From London]

Just returned from long meeting with Bevin and with Massigli.

As to the meeting with Bevin.

A. He feels that an approach to Stalin would be a great mistake that it would restore the Communist prestige throughout Europe for it would be construed as an appeal by the Western Powers to him thus making the Soviet regime symbolized by Stalin dominating force in Europe. Moreover, he disagreed that previous personal approaches to Stalin had been helpful.

B. As to an approach to Molotov he thinks a. That oral representations will be construed as leading from weakness.

b. He thinks that Molotov will not agree to receiving three Ambassadors together, that Peterson advises him that Molotov has not in the past done this and that he, Molotov, will consider a joint meeting with three Ambassadors as constituting pressure. Bevin does not want to be rebuffed.
In this request.

c. He thinks that unless a written document is left that the oral conversations will be inaccurately reported and that therefore we will take great risks in this respect.

d. Bevin believes that an approach even through Molotov is a mistake but will consider—is disposed to agree with it and will present it to the Cabinet this evening solely because he wants to go along with us.

C. If HMG agree to oral representation Bevin believes that a written document even in the form of a memorandum or an aide-mémoire should be read and left with Molotov under an injunction that it is not to be published or that the substance of it is not to be released to the press. This is the only way in which we can be protected against misinterpretations and distortions.

He believes also that the substance of the document should follow the lines of the latest British draft note with such minor changes possibly to strengthen it which we might suggest.

Finally, he believes that the Ambassadors should ask for separate appointments in order to avoid a rebuff which he is confident a request for a joint meeting would receive.

As to Massigli, the following personal views were expressed: A. As to Stalin, he doubts very much that Stalin would grant an audience. If he were to grant one it would be almost impossible to obtain a joint audience for more than one Ambassador, even if the French Ambassador were in a position to represent his Government.
Finally, while he understands our reason for this approach he doubts that it would be productive.

B. As to an approach to Molotov, Massigli doubts that the Ambassadors could obtain a joint audience that they would have to go separately.
He also believes that they must be carefully briefed with a written document of substantially identical language which they must be prepared to leave behind with him.
Massigli’s personal view is that he prefers a note drafted along the lines of the latest British effort to which Bidault has given his consent.
Massigli will put the matter to his Government.

I will probably get HMG’s answer tonight.

What are your comments on the procedure which Bevin has suggested and which HMG may accept?

Bevin feels that he is doing his utmost to carry what he calls a fearful and a bankrupt France and that the pressure on him in the effort to maintain a united front among the Western European Powers is very great burden which he is trying desperately to carry.

In view of the present French situation where no Government exists is it your opinion that either an oral approach or a written note should be postponed until a French Minister of Foreign Affairs can act with authority?

[From Washington]

Subject 4:

We are mystified over Bevin’s reasoning on question of oral approach to Stalin. The idea meets with general approval here. An oral approach to Molotov leaves us cold and we could understand his reluctance to receive three Ambassadors jointly. Routine transmission of note to Molotov would not serve purpose we have in mind. Do you believe it might be useful to drop hint to Bevin that he might prefer us to risk individual approach to Stalin? We fail to see how this would build up Stalin. If Stalin refused interview it would be significant fact for record. Molotov could then be tried. As to leaving an aide-mémoire we consider that equivalent to a note. Therefore the note would either have to be strong as in the first draft reply or great damage would be done. As a record it should be possible with Stalin to agree to have an agreed minute of the conversation prepared by our and their interpreter.

Your reference to British attitude.

It is our strong desire that [not?] to slam the door that causes our preference for oral approach before committing ourselves publicly in form of note. To our minds note could only (a) Slam door if it reflected accurately our determination or

(b) Constitute a grave public weakening our position if it followed lines of British draft which Soviets would be quick to exploit.

[From London]

Your Subject 4. I think it might be helpful to suggest to Bevin that he might prefer US to attempt an individual approach to Stalin on behalf of the US Government that is what I understand the question in the middle of your para 4 to be. It was somewhat garbled.

Question: Would an individual approach by the US along the lines indicated suggest either to Stalin or the Soviets that there was a division of opinion among the three Western Powers? And whether you value it or not I agree, for it is the only way in which we can avoid being [on] one or the other horn of the dilemma. My difficulty is in persuading the French if they are able to act at all now and the British to go along with us. I shall, however, continue to try to persuade them for I take this to be your instruction to me. As a matter of fact I think I suggested oral approaches almost a week ago and again elaborated on the idea on July 17th. That is all.

[From Washington]

Subject 5:

Re para [subject] 4

We only wished your opinion regarding possible unilateral approach by US. Do not yet mention this to Bevin.

Will discuss latest Cabinet decision with Lovett who had to leave and the Secretary and reply soonest.

Nothing further here.

[From London]

Please hold on one minute. Strang is in my office and I am going to see him.

We have a clear unclassified short one for you would you take it?

Sorry not for you, forget it.

Yes.

We are holding on a minute until Amb. returns from his office.

Strang has just given me on behalf of Bevin the following information.

The Cabinet late this afternoon agreed (a) That a communication should be made to the Soviet Government orally.

(b) That it should be given separately by the respective Ambassadors rather representatives for Peterson HMG’s Ambassador is not well and is in England on leave. Ambassador Smith would, of course, make the first approach.

(c) That the oral communication should follow normal procedure and be made to Molotov. The Cabinet is still opposed to making an approach to Stalin for the reason that it believes that such an approach would reestablish Stalin’s position and the Communist prestige now waning in Europe.

(d) That a written record of the oral representation should be kept and left behind not as an official communication. An aide-mémoire but solely for the purpose of accurately reflecting what was said.

(e) That the line of the oral representation should conform generally to that of the latest British draft with such changes and amendments as Bevin may consider. He wants, however, the substance and tone of the note maintained. He gives me assurance that this is not to be construed as a “back down” but for the purpose orally of steering away repeat steering away between the two horns of the dilemma.

(f) That if the US wants Ambassador Smith to make additional representations he, Mr. Bevin, would like to know what they are so that HMG may consider whether they should be used by the British representatives also.

(g) That we should not wait for the French.

(h) That action should be taken by if not before the weekend for in Mr. Bevin’s opinion time is running against us. Moreover, a debate will be held in the House of Commons on Foreign Affairs concentrated principally on the German situation early next week.8

Mr. Bevin asked that we be assured that it is his anxiety to act with US if it is at all possible.

In the light of the above information which Strang has given me it seems to me offhand that there are two points at issue between us.

First, whether we will agree to approach Molotov orally or whether the British will agree to approach Stalin orally and second, whether we can accept the substance and tone of the British note as the basis for Ambassador Smith’s oral representation.

That is all.

We would like to add the following. We would like your comments.

Thank you very much. If you think this a land of beer and skittles you are wrong.

1 In the source text all the transmissions from Washington preceded the first transmission from London. The individual transmissions have been rearranged in their most likely sequence. The conference lasted several hours with occasionally long delays between the transmissions.

2 General Clay and Ambassador Murphy had been summoned to Washington on July 19 for consultations and to report to the National Security Council and the President on the situation in Berlin.

3 At its 16th meeting, July 22, the National Security Council agreed to add 75 C–54’s to the airlift. At the same meeting, the Council reiterated the determination of the United States to remain in Berlin, agreed to proceed with the construction of a new airfield in Berlin, concurred with Clay’s plan to reduce the number of dependents in the city, and discussed Clay’s oral report on the situation in Germany. (NSC Action 84, Executive Secretariat Files) Clay had also discussed the Berlin situation with President Truman and various members of the Cabinet on July 19, and with Secretary Forrestal at dinner on July 20. For accounts of these discussions, see Clay, Decision in Germany, p. 368, Forrestal Diaries, pp. 459–460, and Truman, Years of Trial and Hope, pp. 124–126.

4 London telegram dated July 20, p. 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 583].

5 The transcript of the telecon under reference is not printed; in it the Department of State told Douglas that its reasons for going directly to Stalin had been transmitted in telegram 2867 (supra), but indicated that it might consider an approach to Molotov and discussion of the Berlin situation along the lines of telegram 2819 (p. 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 583]) if the British and French continued to oppose the idea of an oral approach to Stalin. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048)

6 The reference here is to the draft note transmitted in telegram 3320, July 21, from London, not printed; see footnote 5 to telegram 2842, July 20, to London, p. 974 [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 584].

7  Bevin had been at The Hague attending the meetings of the Consultative Council of the Brussels Treaty Nations, July 19–20.

8 In telegram 2888, July 22, 8 p. m., to London, not printed, the Department replied that it did not share Bevin’s view that time was running against the Western powers in Berlin, and expressed the opinion that it was “… preferable to have the French with us and a delay of two or three days may make this-possible.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2248)

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2448: Telegram

[Document 587]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]

top secret   us urgent
niact London, July 24, 1948—5 p. m.

3361. For Secretary and Lovett.

1. I misunderstood Bevin when I reported that he thought the time was running against us in Berlin. What he meant was that time might be running against us in the presentation of a note or the making of oral communications to the Soviet. As to Berlin, he feels that time is running in our favor, that the air lift augmented by the additional 54’s had in the past and would in the future continue to surprise and wear down the Soviet.

2. As to Bevin’s intentions, purposes and determination, there can be no question whatsoever. They were re-affirmed this morning in strong language. Once again he said “the abandonment of Berlin would mean the loss of western Europe.”

3. Without disclosing the substance your short telecon message on Soviet aims1 I drew Bevin out again on his position in regard to possible Soviet objectives, (a) He will not withdraw from Berlin under Soviet pressure; (b) He will not cancel or halt measures already taken or planned for the western zones; (c) He will not agree to any commitment direct or indirect concerning the outcome of the negotiations; (d) He will not agree to any agenda while we are under the pressure of the blockade; (e) The only consideration which he is prepared to extend to the Soviet for the lifting of the blockade is an agreement to convene the Council of Foreign Ministers, the calendar which would have to be agreed to subsequent to the removal of the blockade. I have had no doubts as to Bevin’s position on these points and I hope this will dispel any suspicions which you may entertain.

4. Bevin is prepared to wait for the French to join us in making oral representations in Moscow. In this connection is not unlikely according to Massigli, whom I saw this morning, that a French Government will take office tomorrow and be prepared to act with us. This new government if Marie obtains the necessary absolute majority in the Assembly, will include probably Schumann as Minister of Foreign Affairs. It will not imply any modification of French foreign policy.

5. As to invoking the United Nations, Bevin is disposed favorably to consider it though he makes no final commitment now on the point because while it may not provide a legally valid affirmation of our rights or approve a resolution directing the Soviet to lift the blockade, the support of a substantial majority would give us a moral and political position from which we could make our next moves. He would consider seriously under certain circumstances the imposition of sanctions and would be prepared under appropriate circumstances to view sympathetically among other things the dispatching of a convoy but he thinks it unfortunate if hints of such moves gain any currency.

[Here follow comments on the British draft note and attempts to make it cover the substance of telegram 2819, July 20, to London, page 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 583].]

Douglas

1 The transcript of this telecon is not printed; in it the Department of State speculated that the Russians were likely to use the pressure of the blockade to precipitate negotiations on Germany at which the Western Powers would be forced to negotiate on Soviet terms. Washington then postulated the following six Soviet objectives and the U.S. reaction to them: “Totally Unacceptable: 1. To withdraw from Berlin under Soviet pressure. 2. To cancel or halt measures already taken in Western zones. 3. Any commitment, direct or indirect, concerning the outcome of the negotiations. Possibly Acceptable: 1. Discussions in Berlin concerning currency or any other matters affecting the quadripartitie administration of the city. 2. Meeting of the CFM to discuss German matters as a whole but with agenda to be fixed by mutual consent subsequent to lifting of blockade. 3. CFM meeting under same conditions to consider any questions falling within the competence of the four powers alone.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048)

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2448: Telegram

[Document 588]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Moscow, July 24, 1948—1 p. m.

1414. British estimate that Soviets anxious to discuss overall German questions and possibly prepared compromise on Berlin situation raises basic question as to whether their immediate objective is to push western powers out of Berlin or to force them to major concessions in Germany. With due allowance for indications mentioned in London’s 3280,1 must say have not detected any real evidence of urgent Soviet desire to negotiate overall German questions. Our estimate Kremlin’s present attitude is rather as follows:

Though western airlift, contrary to original Soviet expectations, probably means that real hunger can be staved off indefinitely, time is still working entirely in favor of Soviets, if they desire to make position western powers in Berlin untenable. For besides war of nerves against non-Communist German elements, the economic life of western sectors cannot be supported by food alone. By now it is apparent that airlift cannot supply sufficient coal, other raw materials and consumption goods or solve problem of outward shipment (i.e. disposal) of western sector production to any real degree. For these reasons, prediction of increasing economic stagnation and difficulties given in Depinfotel July 202 appears accurate, and Soviets are undoubtedly realistic enough to have figured this out for themselves. In currency field they already seem to have won important advances, judging from several recent press reports, in that their currency is fast becoming the main medium exchange throughout Berlin, thus promoting assimilation Berlin’s economy with that of surrounding Soviet zone and Soviet-controlled areas in general.

Soviet offer of food to Berliners from all sectors, as well as apparent move to “help out” western sector business concerns (mytel 1402, July 232 ) indicate clearly the path Soviet plans to follow in winning eventual control over entire city. Soviets must be convinced they need only sit tight with present blockade in order to eventually force western powers out.

In thus suggesting that Soviets are, for time being at least, primarily interested in liquidating Berlin as center of western reactionary influences, I do not mean to imply they are abandoning their objectives western Germany. As is so often the case, their policy is probably based on two possible alternatives. Hence if—though only if—sufficiently attracted by western concessions overall Germany, they might be induced for time being to forego battle for Berlin and return to fold of quadripartite government. Their minimum price would probably be liquidation trizonia and bizonia, to which another concession, equally unacceptable from western viewpoint, should perhaps be added, i.e. quadripartite Ruhr control. Furthermore, their reply to western notes and behavior since then certainly does not suggest they contemplate any relaxation of blockade until western powers agree their demands. In this connnection, they are undoubtedly counting fully on western unwillingness to resort to force to endeavor break overland seige.

If they are primarily interested in overall German discussions and questions, following points also appear arguable. They have pushed things pretty far, as regards Berlin, for a return to status quo ante, particularly as regards currency measures. They have gone very far in their statements that Berlin is part of Soviet zone and in the rising propaganda crescendo, which began early April, demanding withdrawal of western powers in view their criminal activities (looting of city and Soviet zone, espionage and disruption). Their imposition of hunger blockade itself a rather decisive step, for Soviets must have realized such crude tactics would deal heavy blow to their prestige and popularity among Germans, and had better therefore be carried through to finish, once begun. And if primary Soviet objective is to use Berlin crisis to produce negotiations on overall German question, and really wished to resolve the Berlin crisis would they not have gone somewhat further in this direction than they have, for instance by a somewhat more tempting reply to our first overture?

On balance, I am inclined to believe Soviets feel sure of winning battle for Berlin in next few months and that they see no haste for engaging in overall discussions and would demand a good deal before terminating the seige. And in any event, I believe that such concessions as we might be willing to make would, if accepted as the price for a temporary lifting of the blockade, only postpone the day when Soviet pressure to force us out of Berlin will be reapplied.

Sent Department. Department please pass Berlin 251, Paris 215, London 94.

Smith

1 Not printed; the indications were two reports by General Robertson. The first was a statement by Colonel Kirsanov of the Soviet Information Services in Berlin that if the West would withdraw the Deutsche Marks from Berlin the situation would get easier. The second was a conversation with a Swiss journalist who had contacts with the Soviet Military Administration in Berlin. The journalist indicated that the Soviet Government was seeking an agreement which would avoid loss of prestige by either side. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2048)

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2648: Telegram

[Document 589]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact London, July 26, 1948—10 p. m.

3389. For Lovett from Douglas. Smith, Bohlen and I met this morning for 2 hours with Strang and others representing the British. During the latter part of the meeting we were joined by Massigli for the French.

1. We discussed the question of oral representation: (a) To whom;

(b) By whom;

(c) The substance and purpose;

(d) Whether in part from prepared notes or written draft to which the 3 powers agreed in advance and a directive for the exploratory discussions.

Smith, Bohlen and I advanced at considerable length the arguments in favor of approaching Stalin instead of Molotov, Smith making clear that the approach could not be made by him for the two governments, and suggesting, personally, that the best procedure to follow would be for the 3 Ambassadors to request of Molotov a meeting with Stalin and Molotov for the 3 Ambassadors (if Peterson, the British Ambassador is in Moscow, or if not the Chargé d’Affaires).

2. This afternoon discussed with the same group the second phase; namely the program for the future, including draft of a note to be sent to the Soviet in the event that the approach to Stalin receives a rebuff or produces a negative response.

3. In regard to reference to UN, the question arose as to whether, assuming that the time factor permits, it would not be preferable to seek action by the GA rather than the Security Council. British agree with the staff memorandum sent me in Deptel 2876, July 22,1 on this subject.
They are inclined to think that there would be more abstentions in the Security Council than we would perhaps anticipate, and that, therefore, the appeal to it might not produce the sort of moral and political support which we are seeking. This they felt could, however, be had by ⅔ vote in the GA. Whether in the latter body the matter should be brought under article II or XIV was a question. Article XIV seemed to be preferable, but in any event, without committing Mr. Bevin, the British were disposed to agree that the Soviet should be placed on notice under the circumstances referred to herein, that the question would be put to the UN.

4. Both the British and Massigli asked where we would go from there, assuming that the Soviet refrained from raising the blockade.

5. Later this afternoon, we met with Bevin, Strang, Peterson, Dean and Roberts for the British. After a long discussion in which Bevin, with a considerable amount of petulance at times and plaintiveness, combined with a resistance to approaching Stalin, for reasons previously reported, finally indicated that he would recommend to his Cabinet an approach to Stalin along the following lines: (a) The US, UK (if Peterson is there, otherwise the Chargé d’Affaires) and the French Ambassadors to present to Molotov a very short communication reciting the situation, that their governments considered the situation that had arisen over Berlin to be very serious, and requesting a meeting with Stalin and Molotov. Smith and Peterson, with Bohlen and Strang, are preparing this brief communication.

(b) If this request is agreed to, the three Ambassadors to meet with Stalin and Molotov and our Ambassador Smith, if he is the senior, to state the position of the three governments using notes derived from a carefully prepared paper agreed to by the 3 governments. Smith, Bohlen, Peterson and Dean are preparing this paper, and in addition, instructions to the Ambassadors for the exploratory discussions which it is hoped will follow after the oral presentation of our position. This paper has not yet been drafted, but will be a reconciliation between, on the one hand, the tone of the British note,2 as amended by the language which I have suggested and discussed with Bohlen, and the substance of your 2819.3 It will probably be much shorter than the British note.

(c) In case these approaches receive a rebuff or clearly negative reaction, Bevin agrees that we should prepare strongly worded note, probably along the lines of the first British draft,4 concluding with the proposal that the matter be referred to the UN. On one last pointy however, Bevin wants further discussions as to its technical features. This note need not be completed before Smith returns to Moscow. It would be prepared by Strang and me and Bohlen as long as he is here. (Embtel 3361, July 245 )

6. Bevin sought light on a complete program based on his observation (Embtel 3361, July 24) that if we lost Berlin, we lose Europe. After submitting the issue to the UN, what steps do we take? (a) Economic sanctions;

(b) Pressure elsewhere in the world?

The former he feels will not be effective against the Soviet; the latter he does not contemplate as a practical step. Alternatively, an armed convoy which may precipitate real trouble. If so, he feels strongly that meanwhile, the Chiefs of Staff should get about their business as rapidly and as thoroughly as possible, but quietly, in order that should trouble come, we will be better prepared to meet the situation. In this connection, he asked the question as to when men would be called up under our recently enacted Selective Service Act (Embtel 3388, July 266 ).
British have been demobilizing their forces, but are now reviewing the matter to determine whether they should not stop the demobilization in order that they could maintain their non-commissioned officer personnel, so essential to the remobilization of an army.

7. Bevin expressed the view that the Soviet were very troubled and would be prepared to enter into discussions. He even went so far as to say that we might arrive at a settlement with them under the terms of which the Soviet would agree to retire to the Oder. This we think is very wishful thinking.

8. At one time during the early part of the talk with Bevin, he indicated plaintively that he would agree to make approaches to Stalin solely because the US was pressing for it. To this both Bohlen, Smith and I promptly and emphatically said that we were not pressing any government to take this position merely because it was ours; that our purpose was to obtain the best agreed approach. Later I personally saw Bevin and reiterated that if he were not sincerely persuaded as to the wisdom of this procedure, to say so quite candidly, but he gave me his assurance that as long as the program outlined above contemplated going to Molotov first, it had his sincere approval.

Sent Department as 3389; repeated Paris as 420; repeated Moscow as 160; repeated Frankfurt (for Clay and Murphy) as 8.

Douglas

1 Not printed; it contained a preliminary study of certain U.N. aspects of the Berlin question (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2148). The Department’s views on the reference of the Berlin question to the United Nations were further elaborated in telegram 2974 July 28, to London, not printed. For substance, see footnote 6, p. 993 [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 590].

2 The note under reference here was transmitted in telegram 3320, July 21, from London, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2148).

3 July 20, p. 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 583].

4 This draft was transmitted in telegram 3255, July 18, from London, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–1848).

5  Ante, p. 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587].

6 Not printed.

Record of Teletype Conference Between the Department of State and the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048

[Document 590]

Record of Teletype Conference Between the Department of State and the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

[Extracts]

top secret Washington, July 26, 1948—5:30 p. m.
London, July 26, 1948—10 p. m.

Conferees

Washington London

[Under] Secretary Lovett Ambassador Douglas

Mr. Samuel Reber Ambassador Smith

Mr. Jacob D. Beam Mr. Bohlen

Mr. Dean Rusk

Col. Gerhardt (Army)

Mr. Hickerson

From London

We have a lot of pre-conference material for you. Following are the texts of: (1) Instructions to Ambassadors as to method of approach and alternate procedures depending on Soviet reply to request to see Stalin,

(2) text of aide-mémoire to be left individually by three representatives with Molotov, and

(3) oral presentation to be made to Stalin if possible, or Molotov.

These texts have been agreed by Peterson, Smith, Bohlen, and myself and Massigli, subject to confirmation by three governments. The British cabinet is meeting now to consider them and we should have their decision very shortly. Massigli anticipates no difficulty with the French Government.

Ambassador Smith is leaving this afternoon for Berlin and will proceed tomorrow morning if clearance can be obtained for Moscow.

Instructions to the Three Representatives at Moscow.

1. You should request interview with Molotov and leave with him following aide-mémoire. Your colleagues will likewise be requesting individual interviews to leave identical communications.

2. If Stalin agrees to receive the three representatives, the senior Ambassador will make to him oral statement as set forth in immediately following telegram [transmission]. In order to ensure complete accuracy, senior Ambassador will speak from notes, and should not in his initial statement depart from text agreed by governments.

3. If Stalin agrees to receive three representatives separately each will make same statement.

4. If Molotov replies that Stalin is absent, or gives some other reasonable excuse why he is unable to receive representatives, the three representatives should request a joint interview with Molotov in order to make the oral statement to him, in accordance with procedure in 2 above.

5. Every effort should be made to obtain an agreed record of the conversation at which oral statement is made, whether to Stalin or Molotov.

6. Stalin or Molotov should be informed during the interview that the three governments do not intend to make an official release of the conversation except by mutual agreement. In the event of a serious and damaging unofficial leakage of a nature to make publication necessary, the three governments would give the Soviet Government the utmost possible notice. For your own information only, if premature release is carried out by Soviet Government, we shall be prepared for push-button release.

7. For your own information only, if Stalin or Molotov refuse to receive the representatives for obviously political reasons, the next step is under active consideration by three governments.

French draft [aide-mémoire]: “The (blank) government have given the most serious consideration to the note delivered by the Soviet Ambassador in Washington and have exchanged views with the British and American Governments on the similar notes received by these governments. The (blank) government does not accept the contention in the Soviet note that the right of the western occupying powers to participate in the occupation of Berlin no longer exists, and while they do not wish to enter into a detailed discussion of the allegations contained in M. Abramov’s note of July 14th, they would like to make it plain at the outset that they cannot accept the Soviet version of the facts nor the interpretation placed on them.

“Whatever may be the reasons which have led the Soviet authorities to decide [on] the restriction of communications between Berlin and the Western Zones of Occupation of Germany, whether these reasons be technical as was first stated, or political, as M. Abramov’s note would seem to indicate, the measures taken by the Soviet authorities in Berlin have created an abnormal and dangerous situation, the gravity of which does not need to be emphasized.

“The Soviet reply of 14th July offers no constructive suggestion for the bringing to an end of the abnormal situation in Berlin. Nevertheless the (blank) government, as any peace loving government, holds the view that this situation is capable of settlement. They trust that the Soviet Government share this view: the question of negotiation has never been, and is not the issue. The willingness to negotiate in the absence of deeds has always been there. In the opinion of the (blank) government, the best way to a solution of the present difficulties lies in direct approach. They think that a frank discussion between Generalissimo Stalin and yourself on one side and the representative of each of the three western occupying cowers on the other side should give the opportunity of finding a solution. I accordingly have been instructed by my government to request that you should arrange an interview between Generalissimo Stalin and yourself on the one hand and the French Ambassador, the U.K. Chargé d’Affaires and myself on the other hand in order to discuss the present situation in Berlin and its wider implications.”2

[Oral Presentation]3

You should speak on the following lines in order to probe Soviet intentions and to test their willingness to find a peaceful issue from the present situation.

Begins “It is not our purpose at this time to rebut in detail charges contained Soviet note. Highly important however to make completely clear certain fundamental points in position of U.S.–U.K. and France and to clarify position of the Soviet Union which in certain respects is obscure. The three governments must reemphasize their right to be in Berlin to be unquestionable and absolute. They do not intend to be coerced by any means whatsoever into abandoning this right.

“Action taken by Soviets in interfering with rights in connection with occupation, derived through the defeat and surrender of Germany and through international agreement and usage, by interrupting communications between Berlin and western zones, thus interfering with duties of allied military forces of occupation, is viewed with extreme seriousness by governments of U.S., U.K. and France. It is incumbent on them to take such measures as are necessary to assure the supply of their forces and discharge of their occupational duties. U.S., U.K. and France do not wish situation to deteriorate further and assume that Soviet government share this desire. The three governments have in mind restrictive measures which have been placed by Soviet authorities on communication between western zones of Germany and western sectors of Berlin. If these measures arise from technical difficulties such difficulties can be easily remedied. The three governments renew their offer of assistance to this end. If in any way related to currency problem, such measures are obviously uncalled for, since this problem could have been, and can now be, adjusted by representatives of the four powers in Berlin. If, on the other hand, these measures are designed to bring about negotiations among the four occupying powers they are equally unnecessary, since the governments of the U.K., U.S. and France have never at any time declined to meet representatives of the Soviet Union to discuss questions relating to Germany. However, if the purpose of these measures is to attempt to compel the three governments to abandon their rights as occupying powers in Berlin, Soviet Government will understand from what has been stated previously that such an attempt could not be allowed to succeed.

“In spite of recent occurrences the three powers are unwilling to believe that this last reason is the real one. Rather, they assume that the Soviet Government shares their view that it is in the interest of all four occupying powers, of the German people and of the world in general to prevent any further deterioration of the position and to find a way by mutual agreement to bring to an end the extremely dangerous situation that has developed in Berlin.

“The Soviet Government will however appreciate that the three governments are unable to negotiate in the situation which the Soviet Government has taken the initiative in creating. Free negotiations can only take place in an atmosphere relieved pressure. This is the issue. Present restrictions upon communications between Berlin and the western zones offend against this principle.

When this issue is resolved, such difficulties as stand in the way of resumption of conversations on the lines set out above should be removed.” (At this point Stalin would be invited to express his views and asked to clarify the Soviet position.)

In the event that Stalin shows a disposition to find a reasonable way out you would say that your government would be prepared to discuss some practical arrangement which would provide a solution of the Berlin situation. Such an arrangement might be along the lines of a reopening of communications by rail, road and water between Berlin and the western zones, with a simultaneous announcement of an agreement resume negotiations on Berlin and an announcement that a four power meeting will take place to consider other outstanding problems affecting Germany or broader questions within the agreed competence of the four powers. You should make clear that the agenda for any discussions would be agreed upon subsequent to the lifting of the blockade.

It is understood that in this conversation the Ambassadors would not be authorized to commit the three governments in regard to any arrangement proposed by Stalin or worked out in discussion, but would report fully to their governments the results of the conversations for consideration and confirmation by them.

Mr. Bohlen is now present.

Mr. Keith is now present.

The three documents have been approved by British Cabinet with a few minor drafting changes which will follow. British wish to send Roberts to Moscow since their Ambassador cannot return for reasons of health. Roberts would like to return with Smith in latter’s plane. This would involve one day delay as Roberts cannot get to Berlin until tomorrow. Smith feels and I agree it would be very helpful to have Roberts and one day delay not important.

[Here follow drafting changes suggested by the British Cabinet.] Massigli has agreed text and informs us in his opinion his government will agree but formal agreement probably will not be forthcoming until tomorrow when instructions will be sent directly to Moscow and confirmed to Massigli here.

As regards a formal note to British and French in regard to persistent leaks and what appear to be inspired statements I have spoken to Bevin on three different occasions and to Strang more frequently. This morning Strang agreed that he would reiterate the old standing orders that no person in the Foreign Office was to respond to any question whatsoever put to him by a newspaperman whether friend or foe in social gatherings or otherwise.

It is very difficult to pin the source of leaks and apparently inspired statements. I have however run two to the ground in the French Embassy.

I have therefore spoken to Massigli and asked him to issue to all members of the Embassy staff the same sort of injunction which we follow in the American Embassy. In view of the above it is my personal opinion, however irritating and dangerous the news stories of the past have been, it would be better to await further developments before sending a formal note.

[Here follows the text of the original draft of the oral presentation.]

That is all here. Do you have any comments?

From Washington

1. This general approach seems satisfactory to us as fair combination our 28194 and British note.5

That’s all here. Further UN material coming by wire tomorrow.6

Either static bad or message written in Chip’s handwriting. Suggest resort to smoke signals hereafter while Bohlen there.7

1 The source text appears to be a corrected and edited version of an earlier record or transcript of this teletype conference.

2 For the final text of this aide-mémoire as handed to Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Zorin on July 30, see The Berlin Crisis, pp. 15–16, Cmd. 7534, pp. 54–55, Germany 1947–1949, pp. 209–210, Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, p. 592, or Berlin Senate, Berlin, Quellen und Dokumente, pp. 1503–1504.

3  The text that follows is a revised draft of the oral presentation and includes changes suggested by the British Cabinet. The text of the original draft of the oral presentation was transmitted later in this telecon, but that part of the record has been deleted.

For the final text of the oral presentation as made by Ambassador Smith to Stalin on August 2, see The Berlin Crisis, pp. 17–19, Cmd. 7534, p. 55, Germany 1947–1949, p. 210, or Berlin, Quellen und Dokumente, pp, 1504–1505.

4  Ante, p. 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 583].

5 Not printed.

6 In telegram 2974, July 28, to London, not printed, Douglas was informed that reference to the Security Council would open up a broader range of possibilities than would consideration by the General Assembly. Secondly, the Security Council was immediately available, while the General Assembly would have to convene a special session. If the situation warranted, after consideration by the Security Council, the Berlin question could be submitted to the General Assembly at its next session in September. (501.BC/7–2848)

7 On July 27, another telecon was held between Washington and London in the course of which the drafts of the instructions, aide-mémoire and oral presentation transmitted in this telecon were apparently agreed. The transcript of this telecon in the Department’s files is incomplete (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048). Ambassador Smith then returned to Moscow, and on July 29, he was instructed to approach Molotov in concert with his British and French colleagues, telegram 873, July 29, to Moscow, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2848).

The Secretary of Defense (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–2848

[Document 591]

The Secretary of Defense (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State 1

top secret Washington, July 28, 1948.

Dear Mr. Secretary: In accordance with recommendations by the Joint Chiefs of Staff,2 in which I concur, it is requested that the British and French Governments be approached by your Department with strong requests for maximum air support for the present supply operation for Berlin.

It is also requested that discussion be initiated with the British and French Governments with a view toward developing preliminary plans for the use of composite (British, French and United States) armed convoys for the supply of Berlin. In this connection and for your information only, the Joint Chiefs of Staff do not recommend supply to Berlin by armed convoy in view of the risk of war involved and the inadequacy of United States preparation for global conflict. They believe it prudent, however, to plan for such an operation in the event that: a. Every other possible solution to the Berlin problem has first failed or been discarded.

b. Current evaluation indicates that the effort is likely to succeed.

c. The United States has first determined that risk of war in the near future and for the Berlin cause is acceptable, and3

d. All possible time shall first have been gained and used for adequate preparation for the attempt to supply by force and for full-out major war action in support thereof if war results.

It should be impressed upon the British and French Governments that these discussions for the development of preliminary plans do not in any way represent a decision by the United States Government that these armed convoys should be used at the present time, but that the United States Government reserves its decision in this matter pending further developments in the Berlin situation.4

Sincerely yours,

James Forrestal

1 Attached to the source text is the following memorandum by Samuel Reber, dated July 28: “General Norstad telephoned me this afternoon to ask that action in respect of the first paragraph of this letter be withheld pending further word from him as to the desirability of the approach to British and French Governments concerning air lift. General Norstad explained when the paragraph was adopted the British effort seemed to be diminishing but that as of this morning they had stepped up their air support to the fullest extent possible. Consequently any request for further support would be superfluous at present and open to misunderstanding. With regard to the second request contained in this letter it is understood that a further communication will be sent by the Secretary of Defense modifying this request and that no action need be taken until the second letter is received.”

2 The reference here is to a memorandum by Forrestal to the National Security Council (NSC 24) of July 26, not printed, transmitting the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the military courses of action with respect to the situation in Berlin. (Executive Secretariat Files)

3  In a memorandum to Lovett, August 3, not printed, Kennan suggested the following language for this paragraph: “It has been duly determined by the Executive Branch of the Government that in its judgment the issues involved in the Berlin conflict are such as to justify an insistence by this Government, even at the risk of war, on retaining its position in Berlin, including full access to its forces and to the population subject to their authority.” (Executive Secretariat Files)

4 According to information provided by the Department of Defense, Secretary Forrestal, in a memorandum dated July 30, told the Joint Chiefs of Staff that he had forwarded the letter printed here to the Secretary of State. Subsequently, Forrestal explained, the Secretary of State had advised him that the question of planning for armed convoys should not be raised at the governmental level in view of the reconstitution of the French Cabinet and had recommended that the matter be taken up promptly with the British through the Combined Chiefs of Staff. Forrestal said that he concurred in the Secretary of State’s recommendation and that he had withdrawn his request. He asked the Joint Chiefs of Staff to initiate planning for armed convoys in the Combined Chiefs of Staff. Forrestal informed the Secretary of State of his action in a letter of July 30, not printed. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–3048)

C. The meetings of the representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and the Soviet Union in MoscowC. The meetings of the representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and the Soviet Union in Moscow

[592] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, July 30, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–3048: Telegram

[593] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, July 31, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–3148: Telegram

[594] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 3, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–348: Telegram

[595] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 3, 1948—11 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–348: Telegram

[596] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, August 3, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–348: Telegram

[597] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 4, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–448: Telegram

[598] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

Berlin, August 4, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–448: Telegram

[599] Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen)

[Washington,] August 4, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–448

[600] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, August 4, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–448: Telegram

[601] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 5, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–548: Telegram

[602] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 6, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–648: Telegram

[603] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, August 7, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–648: Telegram

[604] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 9, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–948: Telegram

[605] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, August 10, 1948—12 p. m.

740:00119 Control (Germany)/8–1048: Telegram

[606] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Frankfurt, August 11, 1948—11 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1148: Telegram

[607] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Berlin, August 11, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1148: Telegram

[608] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

Washington, August 11, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1148: Telegram

[609] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 12, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1248: Telegram

[610] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, August 13, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1348: Telegram

[611] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 16, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1648: Telegram

[612] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 17, 1948—2 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1748: Telegram

[613] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 17, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1748: Telegram

[614] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 17, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1748: Telegram

[615] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, August 17, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1748: Telegram

[616] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, August 17, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1748: Telegram

[617] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen)

Washington, August 21, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2148: Telegram

[618] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 23, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2348: Telegram

[619] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 24, 1948—5 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2448: Telegram

[620] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 24, 1948—6 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2448: Telegram

[621] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Beam)

[Washington,] August 24, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2448

[622] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, August 24, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2448: Telegram

[623] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, August 24, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2448: Telegram

[624] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, August 24, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2448: Telegram

[625] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 25, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2548: Telegram

[626] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 25, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2548: Telegram

[627] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, August 26, 1948—2 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2548: Telegram

[628] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, August 26, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2648: Telegram

[629] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 27, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2748: Telegram

[630] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 27, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2748: Telegram

[631] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, August 28, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2748: Telegram

[632] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 30, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–3048: Telegram

[633] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 31, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1348: Telegram

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–3048: Telegram

[Document 592]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, July 30, 1948—8 p. m.

1474. As agreed with British and French representatives I made initial presentation to Mr. Zorin at 6 p. m. today.1 His attitude can only be described as uncompromising. He replied that the absence of Mr. Molotov on vacation prevented for the time being the granting of the request which I had just made. He then said that there was no indication in the aide-mémoire which I handed him of any change in the position of the US or of any subjects which would make profitable a discussion with Generalissimo Stalin and Mr. Molotov. However, he would transmit my request to his government for their consideration. I replied that my presentation had been brief since the general position of the US had already been made clear. It would be re-defined and amplified during the discussions which I proposed.

I then reminded him that the written word as embodied in the exchange of formal diplomatic notes was very rigid but that it was the opinion of my government that in less formal conversations formulas might develop which would go far in resolving the present grave situation. I stated that I recalled my first conversation with Mr. Stalin 2 and the cordiality with which he assured me that I could come to him at any time and that while I had refrained from requesting interviews in the past except on matters of first importance, I considered the present situation the gravest which had arisen since I came to Moscow two years and a half ago. Nevertheless my government felt, despite this gravity, that an informal exchange of views would improve prospects of a solution.

Mr. Zorin replied that he could only say that the position of the Soviet Government had also been clearly defined in its note of July 143 but that he would, as previously stated, present my request to his government.

I did not make any request for an estimate when reply might be expected and refrained from giving any other indication of eagerness or anxiety on our part.4

Department please pass to London as 105, Paris 221, Berlin 262.

Smith

1 In telegrams 1467 and 1470, July 30, from Moscow, neither printed, Ambassador Smith reported that he had requested an appointment with Foreign Minister Molotov but had been informed that Molotov was absent on vacation. Smith and his British and French colleagues decided, therefore, to arrange an interview with Deputy Foreign Minister Zorin and to present the agreed aide-mémoire (see the teletype conference of July 26 and footnote 2 thereto) to him (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–3048). In his telegram 1475, July 31, from Moscow, not printed, Smith reported that Ambassador Chataigneau had seen Zorin at 7 p. m., and Frank K. Roberts (Foreign Secretary Bevin’s personal representative in Moscow during the absence of Ambassador Peterson) had seen Zorin at 10 p. m. The results of these later conversations were largely the same as Smith’s, although Zorin apparently grew more talkative and less uncompromising (740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–3148). Roberts’ meeting with Zorin is briefly described in Cmd. 7534, p. 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9].

2 A report on Ambassador Smith’s first conversation with Stalin, April 4, 1946, is included among the reports on developments of significance within the Soviet Union of concern to relations with the United States in Foreign Relations, 1946, volume vi .

3  Ante, p. 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579].

4 For a further account of this meeting with Zorin, see Smith, Moscow Mission, p. 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149].

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/7–3148: Telegram

[Document 593]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, July 31, 1948—9 p. m.

1488. This afternoon I was called by the Foreign Office and told to see Molotov at the Kremlin at 7 p. m. I learned later that appointments had been made for the British representative at 8 p. m. and for the French Ambassador at 10 p. m. and had time for short talk with Roberts and French councillor before my appointment.1 Molotov began the conversation by stating that he had taken note of the aide-mémoire presented by me to Mr. Zorin yesterday2 and asked whether I had anything to add. I replied that I had nothing to add at this time and would be glad to have Molotov’s reaction. Molotov said that the aide-mémoire was not wholly clear and that he wondered what kind of discussion and negotiation we had in mind, at present and for the future.

I said that the aide-mémoire was intentionally brief and lacking in detail since it was the purpose of the proposed conversations to develop such details. Turning to the Russian translation of the text of the aide-mémoire, Molotov read the final paragraph and asked what “wider questions” we had in view. He then cited the Russian note of July 143 to the effect that conversations regarding Berlin were not possible except within the framework of conversations regarding all of Germany and inquired whether that represented also the view of the American Government.

I replied that my government considered it possible that such a line of approach might emerge from the conversations.

Molotov then explained that unlike the Soviet note of July 14 the US reply (that is, the aide-mémoire of July 30) does not refer to Germany as a whole and that he had simply asked in order to clarify this question. I repeated that the aide-mémoire was intentionally both brief and not detailed, as the details would be developed in the discussions. Molotov continued to probe for something definite by saying that maybe this preliminary conversation with him today was useless, but that he had hoped to report on this matter to his government tonight and wanted to be able to present to them a clear picture. I said on the contrary I welcomed this opportunity to talk over our proposal. We regarded the proposed conversations with Stalin and himself as preliminary discussions which we hoped might lead to a reasonable formula for composing our differences. The formal position of the two governments had been made clear in the two notes which had been exchanged, but the formal written word was very rigid and much more could be accomplished by informal exploration.

Molotov then said that he would report to his government on the US, British, and French approaches; that he hoped Stalin would agree to meet the representatives of the three governments; and that his purpose in this talk was simply to clarify our proposals.

After some further exchange along the same lines, Molotov remarked that he would “inform me as soon as possible of Stalin’s reply and as to when the meeting might be possible”.

Molotov then went on to refer specifically to the statements in the aide-mémoire regarding Soviet measures to disrupt communications with Berlin and said bluntly he hoped I would understand that these measures were necessitated by the actions of the US, Britain, and France in the Western zones of Germany following the London Conference with respect to currency and the decisions of that conference. Disregarding this statement, I said that I was grateful for the opportunity to talk further about our proposal; that as Molotov knew I was always optimistic with regard to informal exchanges of views as opposed to formal diplomatic notes. He replied that he also liked the informal approach and thought it was better, but reiterated that “if it had not been for the London decisions there would have been no reasons for creating and continuing the difficulties of recent times in the relations of the partners in Germany”. I said I was encouraged by Molotov’s use of the word partners and I felt that as long as that basic fact was kept in mind there was always reasonable expectation of resolving our present difficulties by frank and informal discussion.

It will be obvious from the above that the purpose of the interviews today is to maneuver one or the other of the representatives here into stating definitely the position of the Western governments. I was able to confer with my British and French colleagues immediately after my talk, and believe we will avoid this successfully. My present estimate is chances of discussion with Stalin favorable and reply probably soon. We are having a rehearsal tomorrow.4

Sent Department 1488; repeated London 108, Berlin 268, Paris 223.

Smith

1 Telegram 1489, August 1, from Moscow, not printed, reported that the British and French representatives saw Foreign Minister Molotov as scheduled. Their interviews proceeded almost exactly along the lines of Ambassador Smith’s (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–148). In his telegram 3992, August 2, from Paris, not printed, Ambassador Caffery reported that Ambassador Chataigneau’s reports to Paris on his interview corresponded closely with Smith’s (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–248).

2 See telegram 1474, July 30, from Moscow, supra.

3  Ante, p. 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579].

4 In telegram 1489, August 1, from Moscow, not printed, Smith reported that he had met with his British and French colleagues on the morning of August 1, to plan their approach should an interview with Stalin be granted. Immediately after this meeting, the Soviet Foreign Ministry informed Smith that an interview on the evening of August 2 had been arranged (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–148). For a further account of the interview with Molotov, see Smith, Moscow Mission, pp. 231–233.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–348: Telegram

[Document 594]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, August 3, 1948—3 p. m.

1508. To Department Eyes Only for the Secretary. Following précis of conversation1 is from notes made by English and French interpreters and is accurate summary:

US Ambassador opened by saying that he wished to make very frank and complete statement of the position of the three governments in the light of the Soviet note of July 14,2 and as the senior representative he was authorized to speak for all of us. After making the agreed statement,3 he asked Stalin to explain his position and state the Soviet view.

Stalin’s first response was to ask whether we had authority to open negotiations. The US Ambassador replied that we were not there to negotiate, but to attempt to work out a formula which might lead to negotiations. If, as we hoped, the Soviet Government shared our desire to reach a solution, we were there to discuss practical measures to that end.

Stalin said that, assuming we could settle the most acute questions concerning Berlin, were we prepared to discuss question of Germany as a whole? The US Ambassador replied that we had no authority to commit our Governments to specific proposals, but were interested in learning Stalin views on the possible basis of a settlement.

Stalin, after pointing out that the meeting was an unusual one with the representatives of three powers present, set forth his views on the following lines. The restrictive transport measures undertaken by the Soviet authorities had been caused (1) by technical reasons, (2) because large quantities of equipment were moving westwards from Berlin, and (3) because the London decisions, and more especially the currency reform and introduction of western zone currency into Berlin at the center of the Soviet occupation zone, had disrupted the economy of that zone. The Soviet authorities were defending the Soviet zone.

As long as we have treated Germany as a whole, the presence of allied occupation troops in Berlin, as the capital, is natural; but geographically Berlin was center of Soviet zone. As a result of the London Conference, a separate state had been created in western Germany with its capital at Frankfurt. Two capitals now existed, and as a result of these recent changes the right of the western powers to maintain troops in Berlin had lost its juridical basis. It was in this sense that the relevant passage of the Soviet note of July 14 should be understood. If there were two states in Germany, Berlin could not be regarded as the capital of the whole of Germany. Stalin then stated most emphatically that this did not, however, mean that the restrictive measures employed by the Soviet authorities were intended to oust the allied troops from Berlin. Even if the allies failed to reach agreement on the future of Germany, and even if Berlin were supplied exclusively by the Soviet Government, there was still no intention on the Soviet part of ousting allied forces from Berlin. He had, however, wanted to bring out the juridical position as the Soviet Government saw it. He repeated that all the restrictive measures adopted by the Soviet authorities had been to prevent the invasion of the Soviet zone by the special western currency, and resulted from the tactics of the three powers at the London Conference.

The allies were not entitled to claim that it was impossible to discuss the German question while measures of duress were employed. The present situation was that there was a separate currency in western and eastern Germany. He then argued that there was a third in Berlin, which made economic nonsense. In this respect Berlin, which was in the middle of the Soviet zone, could not be cut off from it, and a special currency there could not be tolerated. He therefore proposed to abolish any special Berlin currency while leaving separate currencies in western and eastern Germany until other matters in dispute could be settled.

The US Ambassador thanked Stalin for his explanation and said he appreciated Stalin’s position. The fact was, however, that there were diametrically opposite views on these problems. For years past the two sides had been getting further apart; it was time to review the whole problem and see if we could get together again. We were not authorized to accept any specific proposal, but should like to know if the Generalissimo was implying that we might expect the opening of communications simultaneously with the abolition of the separate currency in Berlin and the possibility of further discussions on Germany. Stalin said he had not been correctly understood; he had spoken not only of the special currency in Berlin, but also of the effect of the London decisions which had necessitated restrictive measures. He proposed that the London decisions be suspended until a four-power meeting took place to try to reach agreement. Maybe agreement would be reached, but if the London decisions had already been put into effect, there would be nothing left to discuss. He therefore proposed the temporary suspension of the London decisions, as well as the abolition of special currency in Berlin, simultaneously with the abolition of Soviet restrictive measures.

Mr. Roberts said that he had not felt it necessary to intervene before, but he should perhaps say that he was in general agreement with the presentation of the case by the US Ambassador and he thought that his Government would understand the arguments put forward by Stalin over currency. Although he could not, of course, commit them, he had expressed to Mr. Molotov already that their view was that there should be a progressive solution of the problems, beginning with the most urgent, but of course bringing all the more [important] ones into discussion. We quite understood that the currency question was important to the Soviet Government, just as the question of communications was important to us (Stalin said he quite understood). Then the French Ambassador said that he was in complete agreement and that he thought a basis for discussions had been found. He would inform his Government, with a view to opening discussions soon, but of course with the understanding that currency was to be the starting point.

Stalin said that Mr. Roberts seemed to think that his second point about the London decisions was not urgent. He agreed that certain points in connection with London agreements were not urgent, but he was very interested in one question; he understood that a sort of parliamentary council was to be formed soon, and that this would set up a German Government. If this went ahead, the Soviet Government would be faced with a fait accompli and there would be nothing left to discuss. The US Ambassador said he had not seen the matter in that light. Nothing was being done in the western zones which could not be fitted into a central German Government whenever four-power agreement could be attained. He stated that without wishing to go into the detail, of two years of frustrations and disagreements, the steps taken in the western zones seem to us to be defensive, just as the Soviet Government maintained the steps they were taking were defensive. The important thing was to take stock and to try to get back to some possible basis of understanding and confidence. There were at present two artificial conditions existing which were exerting pressure. On the one side there was the Berlin currency, and on the other side there was the interruption of communications. He had had considerable experience with air supply; it was a big job which we could do, and continue to do indefinitely, but we would rather not have to do it. There was always the danger of collisions, with constantly recurring incidents and increasing tension. We should therefore begin discussions and try to find a basis of understanding. His own suggestion, which he would like to report to his Government, was that there should be simultaneous announcement of resumption of negotiations on Berlin, a four-power meeting to consider other outstanding problems affecting Germany, and broader questions within the agreed competence of the four powers, together with the reopening of communications between Berlin and the western zones; and, further, an agreed solution of the Berlin currency problem. He would recommend that a solution should be reached immediately of the artificial currency situation in Berlin, and afterwards he hoped that discussions would develop to deal with the other outstanding questions, and so prevent us from drawing further and further apart. (This followed the line of the agreed instructions.4 )

He said his instructions did not, however, go so far as this, and asked his colleagues what their views were. The French Ambassador said he was in the same position, but he would take the responsibility of recommending such a solution to his Government. Mr. Roberts made a similar statement, and added that the tenor of his parting conversation with Mr. Bevin in London made him hopeful of a satisfactory settlement, but he could not commit his Government.

Mr. Molotov then intervened to remind us that Stalin had raised the issue of the London conference decisions, as well as that of the Berlin currency, although the western representatives had not commented on the first point. On the latter point Mr. Molotov was not quite clear as to what the US Ambassador had in mind, but the US Ambassador stated that his recommendation would be that a solution of the Berlin currency problem be found that was acceptable to the Soviet Government. The US Ambassador was not himself an expert on currency matters, and therefore could not discuss this in detail. (The French Ambassador and Mr. Roberts agreed in this.)

The US Ambassador continued that his idea was the discussion of outstanding problems in an atmosphere without restraint and without loss of prestige on either side. A statement of the kind he had indicated, if his Government endorsed it, should produce this result. Speaking frankly, he was fully aware that technical difficulties might come up again if no satisfactory agreement were eventually reached. Stalin then repeated his own proposal, which he was prepared to make in writing, on the following lines: (1) The simultaneous abolition of restrictive transport measures by the Soviet Military Administration, together with the abolition of special mark—B currency in Berlin, and replacement by Soviet zone Deutsche mark;

(2) Assurance that implementation of London decisions would be suspended until such time as the four powers met (which he understood we had proposed) and try to reach agreement on fundamental questions affecting Germany. (Stalin again said that he was prepared to publish this if we wanted, but readily agreed when we explained that we preferred to keep it confidential for the present.) He emphasized, however, his point about the London decisions.

The US Ambassador said he would, of course, report Stalin’s proposals, but he was not optimistic about his Government’s reaction on this particular point. Without wishing to go into past history, he would remind Stalin of the long and fruitless attempts to reach agreement over Germany. Stalin explained that the only real issue he had in mind was the formation in the western zones of a German Government. He did not mind unification of the three zones, and even considered it progress. The Soviet zone also formed a unity but they had not thought of creating a government there, although we seemed to be pushing him towards it. That was the issue. He understood that the Parliament of the western zones would meet on September 1 to set up a government, and then there would be nothing to discuss. On a question from the American Ambassador, he confirmed that his only objection was the physical establishment of a government in western Germany, because there was still a chance of creating a single government for Germany as a whole when we eventually met, which would automatically solve the Berlin question. If we failed, then clearly the western and eastern zones would drift apart again. He emphasized that he had no wish to embarrass us in connection with the London decisions. The Soviet Government would, however, be embarrassed if a German Government were set up now in the western zones. If we wanted to negotiate we would have to postpone this.

The US Ambassador said he found this very interesting and had not previously considered the problem in that light. He explained that it had never been contemplated that the Government of Frankfurt should be a central German Government but that eventually this government would be able to unite with any government in the eastern zone to form a central German Government. This final step would be the most important subject for discussion at the proposed conference. But the agency now to be set up under the London decisions should in no way hamper eventual understanding. (Mr. Roberts agreed to this.) Stalin said that his understanding was that the object of the meeting this evening was to make possible negotiations to discuss all questions affecting Germany. After disposing of “insignificant conflicts” a meeting should be arranged which might be a Council of Foreign Ministers or some other meeting. If such a meeting took place the Soviet Government would want to put the following questions on the agenda: (1) Reparations. Only those who wanted them need take them but some countries had suffered very heavily and reparations had an educational as well as material value to discourage countries from aggression.

(2) Demilitarization. This had not yet been completed.

(3) The formation of a German Government. The four powers were under an obligation to set up a single German Government. The Yalta and Potsdam decisions had never spoken of separate governments in Germany. There could not be four governments with four currencies. The Soviet Government had been patient despite the probable formation soon of a western German Government with a separate currency. They had been compelled to establish a separate eastern zone currency but had not yet set up a government in the eastern zone and did not want to be forced to do so. At the proposed meeting the question of a single government would be discussed. If agreement were reached, then the western German Government to be set up in September would be liquidated and it would be better not have created it at all.

(4) Peace treaty.

(5) Control of the Ruhr. Certain unilateral decisions had been reached in London.

If we seriously intended to arrange such a meeting and to secure cooperation then nothing should be done now which might hamper this. Stalin repeated in conclusion that it was not the Soviet purpose to oust the allies from Berlin. He had always been confident that after much skirmishing they could return in the end to a basis for agreement. The US Ambassador said that while it was not impossible that any of the subjects which Stalin mentioned might appear on an agenda, it was quite impossible to consider any agenda at this stage, and while conditions of duress existed. This brought us back to our task of creating a situation in which the conference which we all seemed to be agreed was necessary could take place. But he must repeat in all seriousness that no such discussions could take place unless duress were removed. The issue of the London decisions could only be discussed on a higher level. It would have to be dealt with at the proposed conference. The London conference decisions had not contributed to the state of duress now existing in Berlin and which prevented discussion taking place. The really immediate issues obviously were the blockade and currency.

Stalin suggested that the implementation of the London decisions should be suspended, that mark B should be abolished in Berlin and that then there would be no difficulties. He wondered who was bringing pressure to bear on whom. There was also the issue of the suspension by the western powers of transport to and from the Soviet zone. The US Ambassador said that if this was a means of pressure it might well be removed, but only simultaneously with restoration of normal communications between Berlin and the western zone. Stalin then said that the delay in the establishment of a government in western Germay could be handled confidentially by oral statement which need not be published. If the proposed meeting succeeded, then haste was unnecessary. If not, then we would go ahead. He did not want anyone to be placed in an embarrassing position. There would have been no restrictions if it had not been for the London decisions. The Soviet Government were not seeking conflicts but trying to find a solution.

The US Ambassador said that he would report this to his Government but he thought that the implementation of the London decisions had reached a point at which it would be extremely difficult to hold it up although we would of course be ready to discuss these problems in full detail. (Stalin interjected that he only wanted to hold up the implementation of a part of the London decisions.) Mr. Roberts said that he was not in a position to discuss the London decisions as this was a subject of discussion for the Ministers of Foreign Affairs. This might be a more important but it was certainly a less urgent question. Our immediate aims were less ambitious. We had hoped to create conditions which would lead to full and frank discussion and negotiations. Meanwhile, however, we must reach agreement on the immediate issues of pressure in regard to Berlin. The Soviet Government complained of the pressure of currency and we of pressure over communications. It was not we wanted to settle one set of problems only, leaving the others over, but we thought we should proceed in an orderly and businesslike way to resolve all the problems interesting both parties. (Stalin interjected that Mr. Roberts seemed to be in a hurry.) Mr. Roberts said that whilst he had no desire to delay, he was not in any special hurry and thought all questions should be properly and solidly dealt with. (The US Ambassador interposed that he was as patient as Stalin and that we could of course go on indefinitely.)

The French Ambassador said that he hoped that they would reach some agreement tonight which would form the basis for future discussions. (Stalin interjected “tonight or tomorrow.”) Stalin then suggested a meeting tomorrow but, after a long aside with Molotov during which we conveyed unmistakably the impression that in our opinion the results were quite inadequate so far, he asked suddenly whether we wanted to settle the matter tonight. If so he could meet the American Ambassador and make the following proposal: (1) There should be a simultaneous introduction in Berlin of the Soviet zone Deutsche mark in place of the western mark B, together with the removal of all transport restrictions.

(2) He would no longer ask as a condition the deferment of the implementation of the London decisions although he wished this to be recorded as the insistent wish of the Soviet Government. He explained that he realized that this requirement had put us in a difficult position.

The US Ambassador then asked Stalin about the announcement of a resumption of negotiations on Berlin and holding a four-power meeting to consider other problems affecting Germany. Stalin said they should be included.

The three western representatives agreed to present this proposal to their Governments with a joint recommendation that it should be accepted, they would endeavor to get a reply tomorrow, and they would inform Mr. Molotov as soon as possible of the decision of their Governments. The meeting then broke up in a very friendly atmosphere.

It was finally agreed that a communiqué should be issued by Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs stating that Stalin had received the three western representatives with Mr. Molotov present after 9 p. m., and that the meeting had lasted two hours. It was agreed that nothing more than this should be said at this stage by any of the governments concerned.

Repeated Berlin Eyes Only for Clay and Murphy as 272, Paris Eyes only for Caffery as 226, London Eyes Only for Douglas as 111.

Smith

1 In his telegram 1507, August 3, from Moscow, not printed, Ambassador Smith gave a brief, summary report on this meeting (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–348). For other accounts of the meeting, see Smith, Moscow Mission, pp. 233–237 and Cmd. 7534, pp. 22–23.

2  Ante, p. 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579].

3 Regarding the statement (or oral presentation) under reference here, see the record of the teletype conference of July 26, p. 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 590], and footnote 3 thereto.

4 See the record of the teletype conference of July 26, p. 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 590].

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–348: Telegram

[Document 595]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, August 3, 1948—11 a. m.

1509. For the Secretary and Bohlen Eyes Only. Telegrams sent last night1 were prepared in presence of British and French representatives. Following is my personal estimate for your private estimation.

Stalin and Molotov were undoubtedly anxious for settlement. Doubt if I have ever seen Molotov so cordial and if one did not know real Soviet objectives in Germany would have been completely deceived by their attitude as both literally dripping with sweet reasonableness and desire not to embarrass. I am almost certain we could have settled for our original formula i.e. minus currency (if we had played a little harder to get and possibly we might still do so). However Roberts obviously under instructions from Bevin to keep us on soft side as far as possible (in fact I am sure that is why he was sent here) and Chataigneau equally eager although he neither helped nor hindered. Believe I muffed one thing badly in that I might well have obtained Stalin’s guarantee of our use of corridor in future. However this may be “morning after the battle courage” and I have laid groundwork for such a demand on our part by my remarks during discussion. I suggest that this be a condition for our acceptance of Stalin’s proposals and think it can be put over although of course it will be harder to negotiate with Molotov alone.

As will be evident from summary of discussions the two salient points in Soviet mind are Berlin currency and physical establishment of west German government (which Stalin continually referred to as “government for Germany”). Although Soviet emphasis on first point must certainly be inspired by their desire to rivet Berlin to Soviet zone, it seems to me that we are in a mess over the currency in Berlin and might be well out of it on Soviet terms.

Do not know if it is possible to suspend any part of implementation of London decisions on west German government but if this is possible without undue complications or loss of prestige it would give us a good club as with finalization of west German government we will have fired one of the last shots in our political locker. I am sure of one thing and that is if we are going to maintain the appearance of quadripartite control and the fiction (for fiction I am afraid it is) of ultimate agreement with Stalin on Germany, it will be necessary for deputies for Germany to remain practically in continuous session from now on. Believe that as long as discussions are in progress no matter how acrimonious or unproductive we are unlikely to be subjected to physical pressure. Another thing is that at the first opportunity Stalin and Molotov must be told bluntly in so many words, in a confidential conversation, that we are never going to accept a Communist or a neo-Communist Germany or a tight central government that can be seized by a Communist coup d’état as in the case of Czechoslovakia. If they can be made to realize this one fact their eagerness for reparations may induce them to be less aggressive on the political front.

In spite of statement in my message yesterday do not think any harm will be done if there is a day or two delay in replying to Soviet proposal.

Bohlen will find interesting confirmation of his theory re individual approach to Stalin in part of our conversation not mentioned in summary. After my opening statement there was considerable sparring and no immediate direct reply by Stalin. I reminded him that in previous conversations he had been quite frank, not to say vigorous, in expressing his views and he replied “Ah yes, but that was when only the two of us were talking together. This is a very different sort of a conference with three ambassadors present.” I will have an opportunity for such a frank talk with him before I leave here since, believe it or not, he invited me to have “a couple of drinks” and a talk before my final departure.

Have not repeated above to London, Paris or Berlin.

Smith

1  Supra.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–348: Telegram

[Document 596]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, August 3, 1948—7 p. m.

889. For Ambassador Eyes Only. We agree to outline draft statement contained your Niact 15072 with the elaboration of point 2 given below.

Our acceptance of Soviet zone currency in Berlin cannot be unconditional and its use must be subject to some form of quadripartite control. This requirement is essential for the maintenance of our position in Berlin and is made doubly necessary because of Soviet action of last few days in freezing accounts of western sector enterprises in Berlin.

The substitution of the Soviet zone mark for the B mark in Berlin can now be accepted in principle but our agreement must be supplemented by a satisfactory agreement providing for quadripartite control of the availability and use of the Soviet currency in Berlin.

In our opinion confirmed by Gen Clay such agreement should include control of credit, uniform application of credit rules and currency issue within Berlin, availability of sufficient funds for occupation powers, and some arrangements to cover trade between the Western zones and Berlin. Arrangements of this character are necessary for the orderly use of separate currencies in Eastern and Western zones coexistence of which we note Stalin acknowledged “until other matters in dispute could be settled.” (Your Niact 15083 ) This is a point we feel should be stressed in future discussion with Soviets.

We would much prefer that lifting of the blockade should take place simultaneously with our agreement in principle to the acceptance of the Soviet mark as the sole currency for Berlin and recognition by the Soviets of the necessity to provide for the application of the foregoing requirements. However, if the Soviets insist that the lifting of the blockade shall take place simultaneously with the cancellation of the B mark and the substitution their own, instructions should be sent to the military governors in Berlin to work out without delay such arrangements as may be satisfactory for the use of the Soviet mark. This would of necessity postpone announcement of any general agreement but delay should not be longer than 48 hours. We wish to avoid acceptance of the Soviet mark and its introduction without prior Soviet commitment to the essential measures of control.

We have following alternative wording for point 2 to take care respectively of these two approaches (a) the Soviet zone mark will be accepted as the sole currency for Berlin through suitable four-power agreement which will insure equitable rights as to supply of currency, adequate budgetary provisions, currency basis for trade between Western zones and Berlin and freely accessible banking and credit facilities for all of Berlin, (b) The Soviet zone mark will become the accepted currency in Berlin and the Western zones mark will be withdrawn at an early date and under mutually satisfactory conditions determined by occupation authorities.

Either formula is acceptable to Clay with whom he had a telecon this morning and whose comments related principally to point 2.

We note with gratification that you were able to eliminate abandonment of western German governmental organization as a Soviet condition. This is question respecting which we must retain a free hand and we request you to continue to safeguard our position in this matter should it be brought up again by the Soviets. If further argumentation ensues you may wish to point out on the subject of the provisional government that any organization which results from the deliberations of the Consultative Council will allow all the German states to subscribe as soon as circumstances permit and the form will be established by the Germans.

As regards point 3, (a) we assume that immediately following announcement negotiations on Berlin will begin between the military commanders in Berlin, (b) we would prefer a simple announcement that a four-power meeting would be held. If Soviets however insist upon inserting a date in the announcement, we would be prepared to agree to any date after Sept 1 and would prefer Paris which is next in normal rotation.

We desire Moscow to be coordinating center for purposes of present approach and Dept will address you directly repeating all messages to London, Berlin and Paris. Within terms of outline in your Niact 1507 and foregoing comments we wish to allow you desirable latitude in drafting of statement but before final agreement governments must have opportunity to examine the text.4

Marshall

1 This telegram was repeated to London as 3067, Paris as 2970, and Berlin as 1365.

2 Not printed; the draft statement read as follows: “1. Removal of all transport restrictions, both those between Berlin and the western zones and on transit traffic to and from eastern zone, and simultaneously, 2. Cancelation of mark B in Berlin and introduction of Soviet zone deutschemark in Berlin, and 3. Announcement of resumption of negotiations on Berlin and Four-Power meeting to consider other outstanding problems affecting Germany.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–348)

3 August 3, p. 999 [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 594].

4 For the text of supplementary instructions sent to Ambassador Smith in telegram 898, August 4, to Moscow, not printed, see The Berlin Crisis, pp. 21–22.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–448: Telegram

[Document 597]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, August 4, 1948—2 p. m.

1519. For the Secretary (Eyes Only). I am very grateful for and encouraged by your 889, August 3,1 which arrived just as Roberts, with obvious embarrassment, was showing me an extremely querulous and not very intelligent message from Bevin which questioned everything, implied that we had lost the fight before it was fairly started and actually directed Roberts to draft currency proposals, which of course no one here is competent to do and in which I had just declined to participate when your message was handed me.2

Knew you would appreciate fact that what we have done so far is simply to probe Soviet intentions as directed. These now seem reasonably clear and fact that Stalin has made proposal not too much out of line with our own implies that they also are feeling pinch and that, in conformity with standard Bolshevik tactics when opposition to direct action encountered, are trying the more circuitous route. And of course you are fully alive to the dangers inherent in this. If we can obtain a guarantee of our right to use the corridor as a corollary to our physical presence in Berlin (even though Soviet Government maintains that juridically we have no right to be there) believe immediate problem would be solved. However, while Stalin does not insist on delay in formation of west German government as a positive condition of removing blockade there must be no delusion on our part regarding the outstanding importance of this consideration. There was a distinct note of menace in Stalin’s statement of “the insistent desire of the Soviet Government in regard to the formation of a German government in the western zones.” I personally am convinced that when such a government is actually established the Soviet Government will clamp down again, form a government of its own, and put it in Berlin, and that while we might be able to work our way back from such a situation the chances are strongly against it. Consequently while I understand and will maintain necessity for retaining a free hand, I am pessimistic about duration of any solution we may be able to produce here unless it is possible to take advantage of Stalin’s offer of maintaining secrecy and, by dragging our feet or in some other way, to defer finalizing this matter until we can provide a facade of negotiation. If not I believe we must be prepared to face an equal or more serious crisis immediately after September first, the date which Stalin obviously holds in his mind as finalizing establishment of western German government by convocation Constituent Assembly. Would appreciate your views for own information otherwise instructions contained your 889 eminently satisfactory as far as I am concerned. Since on point 2 either (a) or (b) wording acceptable to Clay, will try to combine them as last part of wording (b) might strengthen Clay’s hand a little and give him slightly more latitude. Also might be well to try to add as a prefacing phrase “without impairing quadripartite status of Berlin.”

We are marking time now waiting on London and Paris although Chataigneau has been informed his Government favorably disposed in principle.

Sent Dept 1519.

Dept pass to London 113 (Eyes Only for Douglas); Paris 229 (Eyes Only for Caffery), Berlin 276 (Eyes Only for Clay and Murphy).

Smith

1  Supra.

2 In telegram 3499, August 3, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas reported that Bevin had not yet received a full report of the conversation with Stalin, only a garbled version from Roberts. Bevin was disturbed by some points of the interview and was cabling Roberts for clarification on the matter of the London agreements and the introduction of a separate currency by the western powers which was causing economic dislocation in the Soviet Zone. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–348)

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–448: Telegram

[Document 598]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

top secret
urgent Berlin, August 4, 1948.

CC–5432. Personal for Gen Bradley and Secretary Royall. I am sorry that I had not seen Smith’s second and longer message giving a detailed account of conversation with Stalin.1 Having seen this report, I must say that I consider it far less optimistic intone than indicated in the summarized first version.2 It becomes clear in the second message that no specific mention was made with respect to Quadripartite control of Berlin economy in the event Soviet currency is accepted. Without such control we would in fact in short order have no real say in Berlin Government.

I hope that the subsequent negotiations either in Moscow or here can clarify this situation. It would appear from the conversations that the full import of this problem was not fully understood by the three Western representatives. Soviet measures now being introduced indicate quite clearly their determination to obtain full control of Berlin banking and credit systems. German political leaders who visited us last night believe that the acceptance of such measures would in fact destroy the present city government. I bring this up now only to emphasize the importance of obtaining a satisfactory agreement as a condition precedent to our withdrawal of Western mark currency. State Department instructions to Smith seem very clear and to the point on this question.3

The conversation also makes it clear that there is no real change in Soviet position with respect to the German problem, and in maintaining this position, there remains the implied threat of a renewal of the blockade if and when Western German Government is established. It seems important that we recognize this possibility now. A second imposition of the blockade might take on the nature of an overt act insofar as public opinion is concerned.

Assuming a reasonably satisfactory solution is obtainable for the Berlin currency issue, there is obviously no other course of action left open to us except to accept in principle the Soviet proposal. However, we should do so with our eyes open as to the possibilities which may develop from such acceptance. It is obvious that the Quadripartite meeting at governmental level will be held during the period Western German Government is under consideration, and that political uncertainties will be increased during such a period. It will add to our difficulties in the execution of present policy in Germany, although it seems to us here that the prompt execution of this policy becomes of even greater importance.

Our net gain from the proposal, as I see it, is the lifting of the blockade with some increased prestige as a result, which will be offset in whole or in part by our loss of prestige in Berlin particularly, as we withdraw our currency. However, the lifting of the blockade does remove an immediate risk which might lead to war, and thus gains valuable time. Our net loss, in addition to some loss of prestige in Berlin, [is] the creation of an unsettled political atmosphere for the formation of Western German Government and the economic recovery of Western Germany. This can be offset by careful and delicate handling of the situation within Germany provided the three Western Allies still give full allegiance to the London Conference and no one of the three Western Allies uses the Quadripartite conference either to delay its own decisions or to foster discouragement and delay in German minds.

In finding a solution for the short-range problem of blockade, we have complicated our long-range problem. This is not intended in criticism since I fully agree there is no alternative. However, it does seem imperative to me that some high governmental voice use the time now ahead of us to thoroughly educate American public opinion with respect to our policy in Germany and the necessity for its early implementation in the interest of European recovery and the prevention of Soviet dominated Communist expansion.4

[ Clay ]

1 Telegram 1508, August 3, from Moscow, p. 999 [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 594].

2 Telegram 1507, August 3, from Moscow, not printed.

3 Transmitted in telegram 889 to Moscow, August 3, p. 1008 [Pg. 1008 is part of Doc. 596].

4 In telegram 3490, August 3, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas bad expressed bis interpretation of the conversation with Stalin along the same lines as Clay. In addition he stressed that under Stalin’s analysis of the western rights in Berlin “… the only way in which we can maintain and enjoy the right to remain in Berlin and to occupy our sectors is to suspend, if not cancel, the London decisions.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–348)

Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–448

[Document 599]

Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen)1

top secret [Washington,] August 4, 1948.

I think it is of the utmost importance to note that although Stalin receded from his original demand in regard to the suspension of the London decisions concerning the western German Government in connection with the proposed announcement, he makes it entirely clear that such suspension is the objective of the Soviet Government. In fact he states at several points during the interview that unless this is, done there is nothing to be discussed in regard to Germany as a whole and plainly announces the intention of the Soviet Government in such circumstances of setting up a rival German Government in the Eastern zone.

It is interesting to note that although Stalin repeatedly asserts it is not their intention to oust the Allied troops in Berlin, nevertheless the logic of a completely split Germany with two Governments almost forces the Russians to measures to bring this about. Stalin’s statement confirms our previous estimates of Soviet objectives in applying pressure in Berlin, but in a slightly different order of priority: 1. To bring about the cancellation of the London decisions especially in respect of a western zone Government.

2. Failing that, rendering our position in Berlin untenable through the establishment of a separate Government for the eastern zone. Although if the announcement2 is made as now proposed the western Allies would in no sense be committed to do anything about halting the putting into effect of the London decisions, Stalin’s strong statement on that point should be a definite warning signal that in any negotiations on Germany, the Soviet Government will insist that these measures be halted pending the outcome of the four power negotiations, and might well be prepared to call off the negotiations on that ground if the Western countries refuse.

The Russians will have good ammunition from a propaganda point of view for this stand as they would only have to point to the section in the London announcement which states that these measures in the Western zone are not designed to split Germany but would be superseded or incorporated into any all-German settlement.

The question of what to do about the decisions of the London Conference present[s] great difficulty. There will be strong pressure from certain groups in the U.S. and undoubtedly from France as well to suspend these measures for a Western Government pending the outcome of the four power talks and there may well be a two-way split in the Council of Foreign Ministers on this point. On the other hand, to halt these measures because of Soviet insistence would have a very serious effect in Germany, would certainly be violently opposed by General Clay and Ambassador Murphy, and might make their resumption in the event of a probable breakdown of the four-power talks difficult if not impossible.

Mr. Kennan has this question under consideration in the Planning Staff,3 and I am merely writing this memo to emphasize what will probably be the chief initial point in any meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers. It is even probable that before the discussions in Moscow are concluded that Stalin will again revert to the question of suspension of the London decisions in order to establish it more firmly as an implied or understood condition for four power talks even though it is not included in the proposed announcement. It would be wise in the circumstances to supply Ambassador Smith with more guidance on this point in the event Stalin raises it again.

Charles E. Bohlen

1 This memorandum was addressed to Secretary Marshall, Lovett, Hickerson, and Kennan. It was initialed by the Secretary.

2 For the text of the announcement under reference here, see telegram 1528, August 5, from Moscow, p. 1016 [Pg. 1016 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601].

3 The reference is presumably to document PPS 37, p. 1320 [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 721].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–448: Telegram

[Document 600]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, August 4, 1948—6 p. m.

892.1 For the Ambassador Eyes Only.

I. With reference to British attitude described urniact 15192 we sent following to Douglas in telecon with him this afternoon:3

“We are disturbed at Bevin’s attitude for the following reasons which you can use if you perceive no objection in talking to Bevin.

As we estimate the situation, Stalin is near accepting what we hope to achieve through informal discussions.

We fully recognize that the question of currency must be clarified in order to avoid any possibility of the Soviets controlling the city of Berlin through use of currency. Our 8894 to Smith contains our proposals for safeguarding the currency situation and have received the approval of the Army and Clay. If the currency matter can be straightened out to our satisfaction, we feel that points one and three of Stalin’s proposal represent exactly what we hoped to obtain through oral discussions.

We agree with Smith’s evaluation in his 1519 (to you 113) as to Stalin’s remarks in regard to West German Government. We believe that if and when four-power negotiations begin Stalin’s statement requoted by Smith means that they will insist upon the London measures being halted while negotiations are on.

Based on past experience, it is probable that at next meeting Stalin will be very much tougher, having touched base with the Politburo. It is absolutely essential at this meeting that the three Western Powers stand firm on previous positions. For the same reason we feel it would be a mistake to add any new conditions (apart from elaboration of currency matter) to formula for announcement suggested at first meeting. To do so would provide Stalin with opportunity to charge that previous conversation had been useless and to seek, in line with Politburo reaction, concessions from west, particularly in regard to suspension of West Zone Government. If, however, three Western Powers stand firm without adding entirely new considerations, past experience would indicate that Stalin will adhere to the proposals he made at first meeting. We therefore feel it important that all that has been accomplished so far in oral discussions not be lost by inability to close on terms of announcement at next meeting. We feel we would only be bound by terms of announcement and not by anything Stalin may have said in conversation although we must regard such statements as important indication of Soviet objectives and future intentions in regard to Germany”.

II. With reference to London’s 174 to Moscow5 we commented as follows in telecon with Douglas: “As our 839 to Smith indicates it is also our preferred position to have blockade lifted simultaneously with announcement. We have given Smith latitude however to accept reference to military commanders for 48 hours to work out safeguards on currency. We feel time limit would guard against protracted negotiations on currency. We feel if we insist Soviets lift blockade on our promise to accept Soviet mark, they will counter with proposal to accept promise for promise or conversely performance for performance. We therefore hope that Roberts can be given same latitude as Smith with strong emphasis on preference lifting of blockade on announcement.

We feel basic US, UK positions very close and we are prepared to let Smith, and Roberts work out drafting and tactics, subject of course to final approval by governments. No other comments on British draft instructions to Roberts”.

III. Regarding intimation in urtel 15096 that you might be able to obtain assurance from Soviets that blockade would not be reimposed, we feel it would be inadvisable to press this point as an additional demand. A request for an assurance of this kind might be construed as casting doubt on validity of our basic right of free access. Once blockade is lifted the Soviets would have to bear a heavier onus for its reimposition and assume responsibility for the countermeasures we may find it necessary to take from the start. You will note how the British handle this general question in their draft of statement in London’s 174 by stating “free communications shall be maintained” We would be well satisfied if we could obtain such wording in statement.7

Marshall

1 Repeated to London as 3082, Paris as 2980, and Berlin as 1371.

2 August 3, p. 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 597].

3 Not printed; a record of this telecon is in file 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048.

4 Telegram dated August 3, p. 1008 [Pg. 1008 is part of Doc. 596].

5 Not printed; it reported the strong British preference for “… agreement to the lifting of the blockade simultaneously with the announcement of acceptance, in principle of the introduction and circulation of Soviet currency in Berlin . . . .” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–448)

6  Ante, p. 1006 [Pg. 1006 includes portions of Doc. 594 and Doc. 595].

7 In telegram 3513 (repeated to Moscow as 174), August 4, from London, not printed, Douglas transmitted the British draft of the statement on Berlin which Bevin was sending to Roberts in Moscow (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–448). On the same day, in telegram 1521, from Moscow, not printed, Smith reported a draft of the same announcement, which had been agreed to by the representatives of the three western powers in Moscow before Roberts had received Bevin’s draft (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–448). Subsequently these two drafts were revised and combined by the western representatives in Moscow. For the text of the final draft, see telegram 1528, August 5, from Moscow, infra.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–548: Telegram

[Document 601]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Moscow, August 5, 1948—7 p. m.

1528. For the Secretary’s Eyes Only. At conference just concluded we agreed on following revised draft which I think meets all Department’s requirements: Begins. As the result of discussions held in Moscow between Generalissimo Stalin and Mister Molotov and French, United Kingdom and United States representatives, the Governments of France, the United Kingdom, the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics have agreed as follows:

All restrictions which have been imposed on the transport of persons and goods in either direction between the three western zones of Germany and Berlin shall be immediately removed, and freedom of communications shall be maintained.

All restrictions which have been imposed on the traffic of goods to and from the Soviet zone and the three western zones of Germany shall be immediately removed and freedom of communications shall be maintained.

Meetings shall be held among representatives of the four governments to consider any questions which may be outstanding as regards Berlin and any other outstanding problems affecting Germany as a whole.

Soviet zone mark will be accepted as the sole currency for Berlin and the Western mark will be withdrawn as soon as quadripartite arrangements have been agreed upon by the four military governors for the issue and control of currency in Berlin. These arrangements shall ensure: No discrimination or action against holders of either eastern or western zone currency; equal treatment as to currency and provision of fully accessible banking and credit facilities for all sectors of Berlin; adequate funds for budgetary purposes and occupation costs; and a satisfactory basis for trade between Berlin and the western zones. Implementation of these arrangements shall be carried out by the Berlin Kommandatura. Ends.

Wording of paragraph on meetings at insistence of British as is the order in which this paragraph appears. Last sentence at request of French.

Roberts received instructions last night from Bevin which clear him and we are now ready to go ahead except for fact French Ambassador is still not cleared from Paris. He expects clearance within next two or three hours in which case we will, late this afternoon, make our request for appointment and will probably get it tomorrow. Consequently, I will have time to make any changes which you may consider advisable in above draft but would prefer to make none unless necessary as it is result of considerable wrangling.

Undoubtedly Soviets will have several objections. I anticipate objection to the phrase “and free communications shall be maintained”. If they insist on removal and we are unable to maintain it, will have to fall back on their formula of recording our “insistent demand” that these communications not be interrupted. Assume they will also wish a more accurate definition of meetings both as to level and as to timing. French unwilling to hold any CFM meeting before September 10 and will so state. Bevin does not wish to be committed definitely. This point can probably be handled by informal discussion with very little change in wording of announcement.

Sent Department; Department pass Berlin 280 for Clay and Murphy Eyes Only; London 117 for Ambassador’s Eyes Only; Paris 232 for Ambassador’s Eyes Only.

Smith

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–648: Telegram

[Document 602]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, August 6, 1948—11 p. m.

1544. Eyes Only for Secretary, Berlin Eyes Only for Murphy and Clay, London Eyes Only for Douglas, Paris Eyes Only for Caffery. Our meeting this afternoon was with Molotov and Smirnov as we did not insist on seeing Stalin at a stage when it appeared the discussion would be one primarily of detail. The meeting lasted three hours and was from start to finish an exemplification of typical Soviet tactic of trying to sell the same horse twice.1 After the opening reservation of our juridical position,2 Molotov reviewed the proposed joint announcement3 and while reserving his remarks with respect to the first three paragraphs, immediately opened vigorous attack on paragraph 4 which he said was completely different from the “agreed decision” produced at Monday night’s conference. He immediately coupled this with the question of implementation of the London Conference decisions and the creation of a west German government. In fact, his first remark was “there is nothing in here about the insistent desire of Generalissimo Stalin for the postponement of the decisions of the London Conference.” Since he opened immediately with this gambit and was clearly going to press it, I felt it necessary to make the explanation contained in Deptel 898 August 44 in further definition of the London agreement with regard to the western zones, insisting however that since Stalin had not made this a condition to our present discussion the point was not germane this afternoon and, in any case, Stalin had only referred to physical establishment of a government in western Germany. This did not by any means satisfy Molotov who kept on reverting to this subject throughout the meeting and finally when the discussion became very frank said bluntly, “Tell me, do you or do you not intend to postpone the convocation of Parliamentary Council on September 1st.” He insisted that this would lead up to and was in effect the beginning of a western government for Germany. Our reply was, of course, that it was not our intention to postpone the convocation of the meeting referred to, but we reiterated the statement that this did not physically constitute the establishment of a German government and that the study on which it was contemplated this constituent assembly would be engaged would unquestionably be a protracted one. Nor would the findings reached there in any way militate against decisions with respect to a central German government which might be arrived at by our four governments.

This also did not satisfy Molotov and even to the end of our conversation he continued to bring the question up again and again. Turning to our draft Molotov’s first criticism was that it failed to provide for simultaneous action on points 1, 2 and 4 “as agreed with Stalin.” His particular point of attack in paragraph 4 was the phrase “issue and control of currency in Berlin” and he asserted vigorously that the three western Allies had and could have no function whatever in connection with the control of Berlin currency once the Soviet zone mark had been accepted. He said this was not a technical question but one of principle, on which Soviet Government could not give way.

He argued that the only outstanding technical problems were (a) the time limit for the currency changeover and (b) problem of occupation costs. His proposal for (b) was that each zone should bear the cost of its own troops in Berlin thus freeing Berlin itself from heavy burden. (The significance of this is inescapable.) He also constantly argued that quadripartite control of Berlin no longer existed, without however pressing this point to its logical conclusion. He repeated that regardless of its juridical position Soviet Government had no wish to oust US from Berlin and still regarded US as their allies in the late war. He made one surprising suggestion that if technical discussions took place in Berlin they should be not between the four Commanders-in-Chief but between the Soviet Commander-in-Chief and one representative of the western powers since Germany and Berlin were now divided into two and “there were only two sides in Berlin.” We vigorously refuted this and argued that it was essential at this point to maintain facade of four-power control while we tried to see whether we could put some reality behind it.

His comments and questions with regard to the other three paragraphs were much less searching. He asked for further amplification of what was meant by the meetings referred to in paragraph 3 and resisted the idea that there was any important question which need be discussed in Berlin by the Allied authorities in Germany. Toward the end he seemed to weaken a bit on this. He regarded the Council of Foreign Ministers or the deputies as the appropriate agencies for dealing with wider German questions.

He raised the question of currency again in connection with point 1, arguing that some restrictions would have to be maintained to prevent flooding of Berlin and Soviet Zone by western currency or vice versa. I believe that we stated our position with equal vigor and clarity and gave way on no point. We emphasized that, if faced with choice between conceding in whatever way our juridical rights or continuing as at present and increasing air lift our governments should choose the latter.

Molotov finally stated the Soviet Government wanted to find a practical solution of present deadlock without loss of prestige on either side. He has undertaken to produce a Soviet counterdraft which he stated could hardly be ready tomorrow because of the lateness of the hour today. We gathered this to mean that Generalissimo Stalin was not in the Kremlin tonight.

We all had the impression that Molotov himself was more willing than Stalin had seemed, to accept for the present the division of Germany, unless he could force us to suspend the execution of London decisions. He argued that the division of Germany had been created by us and repeated that Berlin should be regarded as capital of the Soviet zone and not of Germany as a whole.

We felt no reason to be either depressed or encouraged today, if as we believe, we are being treated to a display of conventional Soviet conference tactics. Discussion was unusually frank and not acrimonious and surprisingly blunt statements were made. The next meeting will be more significant. It is evident that these conversations may be protracted and it is obviously the Soviet desire to settle all points including technical ones (which they wish to reduce to almost nothing) in Moscow rather than to transfer any discussion to Berlin. We made it clear that from our point of view this was quite impractical.

A complete minute of the conversation will be despatched tomorrow but will take some time to produce and condense it.

Above was produced in conjunction with British and French Ambassadors. My personal impression is that Molotov is riding two horses. He is trying to force us out of Berlin through Soviet monopoly of currency and by depriving western powers of any control staff, while at the same time he is trying to disrupt our plans on western Germany government, using as bait the lifting of the blockade. His counterproposals and discussions thereof will tell more. I estimate we will have to have at least two more talks with Molotov, during which the proposals of both sides will be rendered to their irreducible minimum, and then we will have to see Stalin for the final decision.

What impressed me most was Molotov’s insistence on the fact that Germany and Berlin were actually divided and that there were now two “sides” instead of four participants. I have the impression he is completely skeptical of producing agreement on Germany by conference on any level, while Stalin seems still to lean toward the idea that eventually some agreement may result.

It may help us, during next discussion, to be able to point out steps already taken under Soviet sponsorship by People’s Congress movement towards drafting a constitution. Request you wire urgently pertinent details.

Smith

1 A verbatim account of the meeting reported upon here was transmitted in telegram 1558, August 7, from Moscow, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–748).

2 The oral statement reserving full juridical rights in Berlin was made by Frank Roberts; for the text, see Cmd. 7534, p. 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12].

3 The text of proposed joint announcement was contained in telegram 1528, August 5, from Moscow, supra. It is also printed in The Berlin Crisis, pp. 22–23 and Cmd. 7534, pp. 24–25.

4 Not printed; it transmitted the supplementary instructions to Ambassador Smith printed in The Berlin Crisis, pp. 21–22. For the text of Smith’s oral statement made at this point, see Cmd. 7534, p. 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–648: Telegram

[Document 603]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, August 7, 1948—2 p. m.

910. For the Ambassador (Eyes Only). We entirely agree with your estimate of conversation with Molotov and consider that you took exactly the right attitude. We feel it is absolutely essential that there should be no weakening in the position of the Western Powers in the face of these obvious Soviet tactics. Bevin also shares this view and Massigli tells Douglas that he is confident his Government will take the same position.

If the Soviet counterdraft, as we anticipate, departs in any important particular from the lines of the proposed announcement agreed to by the Three Powers,2 presented to Molotov last night, you should inform him that there has obviously been a decided change in the Soviet attitude since your discussion with Stalin on Monday night as the new Soviet counterdraft departs materially from the basic formula Stalin suggested and that while you will submit this new Soviet counterdraft to your Government, you are confident it will not prove acceptable.

In your next discussion with Molotov, we feel there are three fundamental points which must be brought home with great firmness to the Soviet Government.

1. The United States (U.K.–France) are in Berlin by right and not by Soviet sufferance. The US Government (U.K.–France) therefore intend not only to stay in Berlin but to maintain their rights and to discharge their obligation in regard to Greater Berlin.

2. The US Government (U.K.–French) cannot accept therefore any arrangement as to currency in Berlin which would in effect turn over to the Soviet authorities economic or other control of the western sectors which is the responsibility of the US Government (the three Governments) to exercise.

3. The US Government (U.K.–French) cannot accept as any precondition for negotiation the suspension or modification of any measures in force or contemplated for the Western Zones.

As regards the currency in Berlin, it should be obvious that unless it is the Soviet intention to utilize the introduction of the Soviet mark as a device for taking over economic control of the western sectors of Berlin, certain practical arrangements to safeguard the rights and obligations of the Western Powers in Berlin are necessary before the Soviet mark can be accepted as sole currency. This point should be stressed with Molotov and you might consider asking him bluntly the question whether or not it is the Soviet intention to take over unilateral control of the western sectors through the medium of the Soviet mark. If he denies any such intention, then it should be difficult for him to deny the necessity of the practical arrangements covering the points set forth in our 889.3 If he admits this is their intention or merely reiterates that Berlin is part of the Soviet zone, you should make it clear that this is inadmissible and cannot be accepted for the reasons set forth in point two above. Such action could permit substitution of another form of duress for the blockade. Our proposed arrangements are orderly and designed to prevent a currency war in Berlin. If deadlocked on the question of “simultaneous action” we could agree as stated in our 889 to a brief delay to permit the Military Commanders to work out the necessary details.

We feel it would be dangerous to raise or even discuss reported Soviet moves in their zone to set up a separate Government or to draw up a separate constitution. To raise this point might offer Molotov the opportunity to suggest that both sides should cancel on an equal basis all such measures in their respective zones as a preliminary step to Four Power negotiations. We feel it probable that the Soviets have permitted the announcement of such measures in their zone precisely for this purpose. If Molotov himself should raise the point with this in view, it might be wise for you to avoid discussion on the grounds that any such measures are not germane to the central issue which is the blockade measures still in force in Berlin.

It is probable that the Soviet counterdraft and Molotov in any discussion will emphasize the point that our agreed draft introduced new conditions in connection with the Soviet currency. You could point out in rebuttal the considerations in regard to currency referred to above and also your statement to Stalin (your 1508, August 34 ) to the effect that none of the representatives in Moscow were experts on currency and could not discuss the detailed arrangements necessary on this point.

As to the London Decisions, while making it absolutely clear that we will undertake no commitment, direct or indirect, for the suspension or modification of these measures as a pre-condition for negotiation, you might repeat your statement to Molotov as reported in your 15445 on this point emphasizing that these measures are not only not final in themselves but do not in any sense preclude Four Power discussions and agreement on Germany. You might cite the portion of the communiqué issued after the London discussion on June 76 which states in one place “The delegations consider that the people in the (German) states will wish to establish a constitution with provisions which will allow all the German states to subscribe as soon as circumstances permit.” Further, the last paragraph of the communiqué states: “The present recommendations, which in no way preclude and on the contrary should facilitate eventual Four Power agreement on the German problem, are designed to solve the urgent political and economic problems arising out of the present situation in Germany. Because of the previous failure to reach comprehensive Four Power decisions on Germany, the measures recommended mark a step forward in the policy which the Powers represented at these talks are determined to follow with respect to the economic reconstruction of Western Europe, including Germany, and with respect to the establishment of a basis for the participation of a democratic Germany in the community of free peoples.” You might point out that Soviet insistence on this point would therefore obstruct rather than facilitate Four Power negotiations.7

We feel there is a certain danger in becoming involved in protracted negotiations with Molotov on the currency or other questions of substance in view of our declared determination not to negotiate under pressure of the blockade. You are therefore authorized in your discretion to ask for an interview with Stalin at any point that you consider this wise in order to avoid protracted negotiations with Molotov.

Marshall

1 Repeated to London as 3131, Paris as 3024, and Berlin as 1403.

2 Transmitted in telegram 1528, August 5, from Moscow, p. 1016 [Pg. 1016 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601].

3 August 3, p. 1008 [Pg. 1008 is part of Doc. 596].

4  Ante, p. 999 [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 594].

5  Supra.

6  Ante, p. 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210].

7 In telegram 911, August 7, to Moscow, not printed, the Department of State informed Ambassador Smith that it could not accept postponement of the implementation of the decisions of the London Conference on Germany as a condition for agreement on Berlin. Should the Soviet Government, however, insist that its view on postponement he made a part of any announcement on Berlin, the Department would reluctantly agree provided language was added to such announcement explaining that the decisions reached at the London Conference on Germany had hot precluded subsequent Four Power agreements and suspension of the implementation of the decisions could not be acceptable as a condition of the agreement to negotiate about Berlin. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–648)

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–948: Telegram

[Document 604]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Moscow, August 9, 1948—11 p. m.

1569. Eyes Only for Secretary: Eyes Only for Murphy, Clay, Douglas and Caffery. At another three-hour meeting with Molotov this afternoon he handed us1 Soviet counterproposal (see mytel 1570 immediately following2 ) asserting that he had used our draft3 as basis, making only such changes as Soviet Govt considered necessary. After short study Roberts and Chataigneau asked the following questions: 1. Why had the same date been stated in paragraphs 1, 2 and 4?

2. What was meant by separate conference in paragraph 3 and was this reference to the Military Governors in Berlin?

3. Did proposals for currency changes in paragraph 4 imply unilateral Soviet decision, or would they result from Four Power agreement?

4. Why was there no mention of quadripartite control in paragraph 4 in view of fundamental importance attached to this matter by western Governments?

5. Why did paragraph 3 contain reference to exchange of statements regarding London Conference decisions since Stalin has specified this was not to be a condition?

6. What was the significance of concluding words of paragraph 1 “in accordance with the present agreement” which did not appear in paragraphs 2 or 4?

Brief of Molotov’s replies are as follows: 1. Any convenient date would do, but it should be specified.

2. Molotov rather evaded this question and suggested that more precise proposals might be made by us.

3. Since the currency was Soviet Zone currency, it was natural and proper it should be introduced under Soviet authority.

4. Quadripartite control had ceased as result of London decisions. If agreement were reached for the restoration of quadripartite control in Germany as a whole then it might also be restored in Berlin.

5. Importance of this point had already been stressed and wording summarized discussion which had taken place between us and which had already been discussed in detail in press of US, UK and France. It was proper therefore to state the position publicly although he did not exclude covering the matter in a separate exchange of notes.

6. This phrase was interrelated with paragraph 4 to ensure removal of traffic restrictions simultaneously with the currency change.

After this discussion I asked Molotov: 1. Was the principal reason for including the added reference in paragraph 3 to the wish of the Soviet Govt in connection with the London decisions, a matter which we had understood from Stalin’s statement was not insisted upon as a condition in connection with our discussions, fact that reports and speculation in connection therewith had appeared in the press; or

2. Was the second sentence of this part of paragraph 3 beginning “in this connection” simply verbiage Molotov wished our govts to accept; or

3. Was this his interpretation of the oral statement given by me and indorsed by my colleagues on the occasion of our last meeting.

If the first were the case I could say that my govt had taken the trouble to determine the source of the article on this subject which appeared in the US papers. The origin of this source was not in the US Govt, consequently so far as my govt was concerned this part of the discussion still remained, like the rest, an official secret. If the second were the case, I wished to remind him that on the occasion of our previous discussion I had emphasized that the western powers could not accept as precondition for negotiations the suspension or modification of any measures in force or contemplated for the western zones.

As to the third, there was no question of the meaning of the oral statement I had made on this occasion. Fortunately I had with me the note from which I had made this statement, which I would now repeat. After repeating my remarks as per Deptel 898 August 44 I asked Pavlov if in the interest of clarity he would like to make a copy. Molotov said this would be a good idea. We made it quite clear that this was a fundamental issue. Molotov also insisted on the importance of the matter from the Soviet point of view and repeated that if there was any misunderstanding as to the exact wording, the sense of which he had interpreted as indicated in the Soviet draft, this wording could be modified to give its correct meaning. He suggested again that we might accept this under some other form which might be agreed upon between us. We have given him no encouragement whatever and restated the position of our govts.

Then said that I would ask one more question which, while blunt, was extremely pertinent. Was it or was it not the intention of the Soviet Govt to take over unilateral control of the western sectors of Berlin through the introduction of the Soviet mark? His reaction to this was interesting as he apparently did not know whether to reply angrily or to sidestep the question. After a moment he sidestepped by saying in effect that the Soviet position had been made very clear in previous discussions. He then amplified at some length his answers to previous questions (a summarization of his statements from the detailed minutes will be sent tomorrow5 ). When he completed his remarks I said that the Soviet draft seems to us to be a decided change from what we gathered to be the Soviet attitude at the time of our discussions with Stalin. It appears to depart materially from our concept of the basic formula which Stalin suggested at our first meeting. We would, of course, submit this new draft to our govts, but I felt bound to state that in my judgment it would not prove acceptable. Molotov was entitled to know my reasons for this conclusion, which were briefly: As repeatedly emphasized previously, the position of my govt and the Govts of UK and France was that the western powers were in Berlin by right and not by Soviet sufferance. They intended to remain in Berlin, to maintain their rights, and to discharge their obligations in regard to greater Berlin. Therefore, it was quite impossible for the western powers to accept any arrangements with regard to Berlin’s currency which would in effect turn over to the Soviet authorities economic or other control of the western sectors which it was our responsibility to exercise. We would be naive indeed to agree to a proposal for opening traffic communications for freight and personnel into Berlin, and at the same time accept a position with regard to currency in Berlin which would make it impossible for us to continue to carry out our responsibilities there. I had already stated and re-emphasized that the western powers could not accept as a precondition for negotiation the suspension or modification of the London decisions. To do so would be to accept duress of a different kind, and would neither relieve the present situation nor create the necessary conditions for reasonable quadripartite discussion. If, however, the Soviet Govt was sincere in its intentions with regard to negotiations and did not have as its objective the securing of unilateral control in Berlin, it was probable that some currency formula might be found.

Molotov said that the position of the Soviet Govt had also been made clear. The French and British representatives associated themselves with my statement and made some additions, emphasizing our fundamental objection to the Soviet draft and maintaining our right to make additional comments on other details later.

Molotov replied with a lengthy explanation and defense of Soviet position which evaded all our objections and followed very much the lines of his previous statement (Embtel 1558 August 76 ). He then asked why we had not raised the issue of quadripartite control of currency in our talk with Stalin August 2. To this we replied that the opening discussion was on matters of principle and not on questions of detail. However, I reminded him that our opening statement clearly defined our position on quadripartite control in Berlin. We declared then that we had no intention of abandoning our responsibilities in connection with Four Power control of Berlin, and this opening statement governed all subsequent points in the discussion and must be considered as applying thereto. Molotov continued to deny that we had any claim to exercise quadripartite authority in Berlin until such authority had been restored in Germany as a whole. He argued at length that for practical reasons there could be only one controlling authority for currency in Berlin and that adequate safeguards were provided in Soviet draft to meet our objections in regard to non-discrimination, trade, occupation cost, etc, etc., particularly with regard to the latter. He reaffirmed the Soviet contention that occupation costs should be drawn from the east and west zones and Berlin be freed thereof. He refused to admit that any useful purpose would be served by the (Military Governors or their representatives discussing currency of other matters in Berlin since these and other questions had long ago been taken over by the several govts. He reiterated his contention that we should settle these matters here. Our incapacity to discuss currency matters was reaffirmed here and restated half a dozen times during the conversation. We also restated our govt’s positions with regard to quadripartite control and on the question of currency, and concluded by saying again that we would report the Soviet counterdraft together with Molotov’s explanations, making it quite clear at the same time that in our opinion his proposals would not be found acceptable.

The atmosphere was generally that of the last meeting. There was no acrimony or overt hostility and Molotov was patient under cross examination. He understands our position, I am sure, as we understand his and if nothing else is accomplished the Soviet objectives are emerging with great clarity. However, I do not think that Molotov has said his last word.

I am not exactly clear in my own mind as to what our next move should be and will comment further on this aspect tomorrow after reviewing the full transcript of the conversation. My present thought is that we should try to go to Stalin next time but my colleagues may prefer to have one more round with Molotov.

Smith

1 The meeting was held at 5 p. m. at the Kremlin and was attended by Smith (U.S.), Chataigneau and Boyer de Fonscolombe (France), Roberts and Lunghi (U.K.), and Molotov, Smirnov, Pavlov and Yerofeyev (U.S.S.R.).

2 The telegram under reference here is not printed. For the text of Molotov’s counterdraft, see The Berlin Crisis, pp. 23–24 or Cmd. 7534, p. 26.

3 See telegram 1528, August 5, from Moscow, p. 1016 [Pg. 1016 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601].

4 Not printed; it transmitted the special supplementary instructions to Ambassador Smith printed in The Berlin Crisis, pp. 21–22.

5 The summarization of Molotov’s statements was transmitted in telegram 1577, August 10, from Moscow, not printed (740.00119) Control (Germany)/8–1048).

6 Not printed; for a summary of Molotov’s previous statement see telegram 1544, August 6, from Moscow, p. 1018 [Pg. 1018 is part of Doc. 602].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740:00119 Control (Germany)/8–1048: Telegram

[Document 605]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, August 10, 1948—12 p. m.

925. For the Ambassador (Eyes Only). We find, as you correctly informed Molotov, the Soviet counterdraft2 unacceptable in its present form. It is apparent from this draft and from the statements of Stalin and Molotov on the subject that the Soviet Govt is seeking to establish its thesis that quadripartite control of Germany and consequently of Berlin as well has lapsed and therefore whatever agreement may be reached in the Moscow discussions will constitute the only Four Power Agreement concerning Berlin. This position is of course completely unacceptable to this Government. We have maintained and will continue to maintain that mere Soviet assertion cannot vitiate the quadripartite agreements, including those defining the rights and duties of the Western Powers in Berlin, We feel it extremely important that this point be covered in order to avoid any misunderstanding in the future as otherwise the Soviet authorities will probably maintain that the Three Western Powers in effect accepted the Soviet thesis that the previous Four Power agreements concerning Germany and Berlin are no longer valid and that failing any Four Power agreements at the Council of Foreign Ministers or elsewhere we have no rights in Berlin other than those accorded by the agreements set forth in the proposed announcement. It therefore seems necessary to us clearly to reaffirm that there has been no derogation of our rights in Berlin by our agreement to a practical solution of the blockade and currency problems. This could be accomplished either by an addition to the communiqué or in a written communication sent by the three Western representatives to the Soviet Government to the effect that the present agreement deals only with the restoration of communications, the introduction of a new currency in Berlin and the resumption of Four Power negotiations and is without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Four Occupying Powers. If done by written communication, the latter should specify that the agreement is without prejudice to the rights, immunities and obligations defined by prior agreement and should be sent immediately prior to the issue of communiqué.3

We agree that a further approach to Molotov be made, but failing agreement, the issue should then be taken to Stalin without delay. Before you approach Stalin, however, we shall wish to send you further guidance.

As to the text of the communiqué, we concur fully in Bevin’s observations (re London’s 3602 repeated to you 1794 ) and have the following suggestions to make concerning the text.

It is clear that the offer to remove restrictions with respect to transport of goods and persons in paragraphs 1 and 2 should not be limited to those “which have been imposed after the announcement of currency reform” and these words should be deleted as many of the restrictions to which we object were imposed before currency reform and this statement appears to be in justification of the Soviet right to impose restrictions. As we recognize that some regulation of movement of goods and persons is probably required, we would be willing; to agree to the following as a substitute “which have been imposed since March 1, 1948,5 including those imposed after the announcement of currency reform”. The words “in accordance with the present agreement” must also be deleted.

In paragraph 8, the proposal that the CFM should negotiate questions relating to Berlin seems a further manifestation of the Soviet desire to reject the principle of quadripartite control through bypassing the established machinery dealing with such questions. We therefore prefer in the first instance that discussions relating to Berlin should be the responsibility of the Four Military Commanders. Our original suggestion for this paragraph therefore seems preferable.

We note strong British opposition to the second part of the third paragraph and can agree, to its omission unless this point alone prevents agreement, in which case we would be ready to urge British to accept the Soviet suggestion provided the last sentence were deleted and language along the lines contained in our 9116 were substituted.

As regards paragraph 4 on currency the absence of guarantees of four-power supervision of its use renders the present text completely inadequate. Furthermore, the proposal regarding the operation of trade by the German Export-Import Agency of the Soviet Zone would put the Berlin economy completely in Soviet hands. We are asking Clay to give you urgently a suggested rewording of paragraph 4 which will meet our requirements yet retain for tactical reasons if possible as much of the Soviet wording as may be suitable. Please await his comments before taking up matter again with Molotov.

Any redraft should in our opinion contain provision along the lines of our original proposal7 to insure adequate four-power supervision (1) over availability of currency, (2) to prevent discrimination between the sectors in currency and credit matters, and (3) to assure non-discriminatory trade with Western Zones and foreign countries. Assumption of occupation costs in Berlin for Western Allies by Western Zones is illogical and unsound. We are prepared to support Berlin economy by imports not only of food but also raw materials and are entitled to occupation costs from Berlin taxes.

In discussing the question of currency you may wish to make the following clarification, of our position.

It appears from Molotov’s remarks about the alleged intent of the Western nations to “establish control over the currency of the Soviet Zone” that some confusion has arisen concerning our real objective. We do not insist on “control” over the total issuance of Soviet Zone currency. What we are basically seeking is agreement on quadripartite regulation of the use of Soviet Zone currency within Berlin and in trade. The former would provide for non-discrimination as to availability of currency throughout Berlin through equitable budgetary and credit procedures. The latter type of agreement is necessary for the orderly conduct of trade between Berlin on the one hand, the Western and Eastern zones and third countries on the other.

As previously stressed, we cannot recognize Berlin as part of the Soviet Zone and it follows from this that we cannot accept the conduct of Berlin’s external trade through the medium of the Soviet Zone’s trade monopoly. Because of their supplies of food and raw materials to Berlin, the Western nations have a substantial interest in the city, and in seeking agreement on the regulation of trade matters they are asking for no more than an assurance concerning the proper and efficacious use of their contributions. The economic well-being of Berlin depends on the maximum freedom of its trade with the other parts of Germany. In the interest of simplification and in order to obviate a currency war, the Western nations are willing to accept a Soviet zone mark as the sole circulating medium but four-power supervision of its use in Berlin is essential to establish a satisfactory economic relationship between Berlin and the rest of Germany.8

Marshall

1 Repeated to London as 3171, to Paris as 3061, and to Berlin as 1421.

2 For the text of the “counterdraft” under reference, see The Berlin Crisis, pp. 23–24 or Cmd. 7534, p. 26.

3 Telegram 931, August 11, to Moscow, not printed, observed that it was doubtful whether a simple, unilateral statement by the three Western Powers to the Soviet Government would be sufficient to protect the Western position in Berlin. Ambassador Smith was therefore instructed not to compromise on the issue but to reserve it for discussion with Stalin. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1148)

4 Not printed; it contained the text of Foreign Secretary Bevin’s instructions to Roberts regarding the Soviet “counterdraft”. Bevin found the Soviet draft generally unacceptable. He felt that the Western Powers should remain absolutely firm on the fundamental principles of the rights to be in Berlin, the quadripartite control of currency in Berlin, and the need for the removal of the blockade. Bevin feared that prolongation of the discussions might constitute negotiation under duress and might result in fundamental issues being obscured. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1048)

5 Telegram 3631, August 11, from London, not printed, reported that Bevin favored an earlier date, possibly December 1, 1947 (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1148). Telegram 2009, August 12, from Berlin, not printed, reported that General Clay and Ambassador Murphy shared Bevin’s objection to the March 1 date. They suggested there be no qualifying date or time limit at all. (740.00119 Control (Germany) 8/1248)

6 Not printed; see footnote 7 to telegram 910, August 7, to Moscow, p. 1021 [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603].

7 See telegram 1528, August 5, from Moscow, p. 1016 [Pg. 1016 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601].

8 In his telegram 3635, August 11, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas reported that Bevin was pleased with these instructions to Smith which coincided so closely with his instructions to Roberts. Bevin authorized Roberts to combine his instructions with those of Smith and make a common approach to Molotov (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1148). In his telegram 4162, August 11, from Paris, not printed, Ambassador Caffery reported that the French Foreign Ministry had instructed Chataigneau along these same lines and had authorized him to work out an agreed position with Smith and Roberts (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1148).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1148: Telegram

[Document 606]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent Frankfurt, August 11, 1948—11 a. m.

90. Eyes Only for the Secretary. Reference Moscow’s 292 to Berlin (1570 to Dept, 238 to Paris1 ).

Clay’s comment via Army (personal for Draper) in which I concurred follows: “Reurad W87308.2 As I understand Molotov’s proposal3 it is a demand for further abandonment of western allied position in Berlin. It takes over complete control of currency and then adds a measure long desired by Soviets which is control of Berlin exports by Soviet export agency. This would, of course, shut us off completely from any payment for imports into Berlin from western zones. It was not one of Stalin’s conditions.

“Moreover, assumption of occupation costs in Berlin for western allies by western zones is illogical and unsound. We are prepared to support Berlin economy by imports not only of food but also raw materials and are entitled to occupation costs from Berlin taxes. Otherwise we will be feeding two million Germans so they may produce for the Soviet administration.

“In exchange for all this, we are offered the return to status prior to currency reform in which we could not move military passenger trains without Soviet inspection, military freight trains without both inspection and permission, and could use highway only subject to Soviet inspection and permission. Of course, this proves again currency reform merely a pretext and the acceptance of such a status is absolutely impossible. While we had to stop our trains and convoys to avoid accepting Soviet requirements, we have not accepted it and to accept Molotov’s proposal would do so. It is unthinkable that we could accept any lifting of blockade which is not an unconditioned withdrawal of blockade measures.

“There seems little to add to previous comment on Molotov’s requirement now that we stop western governmental measures. As you know, I am convinced that to do so would prove disastrous to our objectives in Germany and in Europe. It is the one thing I can think of which to abandon would be worse than to abandon Berlin.

“I can only suggest that we advise Molotov why we cannot accept his proposal and demand once again to see Stalin to insist on a proposal which does accord with latter’s suggestion. If these meetings fail to produce results, it seems to me we cannot lose further time and prestige in Moscow but must proceed with the United Nations route.”

A further thought occurs to me regarding tactical position. If current Moscow conversations end with the Molotov text merely disapproved by west and if that text is published by USSR, task of explaining basic issues to public may be difficult. Soviet text is plausible and to the uninitiated may appear most reasonable. Therefore I hope a revised text again presenting western viewpoint will be submitted to Molotov for the purpose of the record.4

Sent Dept 90, repeated Moscow 1 (Eyes Only Smith), Dept pass London 28 (Eyes Only Douglas), Paris 25 (Eyes Only Caffery).

Murphy

1 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1024 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 604].

2 Not printed.

3 For the text of the Soviet “counter-draft” under reference here, see The Berlin Crisis, pp. 23–24 or Cmd. 7534, p. 26.

4  In telegram 1589, August 11, from Moscow, not printed, Smith admitted that Clay’s view might be the right one, but added: “We could, of course, break off at any time but my own opinion is that general tactical line agreed upon by three Western governments is well advised, that favorable result is still possible though not probable, and that four or five more days here may still do some good and can certainly do no harm. Do not believe any loss in prestige involved. It is a long time since Molotov has heard so much plain speaking.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1148)

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1148: Telegram

[Document 607]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

top secret   us urgent Berlin, August 11, 1948—9 p. m.

879. Eyes Only for Smith.1 Department’s 1421 to Berlin.2 Following from General Glay:

State has asked me to wire you direct a possible version of paragraph 4 of Molotov’s draft,3 sticking as closely to his words as possible. I suggest the following:

In the sentence which begins “the regulation of currency, et cetera” these words would be changed to read “the regulation of currency and credit in Berlin shall be undertaken by the Stadt Kontor under the general supervision of the Four Power Kommandatura and shall be gradually extended, et cetera”. The remainder of this sentence would remain unchanged until the words “through the German export-import agency of the Soviet Zone” are reached. I suggest the substitution for these words of the following: “Under trade agreements to be worked out promptly between the export-import agencies of the western zones and of the Soviet Zone”.

I would suggest the following change for the last phrase in this sentence which begins with “occupation cost” so that it will word as follows: “Occupation costs resulting from the presence of forces in Berlin shall be met from taxes collected in Berlin, provided these occupation costs do not exceed the trade deficit between Berlin and the occupation zones, with such occupation costs as are in excess of trade deficits being met by the respective zones of occupation.”

The reasoning behind these changes lies in maintaining at least a semblance of quadripartite control and responsibility and to prevent our own forces and the western sectors from being completely in the hands of the Soviet Zone economy. The Stadt Kontor is a city-wide bank of Berlin, organized originally by the Soviet military administration. It is competent to control currency regulation and credit within Berlin, obtaining its funds from the so-called German bank of emission of the Soviet Zone. If this city-wide bank with branches throughout Berlin is supervised by the Kommandatura or by representatives of the four powers, it could satisfactorily be charged with the responsibilities which Mr. Molotov proposes to place in the German bank of emission which is not a Berlin bank.

Obviously if we placed all exports from Berlin under the control of the German export-import agency of the Soviet Zone, that agency would have complete hold of the Berlin economy. On the other hand, there is no reason why a satisfactory trade relationship could not be worked out between the export-import agencies of the western zones and of the Soviet Zone, with the exports from Berlin to be based upon a requirement to meet certain import obligations to include raw materials.

Certainly during the period in which the western zones are providing at least one-half of the food for two million Germans, with the remaining half being provided by the western occupying powers, it is too much to expect the western zones to also absorb occupation costs. Our willingness to bring in food and raw materials with the blockade lifted will provide an active Berlin economy which can well afford to pay the taxes necessary to meet the relatively minor occupation costs of the western powers.

Sent Moscow as 379, repeated to Department Eyes Only for the Secretary as 2006, to London Eyes Only for Douglas as 458, Paris Eyes Only for Caffery as 464.

Murphy

1 The source text used here is a copy from the Department of State files.

2 Same as telegram 925, August 10, to Moscow, p. 1028 [Pg. 1028 is part of Doc. 605].

3 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1024 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 604].

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1148: Telegram

[Document 608]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, August 11, 1948—7 p. m.

1427. Personal for Murphy. We are moved by further apprehensions about question of principle discussed in opening paragraphs of Deptel 14212 to seek advice of yourself and Clay. In most of their recent actions in Berlin Soviets have been proceeding on theory that quadripartite control of the city has lapsed. This is doubtless their underlying objection to four-power supervision of use of Sov Zone currency. Assuming, however, agreement is reached in Moscow lifting blockade and providing for four-power supervision of currency, are there any other forms of quadripartite control over Berlin affairs the absence of which Sovs could exploit to render our position untenable? In other words, is revival of Kommandatura necessary from practical standpoint? One view here is that with lifting of blockade and establishment of currency supervision the Western Nations could successfully make a go of it in Berlin, particularly since they would control three-fourths of city and popular sentiment would be on their side. On the other hand, this could lead to split of city. In event of a CFM deadlock on Germany Soviets could harass Western Nations by manipulation of currency issue and latters’ counter-measures would doubtless produce an imposition of blockade on grounds of abrogation of Moscow (agreement which Soviets would probably claim was sole basis of Western Allies presence in Berlin. In Moscow discussions we have asserted principle of quadripartite rights and as you note will continue to do so, but we have been considering whether from practical standpoint of operating city and from standpoint of safeguarding our legal and moral position for the future we can afford not to insist at Moscow on a commitment to which the Soviets would be a party regarding the maintenance of quadripartite control of Berlin including revival of the Kommandatura.

Would appreciate as soon as possible considered opinion of yourself and Clay since this is a question we may wish to take up when we go to Stalin.3

Marshall

1 Repeated to London as 3176, Paris as 3072, and Moscow as 930.

2 Same as telegram 925, August 10, to Moscow, p. 1028 [Pg. 1028 is part of Doc. 605].

3 In telegram 2015, August 12, from Berlin, not printed, Murphy replied that both he and Clay felt the western powers could handle the operation of the western sectors of Berlin with the blockade removed and currency under quadripartite control. He distinguished the practical operation and administration of the city, however, from the legal and moral position of the western powers in Berlin, and recommended that at Moscow Smith adhere to the idea that the agreements, which provided the legal basis for the western powers, had not been rescinded. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1248)

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1248: Telegram

[Document 609]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Moscow, August 12, 1948—11 p. m.

1609. We met Molotov and Smirnov at 5 today in what was, at the beginning, a rather cooler atmosphere than before.1 We began by stating that we had now received instructions from our respective governments and that Soviet proposals in their present form were unacceptable.

In previous conferences each of us had directed particular attention to paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Soviet draft, stating they raised issues which our Govts regarded as of fundamental importance. These would be referred to later. I then proceeded make agreed comments on Soviet draft on behalf three representatives paragraph by paragraph, as contained in my immediately following telegram.2

Molotov’s reply was very cursory in regard to the first two paragraphs. He suggested words “in conformity with what is set forth below” as substitution for last phrase of paragraph 1, and remarked that satisfactory alternative wording could probably be found which would more specifically define restrictions which were to be removed, in lieu of the wording to which we objected in paragraph 1 and 2. He then reverted to paragraph 4. Today, however, he did not as on previous occasions reject our position in Berlin nor did he insist that quadripartite control had lapsed nor maintain any demand for the Soviet wording of this paragraph. His conversation seemed to me to be generally exploratory, in order to determine whether or not we had reached our definite and final bargaining position. As the talks continued he grew progressively more reasonable and more mellow (if such a word can be appropriately applied to Molotov). We continued to press strongly the point that our entire discussions really hinged on one basic factor—our right to be in Berlin and to continue quadripartite regulation and control of the flow and use of the new currency when introduced. Molotov never directly challenged any of our statements in this connection. He also readily admitted that certain practical questions would have to be settled in Berlin. The point to which he reverted most frequently and on which he seemed to concentrate today was the specific mention of a date on which the currency change would be made and the restrictions lifted. Discussion of this subject became involved and protracted and finally, to bring matters to a bead, we suggested the possibility that a tentative date be accepted toward which planning would begin immediately in Berlin by the four military commanders, pointing out that until the machinery for the control and use of the Soviet mark was established any date was meaningless. This subject also Molotov did not directly challenge or reject; although he criticized it as vague. It was our opinion that at the last he wilfully misunderstood it.

Molotov then discussed occupation costs briefly, taking the attitude that he could not see any reason in our objection to the Soviet formula or to exempting Berlin from cost of occupation since all Four Powers were treated alike. An interesting feature of this phase of the discussion was that again he failed to challenge our juridical right, stating that Soviet proposals in this matter did not affect juridical rights of either side to be in Berlin, and that the problem was purely a practical one. We took note of this, and our reply to his comments are as indicated in the statement under Paragraph 4 at the end of my immediately following telegram. Our final statement was that the solution of question of occupation costs was dependent on solution of basic question which remained to be dealt with in first part of that paragraph. This brought us back to the question of currency, and after lengthy discussion Molotov suggested as an alternate solution that the Soviet Government might be willing to agree to the issue of the same quantity of Soviet zone marks for the Western sectors of Berlin as have been issued or introduced in Berlin by Western Powers, arguing that this would dispose of the technical question. We rejected this on the ground that it did not cover our basic requirement which was quadripartite control of currency in Berlin, and did not provide enough currency for our present and future operations.

After this Molotov again came back to question of a fixed date for the introduction of Soviet currency in Berlin and the lifting of traffic restrictions, and proposed that we draw up a list of questions relating to the flow of currency to be discussed by the representatives of the Soviet Union and Western Powers in Berlin. We replied that we would be perfectly willing to accept a tentative date and in fact proposed such discussion, but that the Commanders in Berlin must be provided with terms of reference which covered the basic points on which we insisted, and the technical points which we felt must be settled with regard to new currency. There was still outstanding the major question of Four Power control in Berlin and until this was decided, nothing could be done. We said it would be worse to fix a date and fail to meet it than to leave things as they are now.

We then asked Molotov if he could meet us on the question of Four Power regulation of currency. He evaded direct reply to this by reverting to the second part of Paragraph 3 (London Agreements) although not aggressively. We repeated our Governments’ past objection to the Soviet wording on the lines of Paragraph 3 in the following telegram. He then suggested substituting for the second part of Paragraph 3 our oral statement of August 6.3 We reiterated that our instructions were specific and our Governments could not agree to any statements of this nature being inserted in a communiqué representing preliminary agreement. However, I said I was willing to ask my Government if the oral exchange between Generalissimo Stalin and ourselves might be confirmed confidentially by written notes, providing agreement was reached on all other points.

Roberts then suggested that insertion of this material would unbalance the document, pointing out that Articles I and II were to our mutual advantage, and insofar as the Soviet Government might think I benefitted us more than II benefitted them, this was more than balanced by Paragraph 4. Paragaph 3 would, we hoped, be to our mutual advantage. Molotov agreed, and at this point for a few minutes I thought that he was going to accept and conclude the conference. However, he recovered himself and rediscussed some of the parts of Paragraph 4, during which occasion was taken to point out that he would have to meet us on the basic point of principle under 4 if we were even to consider his proposal under 3, emphasizing again that unless our basic requirement for Four Power control and regulation of currency in Berlin were accepted, the rest of the document would automatically fall.

Molotov terminated the conversation shortly afterward by saying that he would report our statements to his Government, who would consider them carefully. We said we would report his comments and proposals and would inform him when we were ready for further discussions.

We are now in the position of each considering the other’s proposals. We expected a worse session. I was suprised when Molotov, confronted with what amounted to practically a complete and rather forcible rejection of almost the entire Soviet draft, reacted rather mildly. As said before, there seemed to be one time when he was almost ready to accept. He was handed a rather bitter pill and, if he did not swallow it, at least he did not spit it out. Our guess is that he will report to the Politburo tonight the fact that quadripartite control of currency and the economy of Berlin is essential if any agreement is to be reached, and will get the final decision as to whether or not this can be accepted in some form or other. We are undecided now as to whether we should have another go with Molotov or ask to see Stalin as the final act, and would be most grateful for your advice. My personal feeling is that if there is ever going to be an agreement, probably our best chance is with Stalin at our next meeting.4

Smith

1 This meeting was attended by Smith (U.S.), Roberts and Lunghi (U.K.), Chataigneau and Boyer de Fonscolombe (France), and Molotov, Smirnov, Pavlov, and Yerofeyev (U.S.S.R.).

2 Telegram 1610, not printed. For the text of Ambassador Smith’s statement, see The Berlin Crisis, pp. 26–80 or Cmd. 7584, pp. 27–80.

3 Presumably the reference here is to Roberts’ oral statement of August 6; for text, see Cmd. 7534, p. 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12].

4 In telegram 942, August 13, to Moscow, not printed, the Department of State opined that there was a good chance that Molotov would accept the Western draft communiqué virtually in toto if the Western position remained completely firm. The Department preferred that Ambassador Smith make one further approach to Molotov which could either result in agreement or could be used to make a request to see Stalin again (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1348). In his telegram 4187, August 13, from Paris, not printed, Ambassador Caffery reported that the French Foreign Ministry held similar views (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1348). In telegram 3688, August 14, from London, not printed, Ambassador Douglas reported that Bevin thought it would be wise to meet with Molotov again before meeting with Stalin (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1448).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1348: Telegram

[Document 610]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, August 13, 1948—7 p. m.

2032. Although semblance of unified Berlin city government still being maintained, unity is only fiction in most important branches of government. Except for outward appearances, split has already taken place in police and food departments and to great extent in city postal administration; it furthermore appears inevitable in labor, economics and financial departments.

I. Police. After suspension of Police President Markgraf by Magistrat on July 26, Soviets continued recognition of him as Berlin police president. Western military governments upheld suspension and recognized as acting police president of Berlin Markgraf’s former deputy, Stumm. Latter established headquarters in US sector because Markgraf remained in physical possession of old police praesidium located in Soviet sector. Neither recognizes orders of other. Thus two separate police systems are actually functioning, one under Stumm for western sectors, other under Markgraf for Soviet sector.

II. Food. Food department of Magistrat is still under nominal direction of its regular chief, Fuellsack, who, according to information subsequent to that reported in mytel 1993 August 11 (repeated London 455, Paris 461, Moscow 3761 ), still occupies his office in Magistrate central food office located in Soviet sector, thus theoretically still supervising food distribution for all sectors. Actually, however, the separate sub-section of central food office, which was illegally set up under Letsch by unilateral Soviet order, controls all food for Soviet sector while food distribution for western sectors is being taken over by office presently being established in British sector. Latter office headed by Anton Schoepke, LDP, deputy to Fuellsack in central food office.

III. Deutsche Post administration. Contrary to legitimate procedure, Dr. Schroeder, head of Soviet zone postal administration, has been issuing orders to Soviet sector post offices which, like those in western sectors, are supposed to take orders from Berlin Deutsche Post headquarters located in British sector. On Schroeder’s orders, for example, an office was established in Soviet sector where beginning August 3 western sector residents must go if they want to effect money transfers with Soviet sector or Soviet zone, all transactions to be handled in east marks. Furthermore Soviets blocked all western sector postal checking and savings accounts in eastern marks, refusing payments to western sector residents from their eastern mark accounts. Because of this a special postal checking account and money order service has been established in western sectors for both eastern and western marks. Split in Berlin Deutsche Post thus already widened to considerable extent.

IV. Labor. As reported mytel 1974 August 9 (repeated London 446, Paris 450, Moscow 3662 ), Soviets have ordered Magistrat to recognize only those wage agreements negotiated by SED–FDGB and refuse recognize those negotiated by FDGB (UGO). Western military governments and Magistrat previously and subsequently ordered labor department of Magistrat to recognize FDGB (UGO) contracts. LPD head of labor department, Waldemar Schmidt (SED), has refused to accept these orders declaring he will follow only Soviet orders. Situation as yet undetermined but split in labor department appears inevitable.

V. Social insurance. In view of Soviet action last week blocking payments to western sectors, and western military governments reply August 11 which blocked transfers of funds to Soviet sector, split in Social Insurance Institute of Berlin (VAB) seems unavoidable due to necessity of handling separate receipts and payments.

VI. Economics and finance. The German Economic Commission (DWK) for Soviet Zone, and agencies subsidiary to it, have gradually withdrawn most of Soviet sector economy from Magistrat control. Trusteeship administration for sequestered enterprises (Deutsche Treuhand Gesellschaft), which was established some months ago under direct control of Soviet Military Government for Berlin but is now under control of DWK, administers every major Soviet sector manufacturing firm which is not a Soviet AG. German currency bank (Deutsche Notenbank) which is also under DWK and is agency which issued new eastern currency, has largely taken over Soviet sector credit control in alliance with central office of city bank (Stadtkontor) located in Soviet sector. Berlin Trading Company (Handelsgesell-schaft fuer Gross Berlin) centralizes all wholesale trade and has arranged with German currency bank and Soviet Military Government to unblock funds of only those west sector firms which agree to trade exclusively with Berlin Trading Company. Furthermore, DWK lias notified west sector firms (my A–622 August 103 ) that trading company was established for purpose of providing raw materials, fuel and power to those west sector firms ready to cooperate with the company; and that latter was also authorized to handle entire trade of such firms by providing markets in Soviet sector, Soviet Zone and foreign countries. Thus it is evident that Magistrate departments of economy and finance, although still located in Soviet sector, have little or no authority in Soviet sector and that DWK and its agencies are attempting to usurp their authority even in western sectors. In view of crescendo of Soviet propaganda attacks against heads of these departments (Klingelhoefer and Heinzelmann, respectively), it is questionable how long the departments will be able to continue even nominal operation from present location in Soviet sector.

Above demonstrates that simultaneously with Soviet-SED attempts to split or neutralize the present city government, agencies wholly under Soviet control are attempting to usurp the functions of that government. These processes have proceeded with undiminished tempo during Moscow negotiations, in contrast to western military governments attitude of avoiding any action which would exacerbate situation.

Sent Department as 2032, Moscow 392, London 470, Paris 477.

Murphy

1 Not printed; in it Murphy reported the Magistrates order of August 9 which moved the central fuel office to the western sectors of the city since the Soviets had made it impossible for the office to operate in their sector (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1148).

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1648: Telegram

[Document 611]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, August 16, 1948—5 p. m.

1635. Eyes Only for the Secretary, London Eyes Only for Douglas, Paris Eyes Only for Caffery, Berlin Eyes Only for Clay and Murphy. We have just compared latest instructions from Washington, London and Paris.1 Roberts’ last message from Bevin is based on your 9492 and is to general effect that since US agrees with him, why don’t we get on with it? Chataigneau’s latest from Paris puts him behind again but he is willing to go along generally with what we decide although neither he nor Roberts can accept wording proposed for paragraph four in your 949 without some modification.

None of us believe that Molotov will agree to lift the blockade on a specified date subject to acceptance of Soviet mark for Berlin on basis of proviso that certain agreements are reached there, but should he so agree and announcement is made thereof, we have grave apprehensions of the effect of failure to reach technical agreement in Berlin on specified date. It was for this reason that we proposed second alternative mentioned my 16243 and still believe that this or some other provision for simultaneity is the only solution. However, it does not seem to any of us that further delay will improve our situation here—rather the contrary. Accordingly, we have combined the US and British proposals for the paragraph on currency to meet obligations [objections?] of London and Paris. Roberts and Chataigneau will accept paragraphs one, two and three as given in my 1629.4 Chataigneau and I accept British proposed new paragraph three as you authorized me to do. Although we feel that our instructions leave us with rather impossible sales job, we are likewise convinced that it would be a great mistake to drag these conversations out much longer, and we are seeing Molotov at six this evening.

It is the “provided” phrase on currency change that Molotov will reject, and while Chataigneau and I are authorized to present the shorter formula which would put the technical points in a directive to the military governors, Roberts is not so authorized, and in any event, this would not have much more appeal to Molotov than the longer version of the currency paragraph. I hope events will prove that we are unduly pessimistic but it seems to us that a promising start is being jeopardized by a changed or incorrect approach.

Following is agreed text which will be presented to Molotov at our meeting:

[Here follows the text of the draft statement printed in The Berlin Crisis, p. 33 or Cmd. 7534, p. 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16].]

Request Caffery pass copy of above English text, minus my comments, to French Government.

Sent Department as 1635, Department pass London as 143, Paris as 254, Berlin as 311.

Smith

1 During August 14, 15, and 16 consultations proceeded in Moscow between the American, British and French heads of mission, acting on the strength of instructions from their respective governments, regarding the text of a draft statement to be handed to Molotov at the next meeting. Correspondence regarding this statement is included in file 740.00119 Control (Germany).

2 Telegram 949, August 15, to Moscow, not printed, contained the latest Department instructions regarding the draft statement (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1448).

3 Not printed.

4 Not printed; it transmitted the first draft text of the proposed joint statement to be presented to Molotov. The three paragraphs under reference here are essentially the same as paragraphs 1, 2, and 4 of the agreed text. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1448)

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1748: Telegram

[Document 612]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, August 17, 1948—2 a. m.

1648. Eyes Only for the Secretary. We saw Molotov at 6 o’clock and the conference lasted slightly less than 4 hours, all very hard going.1 I began by stating that at our previous meeting we had each agreed to consider the other’s comments and asked him if he had any remarks to make. As he was reluctant to begin, I presented him with a Russian translation of the draft text sent you in my 1635 August 16,2 explaining that this represented our effort to reconcile our own and the Soviet positions, and that we had gone as far as possible to meet Mr. Molotov’s requirements, specifically having inserted a definite date in Paragraphs 1, 2, and 5 as he had seemed insistent on this point at our previous meeting. Molotov studied our draft very carefully and then said his first objection was that our Paragraph 5 was conditional, whereas Paragraphs 1 and 2 were not. This, he said, violated the Soviet requirement of simultaneous action with respect to removing traffic restrictions and making the currency change in Berlin. He repeated that this was an essential point which had been emphasized by Generalissimo Stalin at the very beginning of our discussions.

Returning to Paragraph 1, he argued that as June 18 was the date of western currency reform it should be specified rather than March 1 as governing the restrictions which were to be removed. I replied that March 1 was a neutral date. If the date March 20 had been used, it would have pointed a finger at the Soviet Union; if the date June 18 had been used it would point a finger at the western governments. March 1 was innocuous in that respect. Molotov replied that after all it might be better to leave out any mention of a date on the understanding, however, that the Soviet authorities would remove restrictions which had been imposed after the currency reform. He said that while this should be clear in our own minds, it need not be specifically mentioned in the text. Then much to our surprise, since he had been so insistent in our previous conference on including a definite date for removal of traffic restrictions and currency change provided for in Paragraphs 1, 2 and 4, he suggested that this might also be omitted, unless all dates were unconditional including that in Paragraph 5. If there was any qualification he thought it would be better to omit the mention of any dates in the communiqué.

He raised no specific objection our new Paragraph 3 which I explained as intended to balance our addition to Paragraph 5. He did not make any reference whatever to Paragraph 4 and did not even mention London decisions, passing on rapidly to Paragraph 5 with which we were occupied during the greater part of the meeting. After I had explained, apparently to his satisfaction, our intention in including the various requirements such as non-discrimination, equal treatment, etc., Molotov suddenly suggested that the basis for any agreement should be Generalissimo Stalin’s proposal of August 2, which was for simultaneous withdrawal of traffic restrictions and the currency change in Berlin.3 He again attacked our draft vigorously on the issue of simultaneity repeating his previous statement that we had imposed a condition to the currency change whereas no such condition was implied in Paragraphs 1 and 2, which provided for removal of traffic restrictions. He suggested that if we could revert to the first simple proposal of Stalin, the four military governors might be charged with working out practical arrangements on that basis. This was a surprising change in the Soviet position, as so far Molotov had always rejected any idea of referring any part of the problem for solution to the military governors in Berlin. After further lengthy discussion of Paragraph 5 on the issue of simultaneity, during which we were unable to make any impression on Molotov that our draft met Soviet requirements, he suddenly announced that he thought he could provide us with a simple formula which would deal with Paragraphs 1, 2 and 5. The other Paragraphs, he said, could be left for subsequent discussions as relatively unimportant. He then wrote out in longhand and read to us the following proposed directive to the military governors in Berlin: Begin directive: “The Governments of France, Great Britain, US and USSR have agreed that the following steps should be taken simultaneously: (a). Restrictions recently imposed on both sides on communications between Berlin and the western zones shall be lifted;

(b). The German mark of the Soviet zone shall be introduced as the sole currency for Berlin, and the western mark ‘B’ shall be withdrawn from circulation in Berlin.

“In connection with the above you are instructed to examine, together with your colleagues, within the shortest time possible and if possible before August 25, the detailed arrangements necessary for the implementation of this agreement and to inform your government of the exact date on which provisions under ‘a’ and ‘b’ above can be brought into effect.” End directive.

As we had already talked for more than two hours and Molotov showed no disposition whatever even to give serious consideration to acception our proposed draft, we stated that we would be willing to submit his new proposal to our governments but that it would serve no useful purpose whatever to do so unless the directive he suggested were completed by adding an additional paragraph covering all the points in the second part of our Paragraph 5 which our governments considered the absolute minimum that could be accepted in the way of a directive to the four military governors. Molotov argued against this, taking a line which he had in the past always rejected vigorously, that the military governors in Berlin might very well be able to work out practical solutions of our technical problems without specific instructions. This we declined to accept and suggested that we go over points of our minimum requirements. He was reluctant even to do this, arguing that each government should give whatever instructions it considered necessary to its own military governor, and moved from this to the proposal that the western military governors should receive instructions based on our draft and Soviet military governors should receive instructions based on Soviet draft. We rejected this, pointing out that such proposal meant merely transferring our unsolved problems to Berlin, with far less hope of a solution in the absence of agreement here on the two or three basic issues which still remained unsettled. He then agreed to go through our draft together with the Soviet draft to see whether we could bring them into conformity and set down agreed principles under which the four military governors could work.

We consumed about three-quarters of an hour discussing the first and relatively minor requirements providing that there should be no discrimination or action against holders of the western “B” mark, and at the end of this lengthy discussion he finally accepted this on the condition that it be redrafted to read as follows: “In connection with the substitution of the German mark of the Soviet zone for the western ‘B’ mark in Berlin at the rate of one for one, there shall be no discrimination against holders of the western ‘B’ mark or the German mark of the Soviet zone”.

This wording was quite different from that which I understood him to agree to in the course of our conversation. However, we moved on to the second proviso which covers equal treatment for currency and banking and credit facilities. On this point he refused to give an inch, at first objecting that Soviet wording of a somewhat similar paragraph was absolutely essential to safeguard the economy and currency of Soviet zone. He insisted on reference to German bank of emission as having control of issue of German currency in Berlin and declined to consider a suggestion that a sentence be added to our own wording to cover the principle of safeguarding of Soviet currency through the action of the four military governors in Berlin.

Some further discussion developed the fact that we were again up against the fundamental question of quadripartite authority in Berlin. When he realized that he could not continue to evade this issue, Molotov stated rather bluntly that while he could not concede quadripartite authority over control of Soviet currency, nevertheless Soviet Government did not exclude possibility of four military governors working out a quadripartite modus vivendi in Berlin on various questions to the extent compatible with maintaining the stability and prestige of Soviet currency. However, he would not accept any written formula embodying this general statement, and kept on insisting that we should accept Soviet wording regarding the German bank of emission. This subject was argued backward and forward during the remainder of the conference, and although Molotov insisted that he was not prejudicing our juridical position with regard to quadripartite control in Berlin, he did not budge an inch from the position he took.

There is no doubt but that the Soviet Government is genuinely anxious about the economy of the Soviet zone, but Molotov’s completely intransigent attitude suggested to us that more than this was behind his reluctance to move in the slightest degree toward meeting us on this point. We reiterated the fundamental nature of the principle involved, and again emphatically stated for the record the position of the three governments with respect to Berlin. Molotov said he understood this thoroughly, as we understood the position of the Soviet Government.

In order to more accurately develop his position, we then passed on to the third point, but Molotov simply argued that reference to the German export-import agency of the Soviet zone was reasonable and essential, that there was a similar agency in the western zones but that as Berlin and its economy were inseparably linked to Soviet zone, it was not consistent that other than Soviet agencies should be employed in handling the export-import trade of Berlin. This again brought us face to face with a point of principle, and we had to repeat our position, reminding Molotov that while we were willing to accept Soviet currency as sole currency in Berlin and were anxious to avoid a currency war in Berlin, it would be extremely foolish on our part to pay such a price for the lifting of traffic restrictions that we find ourselves in much more serious financial and economic difficulties in Berlin. I repeated that it was quite useless to send any directive to the military governors unless there was agreement in Moscow on the basic issues, the importance of which had again been demonstrated this evening. It would be equally useless to propose such a vague and undefined directive to our governments, which latter would simply direct us to obtain an answer with respect to the basic requirements already stated and which were considered the minimum that our governments could accept. We repeated there was no point in simply transferring to Berlin problems which we had been unable to solve by direct contact with Mr. Molotov in Moscow.

We finally adjourned with statement recording our disappointment with the lack of progress which had been made. Molotov said that he had done his best to propose solutions and had, he felt, gone a long way to meet our position, but that it required two sides to make an agreement. I suggested that we go over the records of the meeting, consider them carefully and report to our governments, in the possibility that they might have some final instructions or additional guidance; then I said we would ask for a final conference.

The conversation, which was considerably longer than usual and much longer than we had expected, was not in any way acrimonious, and Molotov’s attitude was quiet and reasonably pleasant. Our impression is that he thought, because of our previous insistence on the importance of solving technical problems in Berlin, we might snap at his proposal to refer there the unsettled questions under Paragraph 5. He clearly had no intention of accepting our main points of principle for the directive, and his refusal to accept any agreed terms of reference suggests quite clearly that his proposal with regard to Berlin was merely a tactical maneuver and was not designed to reach an early settlement, unless of course we are foolish enough to give the Russians everything they want in Berlin in return for vague promises.

It seems to us that there has been a change in the Kremlin attitude, which would now appear to be that there is no hurry about a settlement, and that while Molotov does not wish to take the responsibility for breaking off these conversations, he would be quite willing to drag them out indefinitely either in Moscow or Berlin. It is possible that these dilatory tactics are prompted by the approaching General Assembly, the anticipated effect of winter on our airlift, or hoped-for deterioration of economic conditions of the western sectors.

It was particularly noteworthy that Molotov made no reference at all tonight to the London decisions or to future CFM or other meetings in connection with the general problems of Germany. He passed these by with seeming indifference. It may be that Soviets are now convinced they will not get from us any worthwhile concessions with respect to developments in western Germany, and have determined to hold fast in Berlin and see who will wear down first in an economic war of attrition. There was no hope at any time during tonight’s conversation of getting an agreement to our draft. Molotov showed comparatively little interest in it and was more rigid than at previous meetings. Although I thought differently before the conference, I realize now that, even had we approached Molotov on different lines, the result would have been the same, as inevitably we would have come up squarely against the fundamental issues which faced us again tonight and which still would have to be reconciled before anything like a satisfactory agreement could be reached.

We are inclined to think that we should now ask for a final interview with Stalin, at which we can make our position perfectly clear. Perhaps there is still a bare chance that Stalin will himself make the basic concession on quadripartite control in Berlin if he realizes we have said our last word, but none of us think that the outlook after tonight’s meeting is by any means hopeful. Please give me your advice and guidance and any suggestions which may occur to you for use at a final Stalin interview, if you agree that time for this has now come.4

Sent Department 1648, repeated London Eyes Only for Douglas 144, Paris Eyes Only for Caffery 255, Berlin Eyes Only for Clay and Murphy 312.

Smith

1 Participating in this meeting at the Kremlin were Smith (U.S.), Roberts and Lunghi (U.K.), Chataigneau and Boyer de Fonscolombe (France), and Molotov, Smirnov, Pavlov, and Yerofeyev (U.S.S.R.).

2  Supra.

3 See telegram 1508, August 3, from Moscow, p. 999 [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 594].

4 In telegram 3720, August 17, from London, not printed, Douglas reported that Bevin’s initial response to the conversation with Molotov had been a desire to seek an interview with Stalin. Bevin felt the proposal to remove the restrictions imposed since June 18 was unsatisfactory and that reference of the currency question to Berlin without an agreed directive for the military governors would be useless. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1748)

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1748: Telegram

[Document 613]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, August 17, 1948—8 p. m.

1663. Eyes Only for the Secretary. Have just held post-mortem with British colleagues on last night’s conversation with Molotov and review, of course, of discussions to date. We found ourselves in general agreement that Kremlin has throughout had eye on two major objectives, maximum being suspension of London decisions under conditions holding promise of re-entry of Soviet Government into over-all German picture, and minimum being achievement of sole Soviet control in Berlin with west powers occupation apparatus reduced to ineffective appendage in immediate future and eventually removed entirely. We believe that they realized during early stages of discussion first objective was out of reach for time being and we conclude that any further interest they display in this subject will be only for purposes of confusing issues, bargaining or propaganda values to be derived therefrom. On second objective, they must surely have weighed possibilities of advancing toward Berlin control via present talks and some resulting agreement against possibilities of winning control by continuing direct application of physical pressures.

In our last two meetings Molotov has been carrying on a probing operation directed mainly toward clarifying further the possibilities of securing the second objective, i.e., Berlin control, through agreement. We share the impression that Molotov has probably decided that in this connection, too, there is little prospect of concessions on our part substantial enough to warrant abandoning the tactics of physical pressure.

However, since this pressure is presently continuing without interruption and since its ultimate success is still uncertain, he is quite prepared to go on talking here or to have talks initiated and continued almost indefinitely in Berlin. The Soviets have nothing to lose by this. On the contrary, such procedure holds several advantages for them. They avoid responsibility for breaking off the discussions; they always have some hope of wearing us down or of maneuvering us into an ill-considered agreement; and they prevent us from adopting an alternative course of action.

On the other hand, we recognize that from the Kremlin viewpoint the tactic of physical pressure on Berlin involves some disadvantages and even dangers. Economic factors, adverse public opinion and even the actual danger of open conflict are consideration which would impel the Politbureau toward peaceful agreement. Therefore we do not yet exclude possibility that there is still a chance of agreement here, though we now estimate this chance as slight unless the western powers are prepared to make some real concession on Berlin.

In these circumstances it seems to us that the stage has been reached where our government must decide: (1) If we are prepared to deal indefinitely with situation now existing in Berlin in event of breakdown of present conversations; (2) If our ability to cope indefinitely with Berlin situation is doubtful, what concessions would we be willing to make to relieve the situation. These concessions might have to be substantial and would be either surrender of participation in control of currency in Berlin, or suspension of decisions of the London Conference.

While we see these as the basic alternatives facing the three west governments, we nevertheless believe that the remote possibility of reaching agreement, without major concessions of principle, in a final interview with Stalin must be exploited to the fullest, and I am suggesting in my next following telegrams the approach which we believe would give us the optimum chance of success.

Our thought is essentially that it would be necessary for us to present to Stalin a final simplified, essentially unchangeable draft which, while incorporating the basic safeguards contained in our various instructions, would still follow as closely as possible the formula given us by Stalin in our initial interview.

The above estimate has been drafted independently. Roberts and Harrison have also prepared a very able estimate along similar lines which British Embassy Washington will transmit to Department. Embassy London please furnish copy of this message at once to Foreign Office so that in Washington and London our estimates can be reviewed together.

Department repeat London 146 eyes only for Douglas, Berlin 313 eyes only for Murphy and Clay, Paris 256 eyes only for Caffery.

Smith

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1748: Telegram

[Document 614]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, August 17, 1948—9 p. m.

1664. Eyes Only for the Secretary. British and American staffs have collaborated in producing following which is our suggestion and recommendation for conduct of final meeting with Stalin (re Embtel 1663, August 171 ). Begin text proposed opening statement: “Draft opening statement for final meeting with Stalin.

“Since our last meeting with you, Generalissimo, we have had four further discussions with Mister Molotov. At those meetings we have exchanged views in a frank and, I think, a friendly way, and our talks have perhaps served a useful purpose inasmuch as they have at least cleared some of the ground. We have not, however, reached agreement.

“The main obstacle to joint agreement on a communiqué is one of principle. All four governments have stated that they would be willing, under certain conditions, that the various restrictions on communications should be lifted, that Four-Power meetings should be held to discuss any other outstanding questions affecting Berlin or Germany, and that the Soviet zone mark should be accepted as the sole currency in Berlin. The essential point on which we have failed to reach agreement is the conditions under which the Soviet zone mark should be accepted as the sole currency for Berlin. On this issue, the standpoint of the three Western governments, put at its simplest, is that before we can agree to that arrangement we must have an adequate guarantee, in the form of joint Four-Power regulation of the flow and use of Berlin currency. Our governments cannot accept an arrangement which might result in the undermining their unquestionable right to be in Berlin or in making it impossible for them to exercise that right, or to discharge fully their obligations as occupying authorities. On that question of principle there is no possibility of our governments altering their position. There is no hidden motive behind this attitude and no idea of trying to produce a situation which would be damaging to the economy of the Soviet zone. Our object, as I hope we have made clear, is simply to safeguard our own position if the German mark of the Soviet zone becomes the sole currency for Berlin. If we cannot secure those safeguards, we shall have no option but to continue to maintain ourselves in Berlin and discharge our obligations in our respective sectors by methods we are now employing at the present time.

“For the rest, it seems to us that the respective points of view expressed by Molotov for the Soviet Government and by ourselves for the three Western governments are not too far apart to preclude agreement.

“At our first meeting with you, we were glad to hear you say that the Soviet Government had no wish to oust the Western powers from Berlin, and we think it would probably enable us to reach an agreement almost immediately if you and Molotov found yourselves able to give practical expression to that attitude by meeting us on this question of quadripartite regulation of the Soviet zone currency within the strict limits of its use in Berlin.

“Speaking personally, I think that that would be a gesture which would amply repay the Soviet Government. To the Western governments and to their peoples Berlin, which has always been one of the tokens of the common allied victory, has become more than a piece of territory to be controlled by this or that power. It has come to be a symbol. The possibility of peaceful co-existence and collaboration of the Soviet and Western systems in which you yourself have more than once expressed belief will be largely judged by what happens there. If we are able to get along together in Berlin, we can hope to get along in other spheres, too. If we break down over Berlin, then a lot of ordinary folks will give up hope altogether.

“To come back to our immediate problem—we are now putting before you the best suggestion for a solution which it has been possible for our governments to arrive at in the light of the series of talks we have had in Moscow. We have prepared a draft communiqué which conforms as nearly as possible to the basic formula stated by you at our initial conference, while at the same time providing what our governments consider to be the minimum essential safeguards on the fundamental question of our position with respect to Berlin.” End text.

At conclusion of opening statement we would recommend that Generalissimo Stalin be presented with a Russian translation of the following draft but which has been foreshortened by combining paragraphs one, two, and three thereof into a single paragraph one, now reworded so as to be identical in form and provisional implications with currency paragraph previously presented to Molotov,2 and now included as paragraph two. Paragraph three covers the question of meetings. The paragraphs are arranged in this draft in same order as the subjects mentioned by Stalin in his basic statement at our initial conference.3 This we consider of some importance.

Draft begins: “Third Western draft.4

“1. On August 25 all restrictions which have been imposed, both on the transport of persons and goods in either direction between the three Western zones of Germany and Berlin, and on the traffic of goods to and from the Soviet zones of Germany, shall be removed and freedom of communications maintained, provided that before that date the four Military Governors shall have worked out the necessary arrangements.

“2. As from August 25, the German mark of the Soviet zone shall be accepted as the sole currency for Berlin and the Western mark ‘B’ shall be simultaneously withdrawn from circulation in Berlin, provided that before that date the four Military Governors shall have worked out arrangements for that changeover and for the continued flow and use in Berlin, under quadripartite authority, of the German mark of the Soviet zone.

“3. In addition to meetings of the Military Governors, meetings; among representatives of the four governments, in the form of the Council of Foreign Ministers or other conferences of representatives of the Four Powers, shall be held in the near future to discuss:— “(a) Any questions which may be outstanding as regards Berlin, and

“(b) Any other outstanding problems affecting Germany as a whole.”

Draft ends.

As a corollary we would then introduce a draft directive to Military Governors which is based on Molotov’s personal draft5 and which includes basic safeguards on which we have so far insisted. The slight modifications of wording are results of discussions which took place at our last conference.

Draft begins: “Directive to Military Governors.

“The Governments of France, the United Kingdom, the United States of America, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics have agreed that the following steps should be taken simultaneously: “(a) Restrictions on communications between Berlin and the Western zones shall be lifted;

“(b) The Germany mark of the Soviet zone shall be introduced as the sole currency for Berlin, and the Western mark ‘B’ shall be withdrawn from circulation in Berlin.

“In connection with the above you are instructed to examine, together with your colleagues, within the shortest possible time, and if possible before August 25, the detailed arrangements necessary for the implementation of this agreement and to inform your government of the exact date on which the provisions under (a) and (b) above can be brought into effect. These arrangements shall include such regulations as may be necessary to safeguard the currency of the Soviet zone issued by the German bank of emission of the Soviet zone and to prevent illicit black market operations in currency; they shall also ensure: in connection with the substitution of the German mark of the Soviet zone for the Western mark ‘B’ in Berlin at the rate of one for one, there shall be no discrimination against holders of the Western mark ‘B’ or the German mark of the Soviet zone; equal treatment as to currency and provision of fully accessible banking and credit facilities throughout all sectors of Berlin; unhampered trade and economic connections with third countries and with all zones of Germany, subject only to such provisions as may be agreed from time to time among the four Military Governors; and the provision of sufficient currency for budgetary purposes and occupation costs” Draft ends.

If the question of occupation costs is raised, as it undoubtedly will be, we will present Stalin and Molotov with a translation of the following proposed directive on occupation costs to Military Governors, and will state that this directive might be submitted in conjunction with the Soviet6 preceding directive or might be held in abeyance until basic issues of traffic restrictions and currency change had been disposed of, after which the Military Governors would be able to devote time and attention to a serious study of alleviating, insofar as practicable, the burden of occupation costs upon the City of Berlin.

Draft begins: “Directive to Military Governors on occupation costs.

“During the discussions in Moscow resulting in the joint communiqué of (blank date) the question of occupation costs devolving upon Berlin was raised.

“In connection with the above you are instructed to examine, together with your colleagues, the general question of Berlin occupation costs with a view to the possible alleviation of the burden of such costs upon the city. In this connection due regard should be given to the value of food, fuel, and Other supplies imported into Berlin by each occupation power in relation to the value of goods exported.” Draft ends.

Finally, and only if insisted upon by Stalin, we would introduce the following proposed statement on the London decisions with respect to Germany and would inform Stalin we would agree to the inclusion of this statement as a published annex to the communiqué. If he insisted on recording the full oral statements made by both parties at a previous conference, we would be obliged to decline with the statement that these had been recorded and were now a matter of record with governments concerned but with respect to publication, statement in our proposal represented extent, to which our governments were willing to go.

Draft begins: “Separate statement on implementation of London decisions regarding Western Germany.

“During the negotiations the Soviet Government expressed its wish that the implementation of the decisions of the London Conference should not result in the establishment of government for Western Germany before the representatives of the Four Powers had been able to meet to discuss the whole German problem. The representatives of the three Western powers affirmed the desire of their governments for a Four-Power agreement whereby a government for the whole of Germany would be established. They explained that the London decisions did not preclude such an agreement. They were not, however, able to agree to any postponement of the implementation of the London decisions.” Draft ends.

Request your comments, suggestions, and advice, not only as to form and content of above, but as to tactics of presentation. These should be given us as a matter of urgency since we believe that too much delay at this point is inadvisable. We have not consulted our French colleague. Reasons and suggestions for coordination with Paris in separate telegram.7

Sent Department as 1664; Department repeat to Berlin 314 Eyes Only for Murphy and Clay; Paris 257 Eyes Only for Caffery; London 147 Eyes Only for Douglas.

Smith

1  Supra.

2 The reference here is to the draft statement presented to Molotov on August 16 (see telegram 1648, August 17, from Moscow, p. 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612]) and printed in The Berlin Crisis, p. 33 or Cmd. 7534, p. 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16].

3 See telegram 1508, August 3, from Moscow, p. 999 [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 594].

4 Regarding the first draft statement, see footnote 4 to telegram 1635, August 16, from Moscow, p. 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611]; the second draft statement is identified in footnote 2 above.

5 The reference is presumably to Molotov’s counterdraft of August 9; for text, see The Berlin Crisis, pp. 23–24 or Cmd. 7534, p. 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13].

6 In telegram 1635, August 18, from Moscow, not printed, Smith requested the Department to delete the word “Soviet” from the draft directive (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–4848).

7 In his telegrams 1665 and 1666, August 17, from Moscow, neither printed, Ambassador Smith asked the Department of State not to discuss telegrams 1663 and 1664 with the French Foreign Ministry because of the suspicion that coded messages to the French Embassy in Moscow were being read by Soviet authorities (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1748).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1748: Telegram

[Document 615]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, August 17, 1948—5 p. m.

958. For the Ambassador (Eyes Only). We agree with your analysis of yesterday’s conversation with Molotov (your 16482 ) and feel strongly that there is nothing to be gained and much to be lost by any further attempt to negotiate with him. We believe the time has come for an interview with Stalin [in] order to deal with the basic issue which has deadlocked the talks with Molotov.

We feel it is of the utmost importance that there should be no lack of clarity concerning the fundamental issues upon which the discussions in Moscow might break down. You should therefore make to Stalin a statement along the following lines, subject to such modifications as to language as you may work out in Moscow with your French and British colleagues.

Begin outline. Since the meeting on August 2 with Stalin, the three western representatives have held four long meetings with Mr. Molotov in an attempt to draw up the text of an agreement covering the points discussed with Mr. Stalin in order to bring to an end the critical situation existing in Berlin. During these conversations, despite the genuine and earnest efforts of the three representatives and Mr. Molotov to agree on an acceptable text, it has become entirely apparent that the issue dividing the three Western Powers and the Soviet Government on the question of Berlin is basic and cannot be adjusted by any change in wording.

The fundamental issue, as we see it, is whether or not the Soviet Government is prepared to accept the fact that the Western Allies are in Berlin by right and are therefore entitled to participate equally in the quadripartite administration of the city. This basic division between the Soviet Government and the three Western Powers has found its expression in the discussions with Mr. Molotov on the point of the quadripartite regulation of the finances and trade of the city of Berlin.

The three Western Powers are prepared to accept the Soviet mark as the sole currency for the city of Berlin but only on the condition that adequate arrangements are worked out for its continued issue and use in Berlin under quadripartite supervision. So far, the Soviet Government in these discussions has been unwilling to accept the principle of quadripartite supervision of the issue and use in Berlin of the Soviet mark. This does not mean authority over the Soviet mark as such but only supervision over the amount issued in Berlin and over its use there.

It is evident that the Soviet unwillingness to accept the principle of quadripartite supervision in this field stems directly from the position of the Soviet Government, which the three Western Powers have refused to accept, that they no longer are in Berlin by right but only on Soviet sufferance. The Governments of the United States, United Kingdom and France would therefore like to know directly from Stalin whether or not the Soviet Government will recognize that the three Western Powers are entitled to equal participation in the exercise of supervision over the currency, credit and trade of the city.

If the Soviet Government is prepared to recognize the right of the three Western Powers to such participation, then there should be no difficulty in agreeing right now upon the wording of the paragraph in the proposed announcement dealing with Berlin currency and its regulation. If, however, the Soviet Government continues to maintain its position that the three Western Powers have no rights in Berlin. and are therefore not entitled to participate in the regulation of the city’s currency, credit and trade, then these talks have failed since the position of the three Western Powers on this point has been made amply clear throughout all the discussions in Moscow.

(For your guidance, if Stalin is prepared to concede this point, you should then suggest that final agreement on the text of the announcement could be reached at this interview and not accept further reference back to Molotov and the three representatives to work out the details of the text unless you feel this desirable to give effect to agreement reached with Stalin. If Stalin remains adamant in his insistence that we have no juridical rights and hence no right to participate in the regulation of currency, credit and trade in Berlin, you should then make the following statement to him.)

The three Western Powers conscious of their obligation under the Charter of the United Nations had taken the initiative in approaching the Soviet Government for informal discussions in Moscow in order to explore every possibility of preventing the deterioration of an already dangerous situation in Berlin. The three Western Powers had done this despite the fact that the dangerous situation in Berlin had been created solely as a result of the unilateral imposition by the Soviet Government of restrictions amounting to a blockade of communications between the western zones and Berlin.

The Western Powers wished to ascertain in the most direct manner exactly for what purposes the Soviet Government had placed these, restrictions upon the communications between the western zones and Berlin and whether the situation in Berlin could be returned to normal through some arrangement consistent with the rights, duties and obligations of the four occupying powers.

As a result of these discussions in Moscow it has become clear beyond any doubt that the Soviet Government is indeed applying methods of coercion and force in an attempt to achieve certain objectives in respect to Germany and Berlin which that Government was unable to obtain through free negotiations. The objective in respect of Berlin was to place that city under unilateral Soviet control in derogation of the rights acquired by the Western Allies through the defeat and unconditional surrender of Germany and defined by quadripartite agreements.

In short, the Soviet Government is demanding, as a price for lifting the blockade measures, the abandonment of the rights of the three Western Powers in Berlin. This price the three Western Powers cannot and will not pay.

The Governments of the United States, United Kingdom and France wish to draw the attention of the Soviet Government to the fact that through its unilateral action in Berlin and through its unwillingness to accept any arrangement consistent with the rights and obligations of the other occupying powers it has brought about a situation which, if continued, might develop into a threat to international peace and security.

The three Governments, therefore, will find themselves obliged to refer the actions of the Soviet Government in Berlin to the appropriate organ of the United Nations, at the same time reserving to themselves full rights to take such measures as may be necesary to maintain in these circumstances their position in Berlin. End outline.

In our immediately following telegram3 we are sending you suggestions authorizing certain changes in text of announcement for you to use to meet Soviet views in the event that Stalin is willing to discuss final text of announcement.

For Douglas repeat to Smith: Please ask Bevin and Massigli to send urgently any British and French comments to their representatives in Moscow for coordination with Smith who will furnish them this text.

Marshall

1 Repeated to London as 3268, Paris as 3164, and Berlin as 1464.

2 August 17, p. 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612].

3 Telegram 962, infra.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1748: Telegram

[Document 616]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, August 17, 1948—9 p. m.

962. ReDeptel 958, Aug 171 . Should your interview with Stalin indicate that there is still possibility of reaching agreement, we have some suggestions for use with him.

1. It was never our intention to make a distinction between time of the lifting of the blockade and the timing of the currency change in Berlin. It has been our understanding that these two measures would be simultaneous, although we agree that our draft may have left that point ambiguous. You are authorized therefore to accept any wording to indicate that these actions would be taken simultaneously provided arrangements had been made for quadripartite regulation of the use of Soviet mark in Berlin.

2. It now seems that the obvious point of difference appears to have been narrowed to the issue of quadripartite control as reflected in the question of currency. It may be significant that in the last conversations, Molotov did not insist upon mention of the London decisions or revert to the question of a four-power meeting. The first is obviously not to our interest and as regards the second, we proposed the meeting on the assumption that it was desired by the Soviets. In these circumstances, we would be prepared, in fact would prefer, to limit the announced agreement to the two issues of lifting the blockade and the control of currency and could therefore accept a modification of Molotov’s proposal contained in your Niact 1648, Aug 172 provided it maintains the principle of continued quadripartite authority in Berlin even though reference is limited to the two issues of lifting the blockade and control of currency. We suggest language somewhat as follows: “The Governments of France, Great Britain, United States and U.S.S.R. have agreed that the following steps are to be taken simultaneously as soon as the governments have approved the detailed arrangements concluded between the four military governors: “(a) The restrictions imposed by both sides during the current year on communications, transport, and commerce between Berlin and the Western zones and between the various zones of Germany shall be lifted and freedom from such restrictions shall be maintained.

“(b) The German mark of the Soviet zone shall be introduced as the sole currency for Berlin and the German mark ‘B’ for the Western zone shall be withdrawn from circulation under quadripartite arrangements insuring (1) that there shall not be any discrimination against the holders of German marks of the Western or Eastern zones, (2) that a sufficient amount of Soviet currency shall be at all times provided for the reasonable needs of all sectors of Berlin, and (3) that equal treatment as to currency, credit and commerce shall be accorded to all sectors of Berlin.

“The Military Governors are instructed to determine, in the shortest time possible, and if possible before August 25, the detailed arrangements necessary for the quadripartite implementation of this agreement, and to inform their governments of the agreed recommendations and exact date on which this agreement can be brought into effect.” All of foregoing to be published if agreement reached with Stalin.

3. As regards occupation costs, the language proposed above would seem to take care of our requirements by insuring the provision of adequate currency. We note that Molotov did not revert to his original proposal in this respect. You should however make clear that while we do not insist on mentioning occupation costs specifically we understand they will continue to be met as in the past under quadripartite arrangements to be agreed in Berlin.

4. If Stalin suggests that in event of agreement confidential directive be sent to military governors to work out details before announcement we would not wish to block agreement on this point reurniact 1661, Aug. 17,5 but it should be understood that the talks in Moscow are in abeyance to be resumed as soon as military governors can report. We are concerned lest distorted version that agreement in principle has been reached in Moscow be given publicity before it is confirmed as a result of military governors’ report. This might be taken care of by an interim announcement making it plain that discussions in Moscow have not terminated but will be resumed as soon as certain technical reports have been received from Berlin.

5. Copies of this message are being sent to London, Paris and Berlin for their comment. Please await these before submitting any formula to Stalin. Clay is being requested to comment direct to you.6

For Douglas [:] Please endeavor to have Brit and French send their comments urgently to Smith for coordination.7

Marshall

1  Supra.

2  Ante, p. 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612].

5 Not printed.

6 Telegrams 2071 and 2081, August 18 and 19, from Berlin, not printed, reported Clay’s full concurrence with this telegram and his belief that an effort should be made in Moscow to obtain immediate agreement on a directive to the military governors. Further negotiations at Moscow would be suspended until the governors reported to their Governments. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1848 and 1948)

7  Smith subsequently reported that the proposed statements could be coordinated in Moscow without difficulty. (Telegram 1668, August 18, from Moscow, not printed, 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1848)

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2148: Telegram

[Document 617]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen)

top secret Washington, August 21, 1948.

The French Ambassador1 called this morning at his request. He said he had come on instructions from his Government to ascertain what steps the United States Government had in mind in taking in the event of a breakdown in the Moscow conversations, with particular reference to (1) the procedures which we would suggest following in referring the matter to the United Nations, and (2) the course of action to be followed in the event of a veto or other deadlock in the United Nations. He said his Government realized that we were urging recourse to the United Nations in the event of a breakdown but they would like to know under what body and in what manner, in our view, it should be presented.

I told the Ambassador that we felt that the only possible next step, in the event of a breakdown of the Moscow conversations, was to take the matter to the United Nations; that we felt it was absolutely essential for U.S. and world public opinion, to have recourse to the United Nations before the Berlin situation became even more critical. I added that, in our view, recourse to the United Nations as soon as possible might tend to quiet public opinion at home and abroad and might operate as a certain inhibition on Soviet actions in Berlin and thus reduce the hazard of an armed clash there. I said, of course, in submitting the matter to the United Nations, as had been indicated in the agreed statement to be made to Stalin, the three Western Powers would reserve full rights to take such measures as may be necessary to maintain their position in Berlin. As to the specific steps, in the event of a breakdown, we felt, first of all, the release of an account of these discussions to the press would be essential in order to inform world public opinion as to the reasons for the breakdown and then the dispatch of the note to the Soviet Government making formal refutation of the charges contained in their note of July 14 and prompt reference to the United Nations at a time to be agreed upon between the three Western Powers. I told the Ambassador that our thinking here on the subject favored direct reference of the Soviet actions in Berlin to the Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter; that our experts on UN had carefully considered this matter and had decided that Chapter VII was preferable to Chapter VI since to refer the Berlin matter as a “situation” under Chapter VI to the Security Council would automatically bar from voting the four participants to the dispute leaving only seven members entitled to vote, and since the voting rules of the Security Council required seven votes for any decision or resolution you would know in advance that the Security Council could take no such action since the Ukraine as one of the seven would undoubtedly vote against any proposed resolution. Under Chapter VII, however, parties to a dispute were not barred from voting and although the Soviets might veto, there was a good chance of obtaining a nine to two vote in our favor. For these reasons and because of the extreme seriousness of the Soviet action in maintaining the blockade, our experts felt that reference under Chapter VII was preferable.

The Ambassador then reverted to the second part of his instructions, namely, what would be our intentions in the event of a veto or inaction in the United Nations. I told the Ambassador that this Government had made no determination on that point since obviously the situation would have to be examined as it was at the end of the UN action. At the present time we were concentrating on the step in the United Nations. What the three powers should do in the event of a UN failure, which of course we have to anticipate, would depend upon consultation among them. I emphasized to the Ambassador that this Government had taken no decision on this point and would certainly consult with the British and French Governments as to any course of action before making any such determination in the future. I said, in addition, we would of course, as we had in the past, continue to be in the closest kind of consultation in the preparations for the UN and during the debate in that body. The Ambassador expressed appreciation for this and said he would report to Paris.

I added that the airlift into Berlin, while not providing a solution, nevertheless, gave us a certain assurance as to time in which we could consider very carefully the proper course to be followed in regard to the situation in Berlin, probably even after failure in the UN. I said that our air people were confident that with normal weather we could continue to supply Berlin with the basic necessities of life for the population almost indefinitely. I repeated that while not a solution it was in effect a safeguard against being forced by events to take sudden decisions. I added, however, that naturally Soviet action in Berlin was a vital factor and that we had no guarantees at any time that some Soviet action might not precipitate an even more serious situation. The Ambassador said he understood this fully.

The Ambassador then raised the question of the ultimate solution of the Berlin matter, pointing out that if Germany remained divided our position in Berlin would continue to be very difficult and in some respects at the mercy of the Soviets. I said we recognized the great difficulties of finding some solution for the Berlin situation even if the blockade was lifted, but that one thing was clear—and I believed the three Governments were in complete accord on that—and that was that we could not be forced out under Soviet pressure. The Ambassador said that his Government was in complete agreement on this point but that he was thinking of the ultimate solution in the event that the blockade was lifted. I told the Ambassador that we were of course aware of the dangers and difficulties of the Berlin situation on a long-term basis but had not yet found any satisfactory solution. I said to get out of Berlin and turn over to the Soviets the over two million Germans who had stood up courageously under our protection would have very profound and adverse repercussions not only in the Western Zones of Germany but probably throughout Europe. I said we were of course thinking over all aspects of the German problem, including Berlin, but that at the present time we were concentrating on the Soviet blockade.

I gathered the impression that the chief concern of the French Government, as has been indicated before, was that we might be contemplating some unilateral action in respect of Berlin as a result of which they would be dragged into war. The Ambassador several times mentioned how difficult it would be in France to present Berlin with all its past association to the French as a sufficient cause for war. He seemed to be somewhat reassured by my statement that we had not determined on our course of action in the event of UN failure and our intention of consulting closely with the French Government on this and other aspects of the Berlin situation.

Charles E. Bohlen

1  Henri Bonnet.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2348: Telegram

[Document 618]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, August 23, 1948—4 p. m.

1716. Eyes Only for the Secretary. At tonight’s meeting with Stalin and Molotov, I shall use following final agreed draft as basis for my opening statement to Stalin.1

Statement begins:

“In entering upon this series of discussions with Soviet Government, the governments of the three western countries were mindful, as was made clear at our meeting August 2, of the gravity and dangers of present situation in Berlin. They were hopeful that a mutually acceptable solution might be found and, equally, they were aware that failure in these talks would render existing dangers even more acute. Moreover, in expressing their willingness to take part in discussions on the whole German problem they were actuated by sincere desire to reach agreement on tills vital question.

“Since our last meeting with you, Generalissimo, we have had four further discussions with Mr. Molotov. At those meetings we have exchanged views in frank and, I think, friendly way, and our talks have perhaps served a useful purpose inasmuch as they have at least cleared some, of the ground. We have not, however, reached agreement.

“The main obstacle to joint agreement on a communiqué is one of principle. All four governments have stated they would be willing, under certain conditions, that the various restrictions on communications should be lifted, that Soviet Zone mark should be accepted as the sole currency in Berlin, and that Four-Power meetings should be held to discuss any other outstanding questions affecting Berlin or Germany. The essential point on which we have failed to reach agreement is conditions under which Soviet Zone mark should be accepted as sole currency for Berlin. On this issue, standpoint of Governments of France, United Kingdom and United States of America, is that before we can agree to that arrangement we must have an adequate guarantee, in form of joint Four-Power regulation of provision and use of Berlin currency. Our governments cannot accept an arrangement which might result in undermining their unquestionable right to be in Berlin or in making it impossible for them to exercise that right, or to discharge fully their obligations as occupying authorities. On that question of principle there is no possibility of our governments altering their position. There is no hidden motive behind this attitude and no idea of trying to produce a situation which would be damaging to economy of Soviet Zone. We have informed Molotov that arrangements on which we must insist concerning provision and use in Berlin of German mark of Soviet Zone do not, of course, imply any claim on our part to interfere with, this currency as such. They relate exclusively to amount of currency provided in Berlin and its use there. Our object, as I hope we have made clear, is simply to safeguard our own position if German mark of the Soviet Zone becomes sole currency for Berlin.

“For the rest, it seems to us that respective points of view expressed by Molotov for Soviet Government and by ourselves for our respective governments are not too far apart to preclude agreement.

“At our first meeting with you we were glad to hear you say that Soviet Government had no intention of attempting to oust western powers from Berlin, and we think it would probably enable us to reach an agreement almost immediately if you and Molotov found yourselves able to give practical expression to that attitude by meeting us on this question of quadripartite regulation of currency in use in Berlin. If, however, you consider it impossible to accept our standpoint, then I am afraid our three governments will be forced to conclude that Soviet Government is intent on maintaining that our three governments have no rights in Berlin and are thus not entitled to participate in regulation of city’s currency, credit and trade.

“Speaking personally, I think that by agreeing with us on this point Soviet Government would have nothing to lose and much to gain. To our governments and our peoples Berlin has always been one of tokens of common allied victory. It has become more than a piece of territory to be controlled by this or that power. It has come to be a symbol. The possibility of peaceful co-existence and collaboration of our respective systems in which you yourself have more than once expressed belief will be largely judged by what happens there. If we are able to get along together in Berlin, we can hope to get along in other spheres too. If we break down over Berlin, then a lot of ordinary folk will give up hope altogether.

“I have stated the position of our three governments and I hope the Generalissimo will give it his most serious consideration. I have certain practical proposals to put forward which have been drafted so as to conform as closely as we can to the Generalissimo’s initial proposal on August 2 and to suggestions made during our conversations with Molotov. May I present them now?”

(If the Generalissmo agrees, the statement will continue as follows:)

“We have two documents, draft communiqué and draft directive to Military Governors in Berlin. We have drafted communiqué to conform as closely as possible to the formula suggested by the Generalissimo himself on August 22 while at the same time providing what our governments consider to be minimum essential safeguards on fundamental question of our position in respect to Berlin.

“As regards the directive, we have adopted Molotov’s suggestion3 that a directive should be sent to four Military Governors in Berlin because our governments see that nothing we do here can be final unless it is clear that it can be implemented in Berlin. In preparing this directive we believe we have included the main questions on which Molotov expressed concern at our last meeting August 164 in addition to those to which our own governments attach importance. Taken together, these two drafts present what is in our view the best suggestion for solution which it has been possible for our governments to arrive at in light of series of talks we have had in Moscow. Our proposal is that the directive should be sent immediately by four governments to their Military Governors in Berlin. They should then be given one week in which to complete their task and report back to governments. Our further suggestion is that we meet again with Generalissimo and Molotov one week from today to reach final agreement on the basis of the draft communiqué which meanwhile will be held in abeyance.” Statement ends.

At this point we would produce following final drafts communiqué and directive. Both of these would be accompanied by our unofficial translations into Russian. Communiqué begins:

“The Governments of France, the United Kingdom, the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics have agreed that the following measures under (a) and (b) shall be put into effect simultaneously, and have approved detailed arrangements for their implementation jointly worked out by the four Military Governors: “(a) The restrictions imposed on communications, transport and commerce between Berlin and the western zones and between the various zones of Germany shall be lifted, and freedom of communications shall be maintained.

“(b) The German mark of the Soviet Zone shall be accepted, under quadripartite arrangements already agreed, as the sole currency for Berlin and the western mark ‘B’ shall be simultaneously withdrawn from circulation in Berlin.

“The four governments have also agreed that in addition to meetings of the four Military Governors, meetings among representatives of the four governments, in the form of the Council of Foreign Ministers or other conferences of representatives of the four powers, shall be held in the near future to discuss: “(1) Any questions which may be outstanding as regards Berlin, and

“(2) Any other outstanding problems affecting Germany as a whole”. Communiqué ends.

Directive begins:

“The Governments of France, the United Kingdom, the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics have decided that, subject to agreement being reached among the four Military Governors in Berlin for their practical implementation, the following steps should be taken simultaneously:— “(A) Restrictions on communications between Berlin and the western zones and on the traffic of goods to and from the Soviet Zone of Germany shall be lifted;

“(B) The German mark of the Soviet Zone shall be introduced as the sole currency for Berlin, and the western mark ‘B’ shall be withdrawn from circulation in Berlin.

“In connection with the above you are instructed to consult together with your colleagues so as to make, in the shortest time possible, the detailed arrangements necessary for the implementation of these decisions, and to inform your government not later than August (blank) of the results of your discussions, including the exact date on which the measures under (A) and (B) above can be brought into effect.

“The arrangements relating to the currency changeover and to the continued provision and use in Berlin, under quadripartite agreement, of the German mark of the Soviet Zone shall include such regulations as may be necessary to safeguard the currency of the Soviet Zone issued by the German bank of emission of the Soviet Zone and the currency of the western zones and to prevent illicit black market operations in currency; they shall also ensure: that in connection with the substitution of the German mark of the Soviet Zone for the western mark ‘B’ in Berlin at the rate of one for one, there shall be no discrimination against holders of the western mark ‘B’ or the German mark of the Soviet Zone; equal treatment as to currency and provision of fully accessible banking and credit facilities throughout all sectors of Berlin; unhampered trade and economic connections for Berlin with third countries and with all the zones of Germany, subject only to such provisions as may be agreed from time to time among the four Military Governors; and the provision of sufficient currency for budgetary purposes and occupation costs.” Directive ends.

If Soviets agree above, we would invite their suggestions for an interim communiqué, producing only if needed or invited our own following proposal.

Interim communiqué begins:

“At a meeting between the President of the Council of Ministers of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics J. V. Stalin, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the USSR V. M. Molotov, the Ambassador of the US Mr. W. B. Smith, the Ambassador of France Mr. Y. Chataigneau, and Mr. F. K. Roberts the personal representative of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Great Britain, Mr. Bevin, on August (blank) it was decided to refer certain technical questions which had arisen in the course of the present conversations in Moscow to the four Military Governors in Berlin. Meanwhile the conversations in Moscow are continuing.” Interim communiqué ends.

If question of occupation costs is raised by Soviets, we shall handle it as indicated my telegram 1664, August 17.

Likewise, if Soviets persist in further discussion of implementation London decisions, we shall proceed as indicated my telegram 1664, except that last two sentences of proposed supplementary announcement have been amended to read: “They explained that the London decisions did not preclude such an agreement and, while they were not able to agree to any postponement of the implementation of the London decisions, they would make a sincere endeavor to ascertain whether there is a real prospect of agreement among the four powers.”

If, however, Soviets remain adamant on basic issue of our Berlin rights, we shall make final statement as given Deptel 958, August 17, except that last paragraph has been amended to read: “The three governments, therefore, will find themselves obliged to examine the question of resorting to the appropriate organs of the United Nations, at the same time reserving to themselves full rights to take such measures as may be necessary to maintain in these circumstances their position in Berlin.”

Sent Department 1716; Department pass to London as 159, Eyes Only for Douglas, Paris as 271, Eyes Only for Caffery, and Berlin as 326, Eyes Only for Clay and Murphy.

Smith

1 From August 18 to August 23 the three heads of mission in Moscow, acting on instructions from their respective governments, had Worked on texts for an opening statement to Stalin, a four power communiqué, and a directive for the military governors in Berlin. The draft texts from which they worked are those transmitted in telegram 1664, from Moscow and telegrams 958 and 962, to Moscow. August 17, pp. 1049 [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614], 1053, and 1056.

2 See telegram 1508, August 3, from Moscow, p. 999 [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 594].

3 For the text of Molotov’s counterdraft, under reference here, see The Berlin Crisis, pp. 23–24 or Cmd. 7534, p. 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13].

4 See telegram 1648, August 17, from Moscow, p. 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612].

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2448: Telegram

[Document 619]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret
niact Moscow, August 24, 1948—5 a. m.

1728. For the Secretary Eyes Only. Our conference tonight lasted almost five hours, the first two with Stalin and the remainder with Molotov as a drafting committee.1 After all of our careful rehearsals of procedure Stalin met us quite jovially with the remark, “well, I have a new draft”.2 To this we replied that Generalissimo Stalin was always the accomplished strategist but we also had a new draft3 and we would like him to examine ours while we examined his. Stalin’s draft was a proposed new communiqué covering all points but it conformed generally to our draft directive to military commanders. During the discussion of the respective drafts we were able to insert piecemeal our prepared opening statement4 and to reaffirm in strongest possible way our right to be in Berlin. Stalin’s explanation of various points in his draft and particularly his concern over maintaining the value of the Soviet zone mark and the connection therewith of the question of occupation costs were restrained and logical. He placed emphasis on use of Soviet Bank of Emission which he maintained was the source of currency for the Soviet zone and consequently must inevitably be the source of currency for Berlin. He explained that the functions of the Soviet Bank of Emission in connection with regulation of currency in Berlin would be subject to control of a financial commission of representatives of the four commanders which he proposed should be set up to govern the practical implementation of financial arrangements involved in the introduction and circulation of a single currency in Berlin. He was quite categorical that this commission would be the controlling body and said he did not mind using the word control.

He then said that assuming we could reach agreement on the two drafts (which he did not anticipate would be difficult) he felt something must be said about the London Conference. If it was inconvenient for prestige reasons, a confidential exchange of letters might be acceptable but he would prefer a published statement.

He then went on to the question of occupation costs. After saying that he would insist upon Berlin being exempted from occupation costs because otherwise the currency of Berlin (and therefore that of the Soviet zone) might be put to great strain, he later suggested that a relatively small sum, say 20,000,000 marks, be drawn from Berlin as “token” occupation costs and that the remainder be found from our respective zones. We were, of course, unable to agree but said the question would be carefully considered.

He agreed that unless proper arrangements could be made in Berlin for implementing currency change the entire plan would fall down and accepted the idea of a directive to the Military Governors, proposing that they be allowed a week to arrive at a solution. He stated he believed that this solution sound [could] and must be reached, reaffirming again that the financial commission which he proposed should control the economic arrangements in Berlin would be continuing in its function. He accepted several suggestions made by us including the important one that transport restrictions to be lifted would include those imposed before June 18 and agreed to a meeting within a week to confirm or complete the arrangements made in Berlin. He then suggested that we adjourn with Molotov and coordinate our respective drafts. Just before we left he reverted to the question of the London decisions with so much insistence that we felt it necessary to state that while our Governments would not agree to any lengthy published formula or even to the publication of what had been stated orally it was possible that they would accept a published announcement along the lines indicated in my telegram 1716, August 23, which we said we had tried our hands at here. After reading this he said “it suited the Soviet Union very little”. We explained the difference between a published document and a confidential statement. He suggested a statement to the general effect: “The question of the London decisions and of the formation of a West German Government was also discussed in an atmosphere of mutual understanding. The adoption of any decision on this subject was, however, deferred until the next meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers.” We said we felt that a statement of this sort would only be provocative, causing far more uncertainty and comment than was justified by the situation. We were prepared to suggest to our Governments a statement to the effect that the subject had been discussed in an atmosphere of mutual understanding but no decision had been reached. Stalin also disliked this and to terminate the discussion we agreed to refer his proposal to our Governments, remarking, however, that we felt sure nothing beyond the suggestion we had already made would be found acceptable and that it was better to say nothing than to say too little. It was agreed with Stalin that if the directive were approved by our Governments or if they had any comments we would inform Molotov. It might be possible to receive word by tomorrow night, August 24.

We then adjourned with Molotov and began work on our drafts. In our immediately following message5 is the original Soviet draft and the final draft directive and draft communiqué as agreed upon with Molotov, subject to reference to our Governments.

The high points of our discussion with Molotov were: (A) His apparently very real concern over the stability of Soviet currency. He visualizes the possibility of heavy demands on Soviet currency as the result of our occupation of Berlin and the costs resulting therefrom and seems to feel this will have inflationary effect which he is determined to prevent. His comments on this and on the other matters discussed were unusually frank.

(B) Reduction of occupation costs for Berlin. Both Stalin and Molotov apparently consider that it is essential for reasons given above to reduce the occupation costs of Berlin and to balance the Berlin budget. He implied that the food, coal, et cetera we were putting into Berlin should not be part of the current budget, but should be recoverable separately as a “debt” or “charge” against the city. I am not sure whether he meant this to be on a commercial basis or how he intended it to be handled. Most of our discussion hinged on these subjects.

(C) Molotov’s unwillingness to use in any part of the text the terms “quadripartite control” or “quadripartite arrangements”. He finally admitted openly that this was due to the Soviet juridical position in Berlin and their official denial of our right to be there. His apparent feeling is that the open use of the word “quadripartite” implies a tacit recognition of our claim. He pointed out that provision had been made for control by the Military Governors or their representatives and that the word “control” had actually been used without apprehension on Stalin’s part, but he would not accept the term quadripartite. He proposed instead of “quadripartite” in (B) of the communiqué the phrase “on the basis agreed between the four Military Governors”.

As you will note from the two drafts in our next telegram, practically every safeguard on which we have insisted has been included in the final draft. One paragraph on which we are uncertain, and on which Molotov stood his ground with the greatest determination is the paragraph relating to basis of trade. He insisted on including a provision for retaining “existing procedure for inter-zonal trade and clearing accounts” although agreeing to modification of existing procedure by agreement between the four commanders. Unfortunately the full significance of the proposed wording of this paragraph is not apparent to us although we suspect it and stated to Molotov that it was one item which we felt might be questioned by our Governments. Possibly I am unduly suspicious, as I was not sure just what his wording meant. We were able to get it watered down a little.

By comparison, things went so smoothly that I was a little worried, and remembered Stalin’s proverb, “an amiable bear is more dangerous than a hostile one”. However, we have obtained a draft directive which gives a better chance for agreement in Berlin under conditions satisfactory to us than I thought likely, provided always the Kremlin intends to reach an agreement. It is possible Stalin and Molotov realized that we had reached our minimum position and that they really do not at this time want a break. I am sure that it all goes back to the London Conference. This to them is the vital question and Molotov reverted to it again during our discussion with him and pressed us for a commitment finally accepting with reluctance our statement that we would refer Stalin’s proposal to our Governments. We have not heard the last of this by any means.

We agreed to announce tonight simply that we had met but we suggested that when the directive was approved and ready to be transmitted it would be necessary to make some public announcement on the lines mentioned my telegram 1716. Stalin accepted this. We said we hoped to be able to let him know your decision tomorrow, in which case, if it were favorable, the interim communiqué could be released at a time agreed by our Governments. It is understood that the final communiqué will be held in abeyance, even though agreed upon, and that it has no effect unless an agreed solution is produced in Berlin.

My final comment is that it seems to me this is an impossible job to give to the Military Governors, but on the other hand, I don’t see how we can spare more time.

Sent Department, repeated Berlin for Clay and Murphy 329, Paris for Caffery 274, London for Douglas 161.

Smith

1 Participating in this conference, held at the Kremlin beginning at 9 p. m., were Smith (U.S.), Roberts and Lunghi (U.K.), Chataigneau and Boyer de Fonscolombe (France), and Stalin, Molotov, Smirnov, Pavlov, and Yerofeyev. In telegrams 1731 and 1732, August 24, from Moscow, neither printed, Ambassador Smith transmitted detailed accounts of the sessions with Stalin and Molotov (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2448). Extracts from these detailed accounts appear in The Berlin Crisis, pp. 37–38. For Smith’s personal recollection of the meeting with Stalin, see Smith, Moscow Mission, pp. 239–242.

2 For the text of Stalin’s draft, see telegram 1729, August 24, from Moscow, infra.

3 The draft under reference here was transmitted in telegram 1716, August 23, from Moscow, supra.

4 The text of the statement under reference was transmitted in telegram 1716, supra.

5 Telegram 1729, infra.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2448: Telegram

[Document 620]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Moscow, August 24, 1948—6 a. m.

1729. Eyes Only for the Secretary. Following is original text of draft joint communiqué presented by Stalin.

Begins: “1. On August 25, all restrictions which have been recently imposed on the transport of persons and goods in either direction between the three Western zones of Germany and Berlin shall be removed and freedom of communications shall be maintained.

“2. On August 25, all restrictions which have been recently imposed on the traffic of goods to and from the Soviet zones of Germany shall be removed and freedom of communications shall be maintained.

“3. In addition to meetings of the commanders, meetings among representatives of the four Governments in the form of the Council of Foreign Ministers or other conferences of representatives of the Four Powers shall be held in the near future to discuss: “(a). Any questions which may be outstanding as regards Berlin, and

“(b). Any other outstanding problems affecting Germany as a whole.

“4. As from August 25 the German mark of the Soviet zone shall be accepted as the sole currency for Berlin and the Western mark ‘B’ shall be simultaneously withdrawn from circulation in Berlin, the regulation of currency flow in Berlin to be undertaken by the German Bank of Emission of the Soviet zone through the medium of the credit establishments operating at present in Berlin. Prior to that date the four commanders will work out arrangements involved in the introduction of the German mark of the Soviet zone in Berlin and the regulation of its flow in Berlin by the German Bank of Emission.

“These arrangements shall ensure:

“No discrimination or action against holders of German marks ‘B’ so that the exchange of Western marks ‘B’, issued at the time of their introduction, for German marks of the Soviet zone at the rate of one to one is ensured;

“Equal treatment as to currency and provision of fully accessible banking and credit facilities throughout all sectors of Berlin so that this will not lead to disorganizing currency flow or to disturbing the stability of currency in the Soviet zone of occupation;

“A satisfactory basis for trade between Berlin, third countries and the Western zones in conformity with the existing procedure of inter-zonal trade and barter accounting and on condition that any modification of this procedure of trade will be made only by agreement between the four commanders;

“Provision of sufficient currency for budgetary purposes provided that the balance of the Berlin budget is maintained;

“Occupation costs resulting from the presence of forces in Berlin shall be met from the budgets of the respective zones of occupation of Germany, Berlin being exempted from occupation costs;

“A financial commission of representatives of the four commanders shall be set up to control the practical implementation of financial arrangements involved in the introduction of a single currency in Berlin.

“5. Should the preparation of the arrangements indicated here not be completed prior to August 25, the four commanders shall agree on another date for the simultaneous implementation of the above-mentioned decisions.” Draft ends.

Text of communiqué finally agreed upon with Molotov, to be held in abeyance pending report of Military Governors as result of action on their directive, is identical with that given in my telegram 1716, August 231 with following changes:

Under Paragraph “A” insert words “which have recently been” after “restrictions”.

Under Paragraph “B” substitute for “under quadripartite arrangements already agreed” the words “on the basis agreed between the four Military Governors”.

Last paragraph—remove brackets, and modify subparagraphs (1) and (2): (1) to read “any questions regarding Berlin which have not been settled by the Four Powers”; (2)—“any other problems affecting Germany as a whole which have not been settled by the Four Powers”.

Text of draft directive to Military Governors identical that transmitted my telegram 1716 except as follows:

Paragraph 1 identical with brackets removed from within subparagraph (A) and with words “which have recently been imposed” inserted after the words “Soviet zone of Germany”.

Paragraph 2 identical with insertion of date August 31 and addition of following sentence from the Soviet draft which is largely redundant but to which Molotov seemed to attach importance, “the four commanders will work out arrangements involved in the introduction of the German mark of the Soviet zone in Berlin and the regulation of its circulation in Berlin by the German Bank of Emission”.

Draft then continues as follows: “The arrangements relating to the currency changeover and to the continued provision and use in Berlin of the German mark of the Soviet zone shall ensure: “(A). No discrimination or action against holders of Western marks ‘B’ in connection with the exchange of those Western marks ‘B’ issued at the time of introduction of that currency into Berlin. These shall be exchanged for German marks of the Soviet zone at the rate of one for one; (note—Molotov justified his insistence on this wording by saying that there might be a flood of real or counterfeit Western notes offered for exchange, over and above the amount originally issued);

“(B). Equal treatment as to currency and provision of fully accessible banking and credit facilities throughout all sectors of Berlin on the understanding that this will not lead to disorganizing currency circulation or disrupting the stability of currency in the Soviet zone of occupation;

“(C). A satisfactory basis for trade between Berlin and third countries and Western zones, taking into account the existing procedure of inter-zonal trade and clearing accounts. Modification of the existing procedure of inter-zonal trade will be made only by agreement between the four Military Governors; (note—this is the paragraph on which Molotov was so insistent and which worried me because I did not know its implications);

“(D). The provision of sufficient currency for budgetary purposes and for occupation costs, reduced to the greatest extent possible, and also the balancing of the Berlin budget;

“(E). The regulation of currency circulation in Berlin to be undertaken by the German Bank of Emission of the Soviet zone through the medium of the credit establishments operating at present in Berlin;

“(F). A financial commission of representatives of the four Military Governors shall be set up to control the practical implementation of the financial arrangements indicated above, involved in the introduction and the circulation of a single currency in Berlin.”

Request urgently minimum essential changes in wording as close as possible to that given in this draft, and reasons for unacceptability, which I can use in coordinating here and in discussion with Molotov. There are probably some catches which have not been apparent to us. However, if Clay can work under terms given above it would be advisable to take it.

Sent Department, repeated London for Douglas 162, Paris for Caffery 275, Berlin for Clay and Murphy as 330.

Smith

1  Ante, p. 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 618].

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Beam) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2448

[Document 621]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Beam)

top secret [Washington,] August 24, 1948.

Clay at first commented generally as follows on the Moscow texts:1

“I do not feel very happy about directive.

“First—the proposed establishment of a financial commission avoids acceptance of Berlin as a quadripartite city under Kommandatura; in effect our acceptance means a politically separate Berlin under Soviet currency. The implications and difficulties of future operations are clear.

“Secondly—the proposed trade agreement implies treating Berlin as part of Soviet Zone since it would place trade to third countries and Western zones on same basis. This of course means an even exchange of raw materials for goods of same value which will represent great cost with food and coal subsidized by Allies and west Germany. No provision is made for utilization of Soviet currency obtained from food sales.

“Thirdly, budgetary control of city lies in Soviet hands.

“Fourthly, occupation cost limitation will be severe to west because Berlin subsidized three-fourths by west coal and food, with raw materials brought in for finished goods of same value and relieved of occupation costs represents a great financial liability to west and becomes a substantial asset to Soviet zone.”

After receiving our amendments,2 General Clay felt that the changes overcame most of the various technical objections he had in mind. However, he felt that the issue of quadripartite administration had not been met, and if the agreement were made along the lines of the Moscow texts it might, in fact, be conceded to the Soviets. In his opinion the Germans in political and official life will not believe that the agreement restores quadripartite equality and he commented that in Berlin we will have to fight an uphill battle and the issue will only be postponed. His final comments were: “Quadripartite control or supervision of currency credit and trade is only a part of issue. At moment we have divided police forces, divided distributing agencies, and threatened Soviet disavowal of city government. There is involved the full political, governmental, social, and economic life of the city.…3 From my view-point here, I would insist on settling the issue now. However, I recognize broad implications which lead you to different view and decision. I am afraid though that we are merely postponing the day when that decision will have to be made. I recognize, too, that this may well be the wise decision and will do my utmost to effect agreement.”

1 The reference here is to the interim communiqué and directive to the four military governors, transmitted in telegram 1729, August 24, from Moscow, supra. Apparently this memorandum is a summary of a telecon held with Clay immediately after the receipt of telegram 1729.

2 See redrafted texts in telegram 1007, August 24, to Moscow, p. 1074 [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623].

3 Omission indicated in the source text.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2448: Telegram

[Document 622]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, August 24, 1948—11 p. m.

1006. For the Ambassador Eyes Only. In our immediately following telegrams2 we give you suggested additions and omissions in the draft communiqué and directive submitted (your 17293 ) following your meeting with Stalin and Molotov and comments on Western German Government. We have however, the following general comment to make on the proposals as a whole.

We are very much concerned that these drafts do not contain any confirmation of the principle of quadripartite administration of the city of Berlin. We understand that it was not intended that you should seek in these agreements a written confirmation of our general right but had hoped that this principle would find reflection in the arrangements regarding currency. Our general impression is that they appear to be consistent with the Soviet thesis that currency and trade in the city of Berlin shall in the future be primarily under Soviet direction with some small measure of Western participation through the Financial Committee whose powers and functions, however are not clearly defined. Indeed Molotov in stating so clearly his objections to including the word “quadripartite” anywhere in the agreement expressly and definitely confirmed this basic point.

We recognize that the present drafts represent a considerable Soviet concession on certain points, but they do not satisfactorily meet the issue which we have from the beginning regarded as fundamental and controlling.

As long as the Soviet representatives continue to maintain their thesis that we have no rights in Berlin but are there, in effect, on Soviet sufferance, there is obviously no basis for a satisfactory arrangement with them on the Berlin question. Any such arrangement would be subject to the two conflicting interpretations and hence would be unworkable. This fundamental difficulty could be met by any one of the following alternatives: (1) inclusion in communiqué of an appropriate statement by the three Western Powers;

(2) a communication from the three Western Powers to be published.

In the circumstances, we feel it is essential that either there should be included in the communiqué or conveyed in writing and preferably in a joint aide-mémoire from the three Western representatives a clear statement of our position and understanding that the arrangements made for lifting the blockade in Berlin and dealing with the currency question are without prejudice to the co-equal rights, duties and obligations of the four occupying powers in Berlin. This communication in writing should be delivered to Molotov or Stalin prior to any agreement on the communiqué or the directive to go to the Military Governors.

We feel that in sending the directive to the Military Governors, they should be instructed to report back to their Governments within one week, whether in agreement or not, so that the Governments could then decide whether or not to extend the time-limit. Otherwise we fear that the discussions in Berlin might drag on for too long a period.

In the event of an agreement involving the directive to the Military Governors, we agree with the text of the interim announcement contained in your 1716,4 agreed to by Stalin.

Marshall

1 Repeated to London as 3361, Paris as 3291, and Berlin as 1513.

2 Telegrams 1007 and 1008, infra.

3 August 24, p. 1069 [Pg. 1069 is part of Doc. 620].

4 August 23, p. 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 618].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2448: Telegram

[Document 623]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, August 24, 1948—11 p. m.

1007. For the Ambassador. Following is redraft of proposed communiqué and directive which we have made here after consultaion with Clay to reflect to greater extent principle of quadripartite administration of Berlin.2 This redraft adheres as closely as possible to wording you sent us. Roberts is receiving comments thereon direct from Robertson at Bevin’s request.3

At end of quoted text reasons are given for such of our changes as are not immediately apparent.

Text of communiqué “The Governments of France, the U.K., the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. have agreed that the following measures (under (A) and (B)) shall be put into effect simultaneously, and have approved detailed arrangements for their implementation jointly worked out by the four military governors: (A) The restrictions which have recently been imposed on communications, transport and commerce between Berlin and the western zones and between the various zones of Germany shall be lifted, and freedom of communications, transport and commerce shall be maintained.

(B) The German mark of the Soviet zone shall be accepted, on the basis agreed between the four military governors, as the sole currency for Berlin and the western mark ‘B’ shall be simultaneously withdrawn from circulation in Berlin.

The four Governments have also agreed that in addition to meetings of the four military governors, meetings among representatives of the four Governments, in the form of the Council of Foreign Ministers or other conferences of representatives of the Four Powers, shall be held in the near future to discuss: (1) Any questions regarding Berlin.

(2) Any problem affecting Germany as a whole.”

End text of communiqué. Text of directive: “The Governments of France, the United Kingdom, United States and U.S.S.R. have decided that the following steps should be taken simultaneously, subject to agreement for their implementation being reached among the four military governors responsible for Berlin: (A) Restrictions on communications, transport and commerce between Berlin and the Western zones and to and from the Soviet zone of Germany which have recently been imposed shall be lifted;

(B) The German mark of the Soviet zone shall be introduced as the sole currency for Berlin, and the western mark ‘B’ shall be withdrawn from circulation in Berlin.

In connection with the above you are instructed to consult together with your colleagues so as to make, in the shortest time possible, the detailed arrangements necessary for the implementation of these decisions, and to inform your Government not later than August 31 of the results of your discussions, including the exact date on which the measures under (A) and (B) above can be brought into effect. The four commanders will work out arrangements involved in the introduction of the German mark of the Soviet zone in Berlin and the regulation by the commission referred to in paragraph (F) below of its circulation in Berlin.

The arrangements relating to the currency changeover and to the continued provision and use in Berlin of the German mark of the Soviet zone shall ensure: (A) No discrimination or action against holders of western marks ‘B’ in connection with the exchange of those western marks ‘B’ issued in Berlin prior to the effective date of this agreement. These shall be exchanged for German marks of the Soviet zone at the rate of one for one with an equitable compensation for different bases of issuance of the two currencies in Berlin.

(B) Equal treatment as to currency and provision of fully accessible banking and credit facilities throughout all sectors of Berlin.

(C) A satisfactory basis for trade between Berlin and third countries and all zones of Germany to be incorporated into an equitable trade agreement. Modification of the agreed procedure will be made only by agreement between the four Military Governors.

(D) The provision of sufficient currency for budgetary purposes and for occupation costs, reduced to the greatest extent possible;

(E) The regulation of currency circulation in Berlin, under the supervision of the Financial Commission referred to in paragraph (F), to be undertaken by the German Bank of Emission of the Soviet zone through the medium of the credit establishments operating at present in Berlin;4

(F) A Financial Commission of representatives of the four Military Governors shall be set up to control the practical implementation of the financial arrangements indicated above, involved in the introduction and the circulation of a single currency in Berlin. This commission shall endeavor to prevent the foregoing arrangements from leading to disorganizing currency circulation or disrupting the stability of currency in the Soviet zone of occupation”.

Explanation re changes in communiqué:

Under (A) words “transport and commerce” were added.

In (1) and (2) regarding Four Power meetings we changed sentences since we were disturbed that reference to questions and problems “which have not been settled by the Four Powers” might exclude discussion of matters which Soviets might claim were definitively settled by Yalta, Potsdam Agreements, etc.

Explanation re changes in draft directive:

At Clay’s suggestion, preamble was re-worded to emphasize responsibility of all four Military Governors for Berlin. He thought this amendment might help in reasserting principle of quadripartite Berlin administration, although he realized this did not fully and emphatically meet the issue.

Under (A), words “transport and commerce” were added to conform with similar provision of communiqué and reference to “traffic of goods” was amended.

Under second sentence (B) reference to Finance Commission was added.

Second set of lettered paragraphs.

Under (A). Amended to cover currency issued subsequent to time of introduction currency reform. Second amendment designed to provide non-discrimination for holders western mark who were originally issued considerably less converted currency than holders Soviet zone mark.

Under (B). Reference to protection stability Soviet zone currency could operate as a crippling reservation in this provision and is more appropriately related to functions Financial Commission mentioned under (F).

Under (C). We were disturbed by reference to “existing procedure” which might confirm claim present Soviet zone trade monopoly to handle all Berlin trade. Amended text suggested by Clay.

Under (D). We were disturbed that balancing of Berlin budget could be made a condition for payment occupation costs and prefer amended less rigid wording.

Under (E). Amendment self-explanatory.

Under (F). Pro vision originally under (B) added to this paragraph.

Marshall

1 This telegram was repeated to London as 3362, to Paris as 3292, and to Berlin as 1514.

2 The draft texts that follow were revisions of the drafts transmitted in telegram 1729, August 24, from Moscow, p. 1069 [Pg. 1069 is part of Doc. 620]. They were prepared following a teletype conference between the Department and the Embassy in London during the afternoon of August 24. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048)

3 In his telegram 4379, August 25, from Paris, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2548), Ambassador Caffery reported that the French Foreign Ministry generally agreed with the draft texts presented here and with the substance of the instructions contained in telegram 1006, August 24, to Moscow, supra.

4  In telegram 1012, August 25, to Moscow, not printed, the Department sent Smith substitute language for this paragraph which had been received from Clay. It read: “(E) The regulation of currency circulation and credit in Berlin to be under the supervision of the Financial Commission, referred to in part (F) through the medium of the credit establishments operating at present in Berlin. Appropriate agreements to be arrived at with the approval of the Financial Commission between the Berlin credit establishments and the German Bank of Emission of the Soviet Zone to insure adequate currency and credit supplies for the Departments of the city and the Berlin budget.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2548)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2448: Telegram

[Document 624]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, August 24, 1948—11 p. m.

1008.1 For the Ambassador. It is clear that Stalin’s language with respect to Western Germany is open to misinterpretation and therefore as you warned Stalin unacceptable. We agree with Bevin’s position as set forth in London’s 3828 repeated to you as 227.2 The language suggested in your 17163 would be acceptable with the following modifications to indicate that we do not refuse to discuss this point at some subsequent time but are not prepared to make any commitments whatsoever as to postponement. This must be made clear to the Soviets.

“During the conversations the Soviet Govt expressed its wish that the implementation of the decisions of the London conference should not result in the establishment of a govt for Western Germany before the representatives of the Four Powers had been able to meet to discuss the whole German problem. The representatives of the US, UK and France affirmed the desire of their govts for a four power agreement whereby a govt for the whole of Germany would be established. They explained that the London decisions did not preclude such an agreement and, while they were not able to agree to any postponement of the implementation of the London decisions, they would make a sincere endeavor to ascertain whether there is a real prospect of agreement among the four powers. Further discussion of this point was accordingly deferred.”4

Marshall

1 Repeated to London as 3363, Paris as 3293, and Berlin as 1515.

2 Not printed. For a description of the instructions sent to Roberts at this time, see Cmd. 7534, p. 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20].

3 August 23, p. 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 618].

4 In telegram 1009, August 25, to Moscow, not printed, the Department told Smith that agreement had been reached with the British and French on the necessity for a written reservation of the Western rights in Berlin and a statement on the West German Government. Smith was authorized to work out the final text of the Directive and the Communiqué with his colleagues in Moscow. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2548)

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2548: Telegram

[Document 625]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Moscow, August 25, 1948.

1749. Eyes Only for the Secretary. I share the apprehensions expressed in your 1006, August 24,1 but I am frankly somewhat puzzled by its contents. You state “we are much concerned that these drafts do not contain any confirmation of the principle of quadripartite administration of the city of Berlin,” but later state that this could be covered by, (1) inclusion in the communiqué of an appropriate statement by the three Western Powers, or (2) by a communication from the three Western Powers to be published.

I am rather at a loss to understand how either of these alternatives would constitute Soviet confirmation of the principle of quadripartite administration of the city of Berlin. We have, during these conversations, stated repeatedly our position re Berlin and the Soviet conferees have repeatedly stated theirs. This problem of diametrically opposed positions has been clearly defined since the first talk of our series and we have always been alive to the dangers inherent in any interim agreement here. I tried to bring these clearly into focus in my 1663 of August 172 which might profitably be reread at this time.

Western Governments have no intention of abandoning present juridical position re Berlin, and the Russians no intention of abandoning theirs while the London decisions are still hanging over their heads. The best we could hope to get would be a somewhat negative paragraph to the effect that the agreement had been entered into without prejudice to the juridical position taken by the respective governments in regard to their occupation of Berlin, and for this we might barter the equally negative statement we are prepared to make with regard to the London conference.

We feel Department’s view that directive formula “implies that currency in the City of Berlin shall be primarily under Soviet direction” is a little too pessimistic and premature. Certainly Soviet conferees in Berlin will do everything they can to extend their control of currency and Berlin’s economic life but is this not one of the things that we intend to develop and resist in Berlin?

We were not concerned about substituting in certain functions previously exercised by the Kommandatura the financial commission proposed by Stalin, since I understood definitely from Department’s and Clay’s messages that the resurrection of Kommandatura as an active agency was not particularly desirable.

The fundamentals of the situation seem to me to be as follows: (1) Quadripartite control does not exist in Berlin today.

(2) The Russians have no intention of permitting the revival of quadripartite control in Berlin so long as they are unable to achieve quadripartite control of Germany.

(3) The Russians are, however, prepared to make practical concessions as regards the control of financial and economic operations in Berlin as the price of getting their currency introduced there and western currency withdrawn. Actually this means that they are shifting their offensive line in Berlin from transport to currency and this offensive will have to be met just as we have met their aggressive action in connection with transportation. It is possible that as a result of technical discussions in Berlin we will be in a better tactical position to meet it. The extent of the practical concessions they are prepared to make can only be determined by such technical discussions in Berlin but I am sure that these concessions will in no case include resumption of quadripartite control over the life and government of the city.

In my opinion we must accordingly decide whether our position is better in Berlin if we simply stay under present conditions and take the necessary measures to organize the life of the three western sectors independently; or whether it is better to have communications resumed under circumstances in which we would not have complete control over the life of our own sectors.

Finally it was our understanding that we are to produce conditions under which higher level talks might begin at some future date in an atmosphere free of direct pressure. In other words we have worked on the basis of an interim agreement. I am sure it will be quite impossible here to produce any public major concessions of principle.3 I will comment in detail on Department’s 1007,4 just received, in my immediate following.

Sent Department 1749. Department pass Berlin 337, Eyes Only Murphy and Clay; Paris 282 Eyes Only Caffery; London 171 Eyes Only Douglas.

Smith

1  Ante, p. 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622].

2  Ante, p. 1047 [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613].

3  Telegram 1019, August 25, to Moscow, not printed, expressed the view that no Soviet confirmation of Western rights in Berlin could be expected but added the following conviction: “We feel we must, however, make certain that the communiqué and directive do not in fact give any grounds for a Soviet claim that we have abandoned these rights by the present agreement or alternatively permit world opinion to conclude that we have given up an important principle merely for the sake of agreement. We believe that the necessities of the situation would be met satisfactorily if the communiqué or separate announcement stated that this agreement was made without prejudice to the rights of the parties as occupying powers on the one hand and without prejudice to the position taken by the Soviets with respect to the London Conference decisions on the other.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2548)

4 August 24, p. 1074 [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623].

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2548: Telegram

[Document 626]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, August 25, 1948—7 p. m.

1750. Personal attention the Secretary, Eyes Only. My comments on Department’s 1007, August 24:1

Draft communiqué:

(a) Addition good and would probably be accepted. Under subparagraphs (1) and (2)—see no real difference in actual significance in English meaning of words “which have not been settled” etc., and the word “outstanding” used in our original proposal. Former words inserted to get around difficulties of Russian translation as Molotov said Russian equivalent of word “outstanding” was either “unsettled” or “unsound”. This change would simply open up another argument from Molotov for inserting additions proposed by him which we rejected. Doubt if there has yet been a Four-Power conference where Molotov did not attempt exclude items as having been settled “by Yalta or Potsdam” and see no reason to expect him to refrain from doing so in future regardless of wording in communiqué. Recommend change not be insisted on, or take original word “outstanding” which British prefer.

Draft directive:

Preamble—The shade of meaning between the two versions2 is so relatively insignificant that it hardly justifies the counterproposals it will provoke simply in an attempt to slip in the word “responsible” which Molotov will reject anyway. Also do not see any particular reason for omitting the word “practical”. It must be remembered that every word changed or omitted gives an opening for counterattacks. Recommend change not be insisted on.

(A) Addition of “transport and commerce” and omission of the words “on the traffic of goods”, essentially same meaning and may get by.

(B) Molotov might accept insertion of some supervisory reference to the Financial Commission referred to in paragraph F, but sure he will not accept deletion of reference to the function of the German Bank of Emission. Recommend latter be retained.

Second set of lettered paragraphs: (A) Molotov would probably accept an extension of wording to cover those issues of western currency made by authority of Military Governors subsequent to the initial issue. He might also accept the second amendment in some form. We are poorly equipped to argue such points which I visualized would be raised during the technical discussions in Berlin and referred here if necessary for us to fight out with Molotov while these discussions in progress. We are not capable of evaluating the counterproposals on wording which Molotov is sure to make in an effort to slip back in some of the points he has so far failed to make. It seems that our people in Berlin might well argue that the proviso re nondiscrimination should clearly be interpreted to cover this point and we here might put Molotov on notice re second amendment without actually adding the proposed words if he objects strongly. Such objection would mean, of course, trouble in Berlin. Recommend that second amendment not be insisted on.

(B) If “equal treatment” is actually going to lead to possible disorganization of currency circulation or disrupting stability of currency in Soviet zone, as the omission of this phrase will imply to Molotov, then we might as well stop right now. The inadequate wording proposed under (F) will not satisfy him by any means. This is another technical matter which we are not competent to argue here but which should be discussed in Berlin, and is one of the reasons why the phrase “subject to agreement being reached among the four Military Governors” is inserted in the preamble. Recommend this change not be insisted on.

(C) Concur. I was suspicious of this paragraph from the start, but my technical knowledge re Berlin’s trade is nil, and your 1007 does not give me much ammunition for argument. See my final comment under (B) above.

(D) Molotov will fight omission of reference to balancing Berlin budget. However, he does not seem to visualize this as a short-term job, although like other items in the directive he has probably inserted it for later tactical use against us. I doubt if he will break on this point alone, however, and we may be able to water down the phrase but hardly to eliminate it. It is hard for us to argue against trying to balance Berlin budget. Recommend this change not be insisted on.

(E) Concur. Added wording is good. Similar formula might be used in first paragraph following first numbered series where reference to German Bank of Emission has been deleted by you.

(F) To say to Molotov that a commission suggested by Stalin shall “endeavor” to prevent disorganization of currency in the Soviet zone conjures up mental picture which I hope, on further consideration by Department, will provide there a touch of humor which has been lacking here in our proceedings so far. I really think that this commission must be at least “charged with” this duty, but my comments under paragraph (B) apply here and I recommend we adhere as far as possible to original arrangement and wording. This is another matter “subject to agreement in Berlin”. Recommend this change not be insisted on.

General comment:

I have just reread in Deptel 8893 the 32-word formula (B) which Clay at that time considered acceptable to cover the currency question and I cannot help wondering where the rest has come from.

I must say my reaction to all the foregoing, as a whole, is that if our governments want us to start this thing all over, we are of course prepared to do so, and proposed redraft more or less puts us in that position. But if we really want a decision, we must make up our minds on fundamental lines suggested my preceding telegram.4 If it is to be a break, then let us break on the basic issue of the quadripartite control of Berlin. The language changes suggested in reference telegram slide indirectly toward this issue, but they do not constitute an acceptance of such quadripartite control and would not be regarded as a commitment to this effect by the Soviet Government.

My recommendations as to tactics in present situation are as follows: 1. We should get coordinated text with British and French as quickly as possible. I hope within a matter of 24 hours.

2. We should secure such concessions as we can extract from Molotov in one further meeting.

3. Our governments should accept the resulting directive and refer the matter to Berlin as quickly as possible under a one-week time limit. If the conferees in Berlin stick on any point which we might solve here, it can be referred here for concurrent conference with Molotov. Together we may succeed.

4. If failure is inevitable, then let it come at the end of that week and clearly on the issue of quadripartite control.

5. At the end of the week we would have our final meeting with Stalin and speak our closing piece as clearly and forcibly as possible.

6. We would proceed thereafter in accordance with the plans already worked out by the Department for the eventuality of a breakdown in these talks.5

Since dictating the above, I have read the instructions just received by Roberts in which Bevin state he has informed Douglas that subject to amendments he has suggested (and they are few) he is prepared to agree to the text we submitted. He then adds: “There may be some justification for our fears. But there comes a point in every negotiation when a decision must be taken and I do not consider the difference between the drafts which you presented to Stalin and the drafts which you have now submitted for approval would be sufficient to justify in the eyes of our public a breakdown in negotiations. We have a chance of wrecking the agreement if we put up a long series of amendments.”

On the assumption that if possible an agreement without sacrifice of major principle is desired, I completely concur in Mr. Bevin’s opinion as quoted and believe that this opinion should be taken as reinforcing the recommendations on tactics which I have submitted in this message.

Sent Department 1750; Department pass to Paris as 283 Eyes Only for Caffery, London as 171 Eyes Only for Douglas, Berlin as 338 Eyes Only for Clay and Murphy.

Smith

1  Ante, p. 1074 [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623].

2 The two versions under reference here are those transmitted in telegram 1007, August 24, from Moscow (p. 1074 [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623]) and in telegram 1716, August 23, from Moscow (p. 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 618]) as amended by telegram 1729, August 24, from Moscow (p. 1069 [Pg. 1069 is part of Doc. 620]).

3 August 3, p. 1008 [Pg. 1008 is part of Doc. 596].

4 Telegram 1749, supra.

5 During the month of August the United Kingdom, France and the United States were working on the texts of a joint note to be sent to the Soviet Government in the event of a breakdown in the talks at Moscow and a joint press release explaining the failure of the talks. Both documents were updated as each succeeding meeting in Moscow failed to produce the expected breakdown. The various drafts and revisions are included in the August 1948 segment of the Department of State file 740.00119 Control (Germany).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2548: Telegram

[Document 627]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, August 26, 1948—2 a. m.

1022. For the Ambassador Eyes Only. As you are aware the following are our basic requirements for agreement: 1) Insistence on our co-equal rights to be in Berlin.

2) No abandonment of our position with respect to Western Germany.

3) Unequivocal lifting of blockade on communications, transport and commerce for goods and persons.

4) Adequate quadripartite control of issue and continued use in Berlin of the Soviet mark.2

With these principles in mind we have examined comments in urtel 17503 for text of directive and are in general agreement with your recommendations. While we should still like to see as many of our proposals inserted in directive as possible, we do not insist and can accept your recommendations subject to the following comments:

We can agree not to insist upon change in preamble.

(A) There is a difference in meaning between our and Soviet proposal since theirs might be interpreted to exclude transport of persons. We feel you should insist on this point.

(B) We can agree to addition of reference to German Bank of Emission provided there is also reference to the Commission’s supervisory powers. We note French are in agreement this point (Paris tel. 4398 rept to you as 4124 ).

Second set of lettered paragraphs.

(A) Your comment acceptable provided it is understood Military Governors should have some latitude to work this out. In any event you should make strong statement for the record.

(B) We still consider it is a point of prime importance that no wording be accepted which would make equal treatment dependent upon a condition which could easily vitiate the whole basis of agreement. To accept without qualification the Soviet wording “on the understanding that this will not lead to disorganizing etc” might well make the stability of Soviet currency the over-riding consideration. This would transfer the horse-laugh referred to in your para (F) from front to rear. To take care of this point however we suggest that language be inserted in para (B) to the effect that “the Commission referred to under (F) should be given the responsibility to provide adequate safeguards to prevent the use in Berlin of the Soviet Zone mark from leading to disorganizing currency circulation or disrupting the stability of currency in the Soviet Zone”.

(C) We note you agree. This is vital point. In the first instance Soviet wording implies that Berlin is an integral part of the Soviet zone. Further, in order to discharge our occupation responsibilities in Berlin we must have adequate voice in control of Berlin’s external trade.

(D) We accept your procedure but suggest, if Molotov insists upon reference to balancing of budget, that you propose this matter be left to Commission to work out.

(E) We note you concur our suggestion and hope it will be possible to secure agreement.

(F) In view of amendment to (B) above original text of this para acceptable.

As to communiqué you should tell Molotov that it is acceptable in principle with British changes in (1) and (2) in paragraph on C.F.M. Since we feel it important that entire discussion should not break down on disagreement in Berlin on technical points but on basic issue in Moscow in event of disagreement, you should make it clear to Molotov that agreement on communiqué is subject to final approval by Govts following report from Military Governors. In other words communiqué is not finally agreed to by U.S. Govt until we see report from Mil Govs in Berlin. You should make it clear to Molotov that before final agreement on communiqué the 3 Western Powers intend either to include in the communiqué or in separate communication to be published a statement to the effect that the 3 Western Powers are concluding this agreement without prejudice to the co-equal rights, duties and obligations of the Four Occupying Powers in Berlin.

In view of British and French instructions on this point as we understand them we do not insist that this be communicated in writing (see Deptel 10065 ) to Molotov prior to agreement on directive but may be stated orally.

Marshall

1 Repeated to London as 3385, Paris as 3317, and Berlin as 1528.

2 In telegram 3864, August 26, from London, not printed, Douglas reported British agreement with these basic requirements (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2548).

3  Supra.

4 Not printed.

5 August 24, p. 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2648: Telegram

[Document 628]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, August 26, 1948—9 p. m.

1026. For the Ambassador (Eyes Only). You will have seen London’s 3858 rptd to you as 2302 and 3870 rptd to you as 2322 concerning paragraph C. In view of British position, which we are informed French share, you are authorized to accept as initial proposal language suggested by Douglas in his 3858 for this paragraph as follows: “A satisfactory basis for trade between Berlin and third countries and all zones of Germany to be agreed to by the Military Governors. Modifications of this agreed basis only to be made by agreement by the four Military Governors.”

If Molotov refuses to accept this, you should revert to our draft C (Deptel 10073 ).

We cannot accept paragraph C (your 17294 ) as written which would need clarification to take care of points set out in our paragraph C (Deptel 10225 ).

We are disturbed by impression that British and French are prepared to go too far in order to get quick agreement on directive. We see no reason for haste in view of the very vital issues concerned. There has been a definite crystallization of American public and Congressional opinion over the Berlin issue and any agreement we make which appears to have sold out any of our basic rights in Berlin or Western Germany in exchange for lifting the blockade will be received with violent indignation here. From all reports the country is more unified in its determination not to weaken in the face of the pressure of an illegal blockade than on any other issue we can recall in time of peace.

Marshall

1 Repeated to London as 3409, Paris as 3336, and Berlin as 1533.

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

3 August 24, p. 1074 [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623].

4 August 24, p. 1069 [Pg. 1069 is part of Doc. 620].

5  Supra.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2748: Telegram

[Document 629]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, August 27, 1948—11 p. m.

1776. Eyes Only for the Secretary or Lovett; Douglas, Murphy, Clay and Caffery. Following are texts of draft communiqué and directive as they emerged from our 3-hour meeting with Molotov and Vyshinsky tonight:1

Begin communiqué:

“The Governments of France, the UK, USA and USSR have agreed that following measures under (A) and (B) shall be put into effect simultaneously, and have approved detailed arrangements for their implementation jointly worked out by the four military governors.

(A) The restrictions which have recently been imposed on communications, transport and commerce between Berlin and the Western zones and between the various zones of Germany shall be lifted, and freedom of communications, transport and commerce shall be maintained.

(B) The German mark of the Soviet zone shall be accepted, on the basis agreed between the four military governors, as the sole currency for Berlin and the Western mark ‘B’ shall be simultaneously withdrawn from circulation in Berlin.

The four governments have also agreed that in addition to meetings of the four military governors, meetings among representatives of the four governments in the form of the Council of Foreign Ministers or other conferences of representatives of the four powers shall be held in the near future to discuss: (1) Any outstanding questions regarding Berlin, and (2) any other outstanding problems affecting Germany as a whole.” Communiqué ends.

Directive begins:

“The Governments of France, the UK, US and USSR have decided that, subject to agreement being reached among the four military governors in Berlin for their practical implementation, the following steps shall be taken simultaneously: (A) Restrictions on communications, transport and commerce between Berlin and the Western zones and to and from the Soviet zone of Germany which have recently been imposed shall be lifted;

(B) The German mark of the Soviet zone shall be introduced as the sole currency for Berlin, and the Western mark ‘B’ shall be withdrawn from circulation in Berlin.

In connection with the above you are instructed to consult together with your colleagues so as to make, in the shortest time possible, the detailed arrangements necessary for the implementation of these decisions, and to inform your government not later than September 42 of the results of your discussions, including the exact date on which the measures under (A) and (B) above can be brought into effect. The four military governors will work out arrangements involved in the introduction of the German mark of the Soviet zone in Berlin.

The arrangements relating to the currency changeover and to the continued provision and use in Berlin of the German mark of the Soviet zone shall ensure: (A) No discrimination or action against holders of Western marks ‘B’ in connection with the exchange of those Western marks issued in Berlin. These shall be accepted for exchange for German marks of the Soviet zone at the rate of one for one;

(B) Equal treatment as to currency and provision of fully accessible banking and credit facilities throughout all sectors of Berlin. The four military governors are charged with providing adequate safeguards to prevent the use in Berlin of the German mark of the Soviet zone from leading to disorganizing currency circulation or disrupting the stability of currency in the Soviet zone;

(C) A satisfactory basis for trade between Berlin and third countries and the Western zones of Germany. Modification of this agreed basis to be made only by agreement among the four military governors;

(D) The provision of sufficient currency for budgetary purposes and for occupation costs, reduced to the greatest extent possible, and also the balancing of the Berlin budget.

The regulation of currency circulation in Berlin is to be undertaken by the German Bank of Emission of the Soviet zone through the medium of the credit establishments operating at present in Berlin.

A financial commission of representatives of the four military governors shall be set up to control the practical implementation of the financial arrangements indicated above, involved in the introduction and continued circulation of a single currency in Berlin.”3 Directive ends.

Explanation and preliminary comments contained in my immediately following telegram.4

Sent Department 1776; Department pass London 177; Berlin 343; Paris 288.

Smith

1 Participating in this meeting, which was held at the Kremlin at 5 p. m., were Smith (U.S.), Roberts and Lunghi (U.K.), Chataigneau and Boyer de Fons-colombe (France), and Molotov, Vyshinsky, Pavlov, and Yerofeyev (U.S.S.R.).

2 In the final agreed text of the directive, this date was changed to September 7.

3 With the change indicated in the previous footnote, this directive was finally agreed upon by the American, British, French, and Soviet representatives at their meeting on August 30 (see telegram 1818, August 30, from Moscow, p. 1092 [Pg. 1092 includes portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632]). The final agreed text, dated August 30, is printed in The Berlin Crisis, pp. 40–41 and Cmd. 7534, p. 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33] as well as in Germany 1947–1949, pp. 211–212, Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, pp. 594–595, and Documents on Berlin, pp. 83–84.

4 Telegram 1777, August 27, from Moscow, infra.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2748: Telegram

[Document 630]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, August 27, 1948—midnight.

1777. For the Secretary Eyes Only, Caffery, Douglas, Clay and Murphy. Comments on communiqué (mytel 1776, August 271 ): Russian text of communiqué, as provisionally worked out August 23, furnished us yesterday by Pavlov contained an additional paragraph on London decisions as proposed by Stalin. We challenged this yesterday in writing and orally tonight. Molotov admitted that this additional paragraph had not been agreed to by us on August 23 but he understood that we were willing to obtain our government’s views regarding it. Discussion of this point was deferred until we had dealt with, the directive. Molotov confirmed without question Stalin’s assurance that transport restrictions to be lifted would include those prior to June 18.

Comments on directive:

Draft directive proposed by us was accepted in toto to include opening paragraph and first series paragraphs (A) and (B). In first paragraph after first series (B) he refused to accept our reference to the Finance Commission but offered in return to delete his reference to the German Bank of Emission. His argument on this and other points was that all the directive except the last two paragraphs represented subjects which were to be settled in Berlin by the Military Governors but that the last two paragraphs, including the establishment of the Finance Commission, had been settled here. Consequently, while willing to place responsibility on the four Military Governors, it was up to them to delegate this responsibility to their agency, the Finance Commission.

Second series (A): After considerable discussion it was agreed to omit Soviet clause and our own clause at end of the first sentence. Both understood the other’s point of view. Molotov asked for assurance, and we agreed that there would be no issue of western “B” marks in Berlin during the week that the discussions were in progress. It was understood that recent issues had been made because of emergencies arising from Soviet financial pressure. Recurrence of such emergencies would invalidate the assurance given Molotov but he should be placed on notice if the situation arises in Berlin during the coming week which would make such further issue necessary.

(B): Here again Molotov refused to accept reference to the Finance Commission for the reasons given above. He was willing to accept a statement that the “four Military Governors are charged with adequate safeguards, etc.”. Again his contention was that it was the responsibility of the Military Governors to work out and provide adequate safeguards and that in so doing it lay within their discretion to utilize the Finance Commission which was an agency of the four Military Governors.

(C): Wording of this paragraph as it now stands was the result of Molotov’s suggestion made out of a clear sky, after brief statement by me that as anticipated my government was completely unwilling to accept Soviet proposal. His suggestion was that simplest solution to first sentence was to go back to western draft of August 62 with addition of second sentence of our latest draft.3 We then agreed with him to add “third countries”.

(D): Molotov insisted on reference to balancing of the budget as a matter for consideration by the Military Governors.

Last two paragraphs (E) and (F): Although they remain as originally written it was apparently Soviet intention that they should not be separated and that they should not be considered as lettered paragraphs covering questions which Military Governors are required to work out. Molotov argued that it was illogical to include references to the Finance Commission in any other paragraphs since this was not a matter on which the Military Governors had to work out arrangements. In the course of our discussion he reaffirmed Stalin’s affirmation of the control functions of the Finance Commission as given in our record of conversation of August 23 (Embtel 1728, August 244 ). During discussion on this subject, which was prolonged, it was necessary to read from the record several times Stalin’s specific statements.

London decisions: Both Molotov and Vyshinsky raised this question at the end of the meeting. We informed them that we could only offer the agreed additional sentence to add to the formula we presented to Stalin August 23 (Deptel 1008, August 245 ). Both of them studied this very attentively and Molotov finally suggested that it would be acceptable provided it stopped after the words “would not preclude such agreement”. He said that the remainder was unnecessary and that the rest of text (up to and including these words) gave the whole picture. I replied that the omission of the final sentence implied certain delicate shades of meaning which were unmistakable to us and which would appear to be unmistakable in Germany, if his version of text were published. He asked that the question be considered further and agreed that this need not hold up the dispatch of the directive to Berlin.

We also discussed interim communiqué. Molotov’s reaction to our suggestion was that it would not give sufficient information with regard to details which had been discussed and he remarked in this connection that the Soviet people had so far heard nothing of our conversations. He may have suggestions of his own to make tomorrow with regard to wording.

Most noteworthy feature of conversations was 180 degree change of Molotov’s position. Whereas in past he has always argued we must settle and agree to details here, his attitude tonight was that everything except two final paragraphs were matters for discussion and agreement among Military Governors in Berlin. While my first reaction to this is one of some suspicion, we all took occasion to point out that if discussions in Berlin failed there would be no agreement at all. He agreed.

We believe that in the light of our own statements and of Molotov’s explanations recorded this evening the draft emerging from the meeting covers every essential point as satisfactorily from our point of view as we could reasonably expect, and leaves our representatives in Berlin a fair chance of arriving at agreement. There is of course the possibility that the Russians are agreeing to refer points to Berlin so that talks may break down there. But our own view, based on Molotov’s attitude tonight following on Stalin’s attitude on August 23, is that there is a chance they may accept agreement at this stage.

As we have warned in earlier telegrams, Soviet long-term intentions are quite another matter, and we have no illusions that an agreement which may now be worked out in Berlin will necessarily safeguard our position there indefinitely should Four-Power agreement on. Germany as a whole prove unattainable. But our task here has been a limited one, and we consider that the directive and communiqué as now agreed with Molotov cover the objective we were set in these Moscow conversations. We therefore recommend them for approval. Molotov was informed we would submit this latest version of directive by wire tonight and would tell him as soon as possible whether it was acceptable, and if so earliest date on which directive might be dispatched concurrently to the four Military Governors in Berlin. Please advise soonest in accordance with above.

Sent Department 1777; Department pass Paris 289, London 178, Berlin 344.

Smith

1  Supra.

2 See telegram 1528, August 5, from Moscow, p. 1016 [Pg. 1016 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601].

3 See telegram 1007, August 24, to Moscow, p. 1074 [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623].

4  Ante, p. 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619].

5  Ante, p. 1077 [Pg. 1077 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2748: Telegram

[Document 631]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, August 28, 1948—2 p. m.

1034.1 For the Ambassador Eyes Only. We have just been informed by telecon 2 that British and French are sending instructions to Roberts and Chataigneau to accept communiqué and directive as transmitted your 1776.3

You are authorized to inform Molotov that we can accept the communiqué and directive without insisting upon the addition of “eventual” in para D. We are however not thoroughly satisfied with the relationship of the last para to the one which immediately precedes it. You should seek clarification on the point that the “financial arrangements” to be controlled by the financial commission definitely include regulation of currency circulation in Berlin by the German Bank of Emission. This would be done either by a change in language of para E or by an agreed minute confirming Stalin’s definite statements in this respect. As stated in urtel 17814 it is important that this should be clearly understood by conferees in Berlin.

In accepting the language of the communiqué and directive you should make it clear that if the Soviets wish an agreed statement regarding Western Germany we must insist that this contain a clear statement of our position as proposed in our 10085 and that we cannot agree as Molotov suggested last night to omit the last part of this statement since as you point out this would leave doubt as to our intentions. The agreed statement on Western Germany would be made and published when the final communiqué is announced after the Military Governors have made their report.

As indicated in our messages 1006,6 10227 and 10334 we must insist in any event upon a written statement of our position approximately that “The arrangements agreed to by the Western Powers for lifting the restrictions on communications with Berlin and dealing with the currency question in Berlin are without prejudice to their rights, duties, and obligations as occupying powers in Berlin”.

It is our understanding that the three Western representatives would make identic written communications on this subject to be made public at the time of final agreement but you should make our intention on this subject entirely clear to Molotov before any directive goes to Berlin. Notification of intention could be done either orally or in the form of an aide-mémoire as you suggest.

We understand that Roberts has been directed to call to the attention of the Soviets that the disturbances in Berlin8 are not conducive to the development of an atmosphere in which the Military Governors may arrive at an agreement and to urge that steps now be taken among the four Military Governors to restore law and order. You are requested to support Roberts’ declaration on this subject.

As to the interim communiqué we feel it is important that it follow the lines of the proposal you made to Stalin and to which he specifically agreed (see urtel 17319 ).

Bevin has just suggested new text to read “It was decided to refer certain technical questions in the course of the present conversations in Moscow to the four Military Governors in Berlin. Meanwhile, the conversations in Moscow have not yet been concluded”. This seems to us a good formula and hope it can be accepted. We cannot agree to Molotov’s suggestion that the interim communiqué give any information concerning substance of agreement since this would give Soviet propaganda great advantages and possibly indicate that final agreement had been reached and was not dependent on the results of the talks in Berlin.

When interim communiqué is agreed our preference would be for release at 10 AM, EST. Please flash us text when agreed.

Marshall

1 Repeated to London as 3434, Paris as 3360, and Berlin as 1545.

2 Not printed; a transcript of the telecon is in file 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048.

3  Ante, p. 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629].

4 Not printed.

5 August 24, p. 1077 [Pg. 1077 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624].

6 August 24, p. 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622].

7 August 26, p. 1083 [Pg. 1083 includes portions of Doc. 626 and Doc. 627].

4 Not printed.

8 The reference here is to demonstrations, led by the SED, August 27 at the city hall in Berlin which forced the city assembly to postpone its meeting. The text of Bevin’s instructions to Roberts on the disturbances in Berlin and concerning the draft directive and communiqué are in telegram 3899, August 28, from London, not printed. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2848)

9 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–3048: Telegram

[Document 632]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, August 30, 1948—midnight.

1818. Eyes Only for the Secretary, Clay and Murphy, Douglas, and Caffery. Reference mytel 1816, August 30.1

Meeting with Molotov and Vyshinski lasted two hours.2 We explained our governments agreed generally to the communiqué and directive drawn up at our last meeting3 but wanted one or two points clarified.4

With reference to balancing of budget (paragraph 2D) we assumed Molotov agreed that budget could not actually be balanced within the week which the military governors had to settle matters in Berlin and probably not for much longer time. On other hand our governments agreed that earliest possible balancing of budget was highly desirable and indeed essential. We asked Molotov whether he would agree to insertion of the words “earliest possible”. Molotov said he preferred not to change language which had resulted from many discussions. It must be left to the military governors to give a date for balancing of budget. However, in reply to specific question he said he thought this could be done within a week. We made it clear that in our opinion this was a job which must take considerable time and certainly more than a week or even a month. Molotov would agree only to leave matter to the military commanders but thought that since we were willing to reduce occupation costs agreement should be reached quickly in order to avoid leaving a loophole for undermining Soviet zone currency. We said we would not insist upon changing wording of directive but wished Molotov to understand very clearly that in our view, even with the greatest good will, this would take much longer and that balancing of budget within week could not be regarded as a condition of success in Berlin. Molotov finally said “let the military governors discuss it and see how long they would take.”

Our next question was on confirmation of explanations already given to us by Stalin and Molotov regarding functions of Finance Commission. We pointed out that while we had not insisted on agreed minutes of all our conversations, during which explanations of function of the Finance Commission made by Generalissimo Stalin and Molotov had seemed adequate, fact remained that our governments were in possession only of our version of these talks in connection with authority and responsibilities of the Commission. Therefore it was desirable to review previous statements to be sure that there had been no error in reporting the position of the Soviet Government. Molotov immediately rejected this as “a new document” which he was not prepared to discuss or even consider. He said that the draft directive was what we were concerned with and it was perfectly clear in its implications. Discussion of this subject lasted more than an hour. We restated our position from every possible angle and Molotov continued to reject what he termed a “new document” or “new formula”. Finally after denying implication that he was not willing in interest of clarity to discuss matters on which we had reached a full understanding he indicated willingness to answer questions on subject in order that our reports to our governments of the Soviet view could be checked and corrected if in error. We then read to him following from minutes of previous meetings: “Generalissimo Stalin replied that it was impossible to give up the phrase ‘about the German Bank of Emission’ because economically the Germany Bank of Emission controlled the flow of currency throughout the whole of the Soviet zone and it was impossible to exclude Berlin from the Soviet zone. However, if the question was asked whether it did so without being controlled itself the answer was ‘no’. Such control as was envisaged would be provided by the Financial Commission and by the four military governors in Berlin, who would work out the arrangements connected with the exchange of the currency and with the control of the provision of currency and would supervise what the bank was doing.”

Molotov declined to confirm exact wording of the statement attributed to Stalin saying that he had not committed Stalin’s remarks to memory. We then asked whether we were right in understanding that the control functions of the Financial Commission were as indicated in this statement by Stalin. He replied “quite true”. We then read following from minutes of meeting with Molotov on August 27.

“Mr. Molotov said that agreement had been reached in Moscow on the four questions for which the four military governors had to work out arrangements and agreement had been reached on the two questions of regulation of currency circulation and of the Financial Commission for controlling matters connected with those financial arrangements. When the four military governors have worked out the four questions allotted to them and when the measures which they work out are placed under the control of the Financial Commission, this will mean that the Financial Commission will control the currency circulation in Berlin in these respects. Therefore when one spoke concretely of the questions to be worked out with regard to the financial arrangements and the control by the Financial Commission one must at the same time recognize that principle which had been recognized in respect of the German Bank of Emission. This principle, which had been mentioned in the penultimate paragraph, did not need to be referred to the four military governors as it had been settled in Moscow. This was the point of view which he wanted to repeat.”

Mr. Molotov questioned some of the wording of this paragraph saying it was not entirely exact. What he had meant to say was that the following two questions had been settled in Moscow: (1) The regulation of currency circulation by the German Bank of Emission as defined in the penultimate paragraph of the directive, (2) the setting up of the Financial Commission to control the financial arrangements listed in (A) to (D) which were to be worked out by the four military governors. We then read following extract from minutes of same meeting: “Mr. Molotov said that with regard to the Financial Commission it would not only be a controlling body but it would supervise the introduction of currency and its continued circulation.” Mr. Molotov agreed, adding “only to the extent envisaged by the four military governors”.

We consider this constitutes agreement to our minutes in so far as an oral agreement can be obtained or can be considered as binding in the circumstances. Presumably it is line which will be followed generally by the Soviet conferees in Berlin.

Molotov asked irritably why he was expected to agree on “a new document,” and he was at a loss to understand the suggestion in a letter from our interpreter to his interpreter that the draft communiqué had already been agreed.

It soon became clear that he was arguing that the draft communiqué could not be regarded as agreed until it included a paragraph on the London decisions which he had previously proposed. We replied our impression had been that he intended London decisions should be covered by a separate statement. He was clearly determined to make the most of his imaginary grievance on this issue, and did so.

Some discussion followed regarding time limit for military governors in Berlin to complete their work. Molotov said he was ready to make it September 10 but we eventually agreed to September 7 (French were willing to extend this time limit, but Bevin wanted to make it September 4).

On question of an interim communiqué, Molotov asked first whether directive was now agreed. We replied in affirmative. Molotov at once said he regarded it inadvisable to issue anything but final agreed communiqué saying negotiations were confidential and we had agreed not to divulge them. We explained difficulties which our government would have with press and public opinion if nothing were said now that the four military governors in Berlin were to meet, a fact which would be known at once. We explained we wished to say as little as possible and did not propose to go beyond the two points suggested in our draft. Molotov was insistent that a brief communiqué of the kind we proposed could not be accepted by the Soviet Government although they might of course agree to one which “explained the position more fully”. We spent a lot of time on this to no purpose. Most we could get out of Molotov was that he did not raise positive objection when we warned him that if our governments were asked, as they would be, whether talks were now proceeding in Berlin and whether further meetings would take place in Moscow, they would certainly have to answer in affirmative. He was most insistent that it had been agreed to keep these conversations confidential, that there was no reason why any more should be said in Berlin or our three capitals than had hitherto been said in Moscow, and above all that there should be no statement on substance of conversations unless it was a detailed one. He warned that otherwise Soviet Government would feel free to issue its own version. We finally agreed not to issue an interim communiqué on understanding that we should have to answer such questions as those we had mentioned. We assured him that we would keep substance of negotiations confidential.

We then informed Molotov that if and when final agreement was reached and final communiqué published we would be obliged to accompany it with a public announcement of reservation of our rights and duties as occupying powers in Berlin. He replied that Soviet position was well known and that question whether any similar Soviet statement need be made would be decided by Soviet Government in light of the situation at that time. It was agreed directive would be dispatched to four military governors before midnight (tonight August 30–31) so that they could start work tomorrow.

Molotov then returned to communiqué and asked whether we could not discuss tonight question of proposed Soviet addition about London decisions. We replied that, apart from the fact that we had not yet received final instructions on Molotov’s proposed modification of our formula, we now had to explain to our governments that the Soviet Government insisted upon this being included in communiqué and not as we had previously thought in a separate published statement. We could discuss this question later. Molotov agreed. We then confirmed with him definitely that there were no outstanding points of difference as regards rest of communiqué.

Roberts then said that now that we had settled directive and done all we could in Moscow to give military governors a reasonable chance of reaching agreement in Berlin, we were sure that Molotov would agree that they should be able to work next week in a local atmosphere favorable to their reaching agreement. We thought it necessary that the four governments should take all steps open to them to prevent these talks in Berlin being prejudicated by actions of any section of Berlin population. There had recently been troubles in Berlin with demonstrations and counter-demonstrations in different parts of the city. We believed our respective military authorities should do all they could to preserve a good atmosphere in Berlin while talks were in progress.

Molotov replied that Soviet military authorities had tried to do this. Chataigneau then associated himself with Roberts statement and said it was to be hoped negotiations in Berlin would take place in a calm atmosphere. I added that if the military governors were instructed by their governments to maintain peace and quiet in Berlin they would certainly be able to do so. Molotov then said Soviet military governor already had his instructions and that he had kept them strictly. I suggested that a reminder might be sent to him. Molotov said this was unnecessary in case of Soviet military commander but perhaps the other military governors should receive such instructions. We stated they were cognizant of their responsibilities. Molotov fully understood our point.

Sent Department; Department pass Berlin 357, Paris 299 and London 187.

Smith

1 Not printed; it gave a short summary of the meeting with Molotov (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–3048).

2 The meeting at the Kremlin at 5 p. m. was attended by Smith, Roberts and Lunghi, Chataigneau and Boyer de Fonscolombe, and Molotov, Vyshinsky, Pavlov and Yerofeyev. A full transcript of the meeting was sent to the Department in despatch 651, August 31, from Moscow, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–3148)

3 See telegram 1776, August 27, from Moscow, p. 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629].

4 The Department of State’s instructions to Ambassador Smith were contained in telegram 1034, August 28, to Moscow, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2748). The instructions to Roberts and Chataigneau were reported upon in telegram 3899, August 28, from London, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2848).

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–1348: Telegram

[Document 633]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Moscow, August 31, 1948—7 p. m.

1827. Eyes Only for the Secretary. I met this morning with my British and French colleagues to review last night’s talk with Molotov and estimate situation.

We all agree that the central issue with which we must deal from here on, and on which we must have clear and agreed instructions from our respective governments is that of the London decisions. In our view, Stalin and Molotov will play further talks toward final concession from us, or alternatively toward a final break, on this issue.

On the whole, we believe that the outlook for the discussions in Berlin is favored by the fact that this issue is still disagreed and by the firm stand we have taken on it, particularly in last night’s talk. While aware of hazards of prognostication when dealing with Russians, we see as likely course of events one or combination of following: (1) Talks in Berlin will progress favorably except for one or two essential points on which Soviet military authorities will be adamant. These will therefore have to be referred to Moscow, probably during course of week, and Molotov will attempt to trade them off in return for communiqué statement on London decisions.

(2) Talks in Berlin will proceed to satisfactory conclusion with no major hitches and acceptable report submitted to four governments. Kremlin will refuse to approve, however, or to agree to communiqué unless we include therein statement on London decisions. Talks would then break down on this issue, and Soviet Government would be in favorable position to charge that in spite their demonstrated readiness compromise we had insisted on pursuing course of splitting Germany.

We are inclined to believe Molotov has made a serious tactical error in indicating to us in advance the formula which he would accept on the London decisions for inclusion in communiqué (mytel 1777, August 271 ), i.e. first part of text we proposed to Stalin (Deptel 1008, August 242 ) ending with words “did not preclude such agreement”.

Consequently, if this formula can be considered satisfactory by our governments, as we believe it should, we are in a favorable position. If we see Molotov during the coming week, as seems likely (as per numbered paragraph one above), and he raises question London decisions, we could simply inform him, without committing ourselves, that this matter is under serious consideration by our governments, indicating we were hopeful of favorable decision but that our governments could of course not reach a final decision on this matter until the outcome of the Berlin discussions was known. And if and when satisfactory agreement was reached in Berlin (on lines suggested above) we would then be able, after agreeing on approval Berlin finance arrangements, also to agree on terms final communiqué and prevent further wrangling by taking latter with Molotov’s own proposed language.

As to acceptability of Molotov’s formula, we have restudied this carefully and strongly recommend it be approved. It is certainly less desirable from our point of view than our own language specifically refusing any postponement implementation London decisions, but there has never been any possibility of securing Soviet agreement to our language either as part of communiqué or as separate document.

While inclusion of reference to London decisions was initially Soviet proposal, acceptance of which by us may be considered as being a concession, fact remains that this has now become the central issue. At this stage, insistence on our own language (Deptel 1009, August 24) on a take-it-or-leave-it basis might well constitute a breaking issue favorable to Soviet Government.

Molotov’s formula seems to us in many respects better, i.e. less compromising and less subject to misinterpretation, than our original statement which has been officially recorded and is available to the Kremlin for propaganda use. Certainly Soviet propaganda will exploit any possible misinterpretation of Molotov’s formula or any other, and as we know from sad experience, they are quite capable of distorting even language which we regard as air-tight. We must simply be prepared to meet this by propagandizing our own interpretation, and of course the visible demonstration going on in Western Germany that the implementation of the London decisions has not in fact been either delayed or postponed is unchallengeable.

Please consider urgently and instruct soonest.

Sent Department 1827; Department pass Berlin 360, Eyes Only for Murphy and Clay; Paris 301, Eyes Only for Caffery; London 189, Eyes Only for Douglas.

Smith

1  Ante, p. 1088 [Pg. 1088 is part of Doc. 630].

2  Ante, p. 1077 [Pg. 1077 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624].

D. The negotiations of the Military Governors in BerlinD. The negotiations of the Military Governors in Berlin

[634] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, August 31, 1948—midnight.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–3148: Telegram

[635] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, September 1, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–148: Telegram

[636] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, September 2, 1948—1 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–148: Telegram

[637] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, September 2, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–248: Telegram

[638] Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen)

[Washington,] September 2, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–248

[639] The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

Berlin, September 4, 1948—5 a. m.

Paris Embassy Files: File—Germany: Telegram

[640] Record of Teletype Conference Between the Department of State and the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, September 4, 1948—11 a. m. London, September 4, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048

[641] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, September 4, midnight.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–448: Telegram

[642] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, September 5, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–548: Telegram

[643] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Berlin, September 5, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–548: Telegram

[644] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, September 5, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–548: Telegram

[645] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, September 6, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–648: Telegram

[646] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, September 7, 1948—2 a. m.

862.00/9–748: Telegram

[647] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, September 7, 1948—2 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–748: Telegram

[648] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, September 8, 1948—1 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–848: Telegram

[649] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, September 8, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–848: Telegram

[650] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 9, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–948: Telegram

[651] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, September 10, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1048: Telegram

[652] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

Washington, September 11, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1148: Telegram

[653] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 12, 1948—1 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1248: Telegram

[654] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, September 12, 1948——9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1248: Telegram

[655] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, September 12, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1248: Telegram

[656] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, September 12, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1248: Telegram

[657] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 14, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1448: Telegram

[658] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 16, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1648: Telegram

[659] The Soviet Ministry for Foreign Affairs to the Embassies of the United States, the United Kingdom, and France

[Moscow, September 18, 1948.]

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1848

[660] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 18, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1848: Telegram

[661] Minutes of a Meeting of the Secretary of State With the Foreign Ministers of the United Kingdom and France

Paris, September 20, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–448

[662] Minutes of a Meeting of the Secretary of State With the Foreign Ministers of the United Kingdom and France

Paris, September 21, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–448

[663] The Acting Secretary of State to the Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin)

Washington, September 22, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–2248

[664] The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) to the Acting Secretary of State

Washington, September 25, 1948.

862.515/9–2543

[665] Record of Meetings of the Secretary of State With the Foreign Ministers of the United Kingdom and France

Paris, September 26, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–448

[666] The Acting Secretary of State to American Diplomatic and Consular Officers

Washington, September 26, 1948—1 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–2648: Circular telegram

[667] The Acting Secretary of State of the Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin)

Washington, September 26, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–2648

[668] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy United States Representative on the Security Council (Jessup)

Paris, September 27, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–2748

[669] Minutes of the 286th Policy Planning Staff Meeting, Washington, September 28, 1948, 11 a.m. to 12 noon

Washington, September 28, 1948, 11 a.m. to noon

Policy Planning Staff Files: Lot 64 D 563: Box 20036

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–3148: Telegram

[Document 634]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Berlin, August 31, 1948—midnight.

2207. Personal for the Secretary and Lovett (Eyes Only). I accompanied General Clay to the first meeting of the Military Governors which was held at 5 p. m. Berlin time, 31 August, in the ACA building Berlin. Robertson opened meeting with statement he had received directive1 and instructions from his government and he thought it would be proper to inquire whether his colleagues had received similar instructions. He was glad to note celerity with which his colleagues had responded to his invitation. He then referred to paragraphs (A) and (B) of directive and suggested the establishment of two committees under the heading of (1) communications, and (2) currency. If his colleagues agreed, then there would only be the question as to time committee reports would be made and question of press.

Koenig agreed, but Sokolovsky suggested that if his colleagues were willing to agree to such an arrangement, it would mean the loss of considerable time and that if it were desired to complete the work assigned to Military Governors within the time limit established by governments, it would seem better for Military Governors to do the work themselves. The auxiliary work could be done by the experts. He thought that Military Governors should meet every day for several hours and at the same time experts could meet daily. As to the press, Sokolovsky insisted that no report should be made until the work of Military Governors and negotiations are completed and Military Governors’ report approved by governments.

Clay pointed out that there was essentially not much difference between UK and USSR suggestions. He thought that the appointment of a third committee on trade would be an excellent idea and that if committees were appointed, they could work simultaneously with the meeting of the Military Governors. He suggested that committees be detailed to start work immediately in order that a preliminary report could be submitted for tomorrow’s meeting. After more discussion, Sokolovsky said “If you want committees, let’s have them”.

It was agreed to name the following committees: Communications: General Bapst, French; General Brownjohn, British; General Kwaschnin, USSR; General Hays, US.

Finance: Leroy-Beaulieu, French; Coates, British; Maletin, USSR; and Bennett, US.

Trade: Humbert, French; Weir, British; Mechin, USSR; and Wilkinson, US.

There was considerable detailed discussion of the procedure to be followed by the committees in approaching their work, General Clay emphasizing for the US that we were ready to accept any arrangements which would facilitate and expedite the work of the committees.

On Clay’s suggestion, it was also agreed that chairmanship of the Military Governors would rotate daily and that the same rule would apply to the committees.

Sokolovsky having suggested that he thought that it would not be possible for the committees to meet today, it was agreed that they would hold their first meeting at 10 a. m., September 1, and that the Military Governors would next meet at 5 p. m., September 1, with Koenig in the chair.

Secretariat was established consisting of following: Glaim, French; Swayne, British; Maximov, USSR; Oulashin, US.

There was lengthy discussion regarding press with Soviet delegate insisting that nothing be said to the press, but on British suggestion it was agreed to say further meetings would be held.

Sokolovsky’s attitude might be characterized as mildly provocative with evident desire to indicate mastery of situation.

Sent Department 2207; repeated London for Douglas 551; Paris for Caffery 565; Department pass Moscow for Smith 461.

Murphy

1 The reference here is to the Directive to the Military Governors in Berlin; see telegram 1776, August 27, from Moscow, p. 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], and footnote 3 thereto.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–148: Telegram

[Document 635]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret
niact Berlin, September 1, 1948—11 p. m.

2212. Personal for the Secretary and Lovett. Eyes Only. Following is Clay’s cable to Army on meeting today of Military Governors:

Today’s meeting of the four Military Governors was preceded by meetings of transport, finance and trade committees which attempted to develop questions for consideration by Military Governors. Only finance committee was able to reach agreement on questions to be considered.

At meeting of Military Governors first report considered was that of transport committee. Here Russians had insisted on discussing air traffic into Berlin. British, French and American representatives stated that the transport issue was specifically defined in the Moscow directive1 as the removal of restrictions and hence there was nothing to discuss with respect to air transport. Sokolovsky demurred and finally gave as his reasons that air traffic could be used to upset the stability of Soviet currency through importation and exportation of money and also through the removal of goods from Berlin without accounting. Robertson had led the argument against consideration of air transport.

After Sokolovsky’s statement, I reminded Sokolovsky that the Moscow directive was quite specific with respect to the removal of restrictions on transport; however, I was prepared to recognize that Soviets were entitled to some safeguards with respect to movement of money and goods, by air or otherwise. I reminded him that financial agreement would unquestionably develop procedures for movement of money to and from Berlin, and that trade agreement would undoubtedly lay down procedures for movement of goods into and out of Berlin. It seemed to me that if we could reach agreement with respect to finance and trade that there would be very little difficulty in agreeing upon language which would result in removal of transport restrictions. Hence, I suggested that we pass directly to report of Finance Committee. This was agreed to by four Military Governors.

The first question on Finance Committee agenda was issuance of law fixing Soviet currency as sole currency for Berlin. Soviets recognized that laws introducing Western currency in each sector would necessarily have to be rescinded by action of responsible zone Commanders. However, they insisted that with revision of these laws introducing Western currency, their law was immediately effective for all Berlin. Obviously, this would be a recognition of Soviet sovereignty. In addition, it would not be practicable as law withdrawing Western marks must also contain provisions governing exchange. It was finally agreed that final agreement on this question signed by Military Governors would be issued as a joint proclamation of four Military Governors, if and when their Governments had approved it.

We then proceeded to the next question which was the function of the quadripartite Finance Commission. Here we developed what may be a breaking point in the negotiations. In fact, my British colleague immediately after the meeting came to me and asked if Soviets were attempting to make this issue the breaking point. In this connection, please refer to draft directive. Soviets contend that last sentence of directive establishing the Financial Commission to control the introduction and continued circulation of a single currency in Berlin applies only to Paragraphs (A), (B) and (D) and does not apply to Paragraph (C) nor to the unnumbered paragraph placing the regulation of currency circulation in the German Bank of Emission of Soviet zone. You will remember that at one time the wording in this paragraph provided that this regulation would be under the control of the Financial Commission and that the reference to the Finance Commission was changed from this paragraph to a separate paragraph in last stages of negotiations at Moscow. An examination of paragraphs (A), (B) and (D) will show that the Financial Commission would have no authority other than to secure uniform treatment of all persons in Berlin and that credit and discount rates could be so established as to wreck Berlin economy and to force it into complete dependence on Soviet zone. In this connection, I reminded Marshal Sokolovsky that top Soviet authority had stated that German Bank of Emission controlled all currency through Soviet zone and it was impossible to exclude Berlin. However, if he was asked the question if it did so without being controlled itself, the answer was “no”. He further stated such control would be provided by Financial Commission and by four Commanders in Berlin who had worked out arrangements and would supervise what the bank was doing.

This top authority had further stated that word “control” was satisfactory and that he would not object to its use. This was stated by Generalissimo Stalin at meeting on August 23 (Moscow’s 331, to Berlin2 ). On August 27, Molotov stated that points (A), (B), (C) and (D) of second paragraph of directive and measures worked out in Berlin were to be placed under control of Commission. It was clear, however, that Molotov in his conference of August 27 (Moscow’s 350, to Berlin3 ) was hedging and that while he orally reaffirmed Stalin’s categorical statement that Commission shall control, he refused to make it specific in directive. There was no question but that Sokolovsky had firm orders in this respect. General Robertson stated that he could proceed no further on this issue as Soviet interpretation was so different from understanding reached at Moscow that he would have to go to his Government for instructions. I agreed with General Robertson as did General Koenig. Meeting which lasted three hours referred remaining questions back to committees of experts and agreed to meet again at 1500 hours tomorrow.

It is quite obvious that acceptance of limited control in Financial Commission as now proposed by Soviets would in fact place financial and economic destiny of Berlin in their hands. I do not believe that we should permit it to become a breaking point here but that rather we should attempt to pass it back to Moscow as a disagreed point, in meantime trying to reach agreement on other points in understanding that such agreements are valid [invalid] unless agreement is reached on whole. I would appreciate your thinking on this issue.

Up to date, I had avoided taking initiative as I felt that it would be much better for French or British to take lead. However, after today’s meeting, I asked my British and French colleagues if they would be prepared for our political advisers after each meeting to agree to a common report which we could send to all three governments. Each of us would, of course, be free to comment on the report and to make separate recommendations, but the actual report going to all three governments would be same. We believe this would be helpful to you in Washington.

Moreover, this same report will be sent direct by Murphy to State Department. We have further agreed to meet in my office on hour prior to meeting with Sokolovsky to receive reports of our subcommittees and to coordinate our action as much as appears desirable and possible. This, too, we think will be helpful.

I would like to emphasize that the differences in interpretation of the functions of the Financial Commission does perhaps represent an impasse which cannot be solved here except through acceptance of Soviet viewpoint which, while it might lift the blockade, would make our position in Berlin just as much, if not more, precarious than the blockade now makes it. I am sure that Koenig and Robertson both share my feelings in this respect and that at least Robertson will make strong representations to his Government on this issue.

The atmosphere of meeting continues strained; so much so that Koenig, who was chairman and had refreshments prepared, did not extend invitations until after Russians had left the room. The Russians made this easy by arising from the table immediately the meeting was adjourned without wasting time in saying farewells. At present moment there is not the slightest indication of any “give” in Soviet attitude.

Sent Department, repeated London for Douglas 553, Moscow for Smith 454, Paris for Caffery 567.

Murphy

1 Regarding the Directive, see telegram 1776, August 27, from Moscow, p. 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], and footnote 3 thereto.

2 Not printed; for a report on this meeting, see telegram 1729, August 24, from Moscow, p. 1069 [Pg. 1069 is part of Doc. 620].

3 Not printed; regarding the meeting under reference, see telegrams 1776 and 1777, August 27, from Moscow, pp. 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629] and 1088.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–148: Telegram

[Document 636]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, September 2, 1948—1 p. m.

1050. For the Ambassador. After further consideration Clay’s report on meeting (ref Berlin’s 2212 repeated to you as 464,2 London’s 3939 repeated to you as 2383 ) it is our belief that had this issue been referred to Moscow for decision at this stage it would probably have meant a break over a technical point in Berlin. For this reason we have, as you are aware, recommended that the Military Governors explore this and other portions of the directive further (ref our 3480 to London repeated to you as 10474 ) in order to ascertain more clearly how far the Soviets are prepared to go. If the Military Governors as a result of their efforts in Berlin have to submit to the governments a report on agreed and unagreed items the basic disagreements would emerge more clearly than would the case if one item, no matter how important, should be selected for reference back to the governments.

In our telecom with Clay this morning he agreed that Military Governors should proceed with the authority of the finance commission as a disagreed item until no further progress is possible. He considers to negotiate in Berlin with disputed items being referred daily to Moscow would be a time consuming and probably a fruitless process. Clay’s present feeling is that “Soviet position is to take their terms in full or else.” However, he considers this may be their usual opening tactics of “shooting for the moon”.5

Marshall

1 Repeated to London as 3483, Paris as 3420, and Berlin as 1570.

2 September 1, p. 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635].

3 Not printed; it contained Robertson’s report on the second meeting of the Military Governors and Douglas’ view that Smith should be authorized to concert with his colleagues and approach the Soviet Government with respect to the powers of the commission and paragraph C of the Directive (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–248). In telegram 4555, September 2 from Paris, not printed, Caffery reported that the French Government was instructing Chataigneau to request an interview with Molotov for the same purpose (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–248).

4  Not printed; in it the Department of State affirmed its view that the limited control proposal was contrary to Stalin’s assurance, but added: “… before taking the question of the financial commission back to Moscow the Mil Govs should further explore other portions of the directive and also if possible and appropriate the question of the financial commission in order to ascertain the extent of control which Sokolovsky is prepared to accept.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–148)

5 In telegram 1841, September 2, from Moscow, not printed, Smith expressed his agreement with these views. He felt sure Sokolovsky had complete reports of the Moscow conversations and was acting according to his instructions in pressing for maximum powers for the bank of emission. The Ambassador agreed that it was most important to ascertain as far as possible the form and extent of control that Sokolovsky was prepared to accept. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–248)

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–248: Telegram

[Document 637]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Berlin, September 2, 1948—7 p. m.

2222. Personal for the Secretary Eyes Only. Following is agreed joint report of the third meeting of military governors on 2 September. The report of the Trade Committee1 was first considered in an atmosphere of greater relaxation than that which had previously prevailed. The Trade Committee had presented two separate proposals, one by US expert, and other by Soviet expert, which listed the questions thought pertinent for consideration. The proposals showed two principal diferences in that the US draft made reference to the importation of food, power and fuel into Berlin as well as means of payment. The Soviet draft made reference to the question of interzonal trade as distinct from trade between Berlin and the rest of Germany, and to the lifting of restrictions of trade between Berlin and the Soviet zone of occupation.

General Clay addressed himself to the report of the committee and particularly to the two questions just mentioned. He thought that all questions in both papers should be discussed and pointed out that if the East mark is accepted, obviously, payment for food, power and fuel for Berlin would have to be made in East marks. Speaking for himself, he would be willing to have this question of payment submitted to the financial experts. He continued in stating that insofar as the Western zones are concerned, if traffic is opened, more food and coal could be shipped in if sufficient trains were available. This would obviously result in larger production of finished products in Berlin. Normally these products would have a far higher value than the imports from which they are made. This we should be able to take into account in effecting fair division. General Clay thought it would be possible to make an agreement which would take account of the costs involved, and therefore a policy agreement would be required for the allocation of such exports which in turn might lead to the establishment of some sort of licensing system under Four Power supervision. With respect to the question of resumption of trade relations between the Soviet and Western zones, it was clear that some sort of clearing accounts would be required in view of the different currencies. He then proposed that the question of accounting for food and coal imports should be transferred to the finance experts.

General Robertson remarked that he found the two proposals of the trade experts similar with the two exceptions described above. He was in general agreement with General Clay’s remarks and would agree to the reference of the question of the payment of food, fuel and power to the finance experts. General Robertson doubted if the economy of Berlin could be quickly developed to pay for all the imports necessary of food, fuel and power. He remarked that what the country imports in the way of food and fuel it normally regarded as part of its trade, unless it be decided to treat it otherwise. Apart from the question of payment, we must decide what food and fuel must be brought in, by whom, and for whom. He had no objection to interzonal trade being discussed, but he would prefer to defer comment on General Clay’s remarks about its organization.

General Koenig stated that he was in general agreement with Robertson and Clay, but pointed out that the financial experts had already agreed to include accounting for food and coal in their report.

Marshal Sokolovsky agreed that the items in the Soviet and US papers should be discussed by the trade experts. Clay had raised the question of payment by Berlin for imports of food, power and fuel and he had no objection to the discussion of this question by the finance experts. He wished, however, to make certain general observations as follows: (1) The present condition of the Berlin economy does not allow the city to pay in full for its imports from the respective zones of occupation;

(2) The supply to Berlin of food, fuel and power was not conditioned by anything and no agreement had ever been made that such imports should be paid for immediately or in full. He added that as is known when the Soviet Government offered to feed Berlin it did not demand any payment for the supplies from the resources of Berlin only.

(3) In 1945, the Kommandatura reached agreement on imports into Berlin to supply the population with food, power and fuel and no indication was given that such imports would be considered as trade transactions. He was certain, however, that the experts could come to a reasonable agreement and make proposals on this.

(4) With respect to trade for Berlin, he would agree to Clay’s proposal that trade should be regulated by a system of licenses.

(5) As to payments for such trade, he would agree that it could be based on a clearing system which in turn would be considered by the experts who would present their proposals. He observed that the trade of Berlin with the Western zones and other countries must be based on a “netto balance,” which we assume means a commodity balance. He thought the trade of Berlin with the East zone would be much simpler if agreement should be reached on a single currency.

(6) As to interzonal trade, Sokolovsky considered that the trade experts should examine the question in the sense indicated in the directive, i.e., repeal of restriction on interzonal trade and resumption on basis formerly agreed to between East and West zones.

It was then agreed that the trade experts would study all questions in both papers except that of payment for food, power and fuel imports which would be dealt with by the finance experts. General Clay said that the development of Berlin’s economy would involve the import of more coal and more materials than in the past. It was essential for the Soviet authorities to advise us of the number of trains which would be available. Sokolovsky proposed that the Transport Committee should examine the question of available transport facilities in both directions. General Koenig pointed out that the Committee was no longer working and suggested that it should continue its work on those points on their agenda on which there is no disagreement. This was agreed.

It was then agreed to hear a progress report from the chairman of the Finance Committee in which it was stated that the Committee had discussed the following items: (a) exchange of cash, (b) exchange of bank accounts, (c) exchange of accounts which appeared prior to the capitulation of Germany (blocked accounts), (d) question of settlement of private debts. The chairman of the Finance Committee stated agreement had been reached in principle on the removal of Western marks from Berlin on the basis of Soviet Law No. 111.2 The committee had exchanged opinions and information on the volume of Western marks to be exchanged for Soviet marks and was tentatively informed that approximately 326 to 360 million West marks had been issued in Berlin. However, it was not believed that all of this amount would be offered for exchange as part would be hoarded and part transferred to the Western zones. After considering this information the finance experts can agree to consider tomorrow more accurately figures and to prepare a report for the military governors respecting the withdrawal of Western marks and the introduction of Eastern marks into Berlin. It does not follow that this report will be unanimous, but it is hoped to present a paper on which agreement can be reached.

Sokolovsky then suggested that the finance experts be instructed to present their report tomorrow at which time Clay pointed out that only one of the five items have been considered by the finance experts. Clay suggested that the finance experts be instructed to go to work at once with a view of presenting a report on as many items as possible tomorrow. The military governors then agreed to meet at 5 p. m. tomorrow to give more time to the committees. It was further agreed that the finance experts will confirm their readiness to report prior to the meeting tomorrow.

Sent Department 2222; repeated London 558; Paris 571; Moscow 468 for Ambassador’s Eyes Only.

Murphy

1 The report was transmitted in telegram 2225, September 2, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–248).

2 The full text of the order is printed in Ruhm von Oppen, Documents on Germany, pp. 295–300.

Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–248

[Document 638]

Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen)1

top secret [Washington,] September 2, 1948.

Brief for the President

Subject: Difficulties Encountered in Technical Discussions by the Military Governors in Berlin

The Military Governors who are attempting to work out the practical arrangements under the directive sent them by the four governments have run into difficulties concerning the relationship of the proposed quadripartite financial commission and the German Bank of Emission of the Soviet Zone. Our interpretation of the directive is that the financial commission will have powers of supervision over that portion of the Bank’s operation dealing with the issue and circulation of currency in the city of Berlin through the Stadtkontor and the various credit institutions. This interpretation has been specifically confirmed by Stalin and Molotov. Sokolovsky, however, professes ignorance of any such confirmation by Stalin and Molotov and contends that the directive does not expressly state this power of the financial commission. The issue is complicated by the fact that the German Bank of Emission of the Soviet Zone would issue currency for the whole Soviet Zone as well as for Berlin under the proposed arrangement. We have not contended that the financial commission for Berlin should have control powers over the bank in so far as currency for the Soviet Zone is concerned but only over the handling of the Soviet mark in the city of Berlin.

Sokolovsky’s attitude is characteristic of Soviet tactics, which were fully anticipated during the Moscow discussions. We were strongly in favor of a definite reference, in the directive itself, to the powers of the financial commission over the German bank, but we could not get the British to go along with us. They seemed to feel, together with the French, that the definite statements of interpretation by Molotov and Stalin were adequate. The matter is of central importance and may prove to be the breaking point of the discussions. We have, however, instructed Clay, with his full agreement, to leave this point aside and to continue discussions with the other military governors in an attempt to reach agreement on the other parts of the communiqué. If agreement is reached on the other points and the military governors are still unable to agree on the relationship of the financial commission and the German bank, the matter will then be referred back to Moscow for discussion with Molotov or Stalin. We feel that these negotiations should not break down in Berlin on what would appear to be a technical point but rather in Moscow on the basic issue reflected in this technical point. The reason that the powers of the financial commission are so important is that unless it is given supervisory powers over the operation of the German bank in the city of Berlin, the entire financial life of the city would pass to unilateral Soviet control, since the bank could go right ahead and handle the currency, credit and other financial arrangements without any degree whatsoever of four-power control.

1 It has not been ascertained whether this paper or its substance was communicated to the President. It is possible that this paper was prepared for the use of the Secretary of State in orally briefing the President on the Berlin situation.

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army Paris Embassy Files: File—Germany: Telegram

[Document 639]

The United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) to the Department of the Army

[Extracts]

top secret Berlin, September 4, 1948—5 a. m.

CC–5804. Personal from Clay action to Dept of Army, personal for Under Secretary Draper, info personal for Ambassador Douglas, London, Ambassador Smith, Moscow, and Ambassador Caffery, Paris. Herewith my comments on today’s meeting. I will limit them to major points of difference as it will be some time before the official and agreed summary of today’s meeting is ready.1 We met today from 1700 hours to 2130 hours. As this will probably happen frequently, I will probably continue to send personal comment prior to receipt of prepared summary as waiting for the latter would either keep us up most of the night or else delay my comment. While I do not object to the former, I am afraid that these meetings will last for some time and of course we do have our other business to continue concurrently.

At today’s meeting the Finance Committee reported on its work since the last previous meeting. It was able to agree three items completely and three items with reservations having to do with the methods arid procedures of exchange. These will be sent you separately in exact wording.2 However, the first point of difference was in the way the law would be promulgated to withdraw B-marks and substitute E-marks. The Soviets insisted that the agreement of the Commanders in Chief would suffice whereas it was our contention that a joint proclamation would be necessary. It was apparent that the Soviet desire was to effect the withdrawal by agreement thus letting the Soviet law as promulgated by the Soviet Military Administration become in fact the law for all of Berlin. The legal validity of the Soviet proposal is doubtful as all previous agreements have been issued either as proclamations of the Four Commanders in Chief or as proclamations by each of the Zone Commanders. Robertson suggested that the agreement be promulgated as the basis for the law. I reserved my position to get a legal opinion as many future legal transactions and claims will have to be resolved under the law. I also reserved for possible bargaining position. If in fact the promulgation of the agreement is considered legally valid, it is of course not a major point. This paragraph further provides that the exchange would be under instructions of the German Bank of Emission. I reserved my acceptance of this unless it was amended to require the approval of the instructions by the Financial Commission or unless the agreement of [on] the functions of the Financial Commission clearly established its right in this respect. This question arose in connection with another of the partially agreed paragraphs in which it was provided that the exchange would be through the established credit institutions. Here the Soviet version states that these credit institutions would operate under the control of the German Emission Bank. The British and French joined me in insisting that there be added to this paragraph “under the supervision of the Finance Commission”. Of course, this was not accepted by the Soviets nor was a French amendment which placed the control of the credit institutions under the Financial Commission acting under the regulations of the Emission Bank. The French amendment was not accepted by either Robertson or myself. The remaining issue was over the disposition of the B-marks which the Soviets insisted should be destroyed. As we still have the desire to permit B-marks to move to the West Zone to protect their holders, we resisted the Soviet proposal and stated that these B-marks were our property and had value to us if we desired to use them for currency in the Western Zones. While I did not consider this as major point, it is one I would not like to concede except to secure final agreement. This completed our action on the work of the Finance Committee today. They were placed back at work to report to us on Sunday, thus allowing them more time to discuss the very complicated details still ahead. They will also produce a clean copy of today’s agreements with the disagreed portions in usual brackets.

We then received the report of the Transport Committee. This committee had achieved almost nothing. It had attempted [to deal with] the present condition of the rails; the obtaining of additional paths to permit increased supplies being brought into Berlin; and the freedom of traffic on military trains. The Soviet representative was unwilling to discuss any of these subjects in any detail unless the questions of restrictions on air traffic were also discussed. General Koenig pointed out that the Soviet attitude indicated a desire to impose additional restrictions whereas the instructions in the Moscow directive were very clear that all we had to discuss was the removal of restrictions. At this point Sokolovsky took almost an hour to present the Soviet viewpoint. He argued that the restrictions in question were only those applied since 18th June and would not include the earlier restrictions applied in March. He insisted on the Soviet right to require identification and presumably inspection, and enlarged it to say that traffic on military trains should be restricted to military persons and that civilians, families, and others should travel on whatever other and general service might be arranged. He also brought up the question of payment for such travel. He admitted that these restrictions had been imposed in March because of the London Conference and on 18th June because of currency reform, but claimed that since our directive concerned only the latter insofar as Berlin was concerned it was manifest that the transport restrictions could only have been those applied as a result of currency reform which would be removed when the Soviet Currency was accepted in Berlin. You will remember that Molotov suggested the same date of 18 June but that later Stalin had said if restrictions had been imposed prior to this date these restrictions would also be removed. Sokolovsky then stated that our agreements provided only for airlift for Military persons and cargo and that they could not accept commercial or civil airlift. This is, of course, an old contention that the permission given to civil airlines to fly into Berlin was contrary to our quadripartite agreement. He suggested that what he was proposing formed a reasonable basis for discussion by the transport committee and that it be instructed to proceed with detailed discussions on this basis. General Koenig reiterated the French position that we were not to discuss additional restrictions but only the removal of restrictions, however, he was ready for the transport committee to make another try. General Robertson referred to the Soviet letter imposing the restrictions in March3 to refute the statement by Sokolovsky that the Soviets had always restricted the movement of other than Military personnel or military trains. He stated that progress of the transport committee would be an evidence of sincerity of the Soviet desire to reach agreement and for that reason he was prepared to have the transport committee make another try. At this point I stated that I was certain that my government had understood in Moscow that the removal of restrictions on transport meant the return to the conditions which existed before March and that it had not authorized me to discuss removal of restrictions except in this overall sense. I further stated that we could not accept Marshal Sokolovsky’s interpretation of past agreements in a way in which he desired them to be interpreted and that we would not agree that there had ever been any restrictions on air lift, hence this would not appear to be a proper subject of discussion under the Moscow directive. I reminded him that I had said that I was prepared to discuss safeguards with respect to the movement of currency and goods to and from Berlin by air but not the restriction of air traffic; that as I felt that Marshal Sokolovsky’s proposal both with respect to passenger traffic and air lift were entirely outside the scope of the directive sent to us by our Governments, it seemed hopeless to me to refer these matters under this misunderstanding to a committee; and that as much as I regretted to cause any delay I desire definitely to study Sokolovsky’s proposal before committing myself to a further course of action. It was then 21:30 hours and we agreed to adjourn the meeting to meet at 15:00 hours tomorrow to resume the transportation discussion and to hear the report of the Trade committee which in fact is still arguing about the agenda which it will discuss.

[Here follows a brief account of the discussion between Clay, Robertson, and Koenig, adjournment of the meeting with Sokolovsky, and Clay’s reiteration of his determination to stand firm.]

The going is tough and it is too early to predict the outcome.

I do not propose even to let this transportation issue cause a break, as I feel that it is now necessary to explore every detail with a view to determining how many we can agree and how many remain unagreed, as the extent of the latter I am sure is of utmost importance to the decisions which you will have to make in Washington. However, at the present rate here would seem little likelihood that we could be anywhere nearly through with the discussion of details by the established date of 7th September.4

[ Clay ]

1 The agreed report of this meeting was sent in telegram 2227, September 4, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–448).

2 Materials on the reports of the Transport and Finance Committees were also sent in telegram 2227.

3 The reference here is to General Dratvin’s letter March 31, the text of which was transmitted in telegram 749, April 1, from Berlin, not printed. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–148) Further documentation on this letter is in telegram 748, April 1, from Berlin, p. 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528].

4 In telecon TT–1139, September 4, not printed, Clay was authorized, at his discretion, to refuse to allow the Transport Committee to consider the lifting of transport restrictions except on an overall basis, and any question of air restrictions, except those necessary to safeguard the currency. Clay was also authorized to withhold his approval of any other issue as long as Sokolovsky maintained his position on transport. (862.515/1–148)

Record of Teletype Conference Between the Department of State and the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048

[Document 640]

Record of Teletype Conference Between the Department of State and the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

top secret Washington, September 4, 1948—11 a. m.
London, September 4, 1948—4 p. m.

Conferees

Washington London

Under Secretary Robert Lovett Ambassador Douglas

Mr. Samuel Reber Mr. Mallory Browne

Mr. Charles Bohlen Mr. Gerald Keith

Mr. J. D. Beam Mr. Linebaugh

Mr. J. D. Hickerson Mr. Stebbins

from washington

Subject 1.

1. Sokolovsky’s attempt yesterday to go back completely on the entire understanding concerning restrictions of surface traffic and his reference to new regulations for air traffic require, in our opinion, immediate reference to Moscow, together with his disavowal of the understanding given by Stalin and Molotov concerning the financial commission and bank. We feel that these two blatant renunciations of the foundation of the understanding from our point of view are so gross as to indicate that the Soviet Government has given Sokolovsky special instructions probably designed to produce a break in Berlin.

2. We feel reference to Moscow should be in accordance with the following procedure: (a) The Governors should continue in Berlin to discuss other points of the directive in order to avoid the publicity which would attend a suspension of their meetings.

(b) The continuance of meetings in Berlin would permit the Soviet Government to issue new instructions to Sokolovsky to adhere to original Moscow understanding.

(c) We feel that the three representatives should call on Molotov and draw his attention in strongest terms, citing Stalin’s remarks, et cetera, to the complete rejection of these understandings by Sokolovsky in Berlin. They should insist that Sokolovsky receive new instructions to adhere to the understanding reached at Moscow.

3. In the event that Molotov refuses or is evasive and no new instructions go to Sokolovsky, the breakdown in fact has occurred and we feel we should follow up immediately with a written communication to the Soviet Government briefly recounting the understandings reached in Moscow, citing Stalin’s and Molotov’s statements on the two main points at issue, stating that it is obvious the Soviet Government has no intention of honoring the agreement reached, and ending with the statement of our intention in the circumstances of referring the Soviet actions in Berlin to the appropriate organ of the United Nations.

4. We feel that the bad faith displayed, plus the denial of rights, and the evident attempts to exercise duress through demonstrations, et cetera, constitute the soundest background for our case before the Security Council.

london

Subject 1.

I have had a brief discussion with Strang in regard to your subject 1. As you know when the fundamental question of principle developed in Berlin, namely, the powers of the international commission over the Berlin bank of emission the British felt that we should promptly have taken the matter to Moscow. This, they felt, was not a matter in which the Military Governors were under the directive to negotiate but rather one which they were to implement. Since Sokolovsky repudiated the principle which had been agreed to in Moscow the British felt there should have been a call to the Soviet Government then. Subsequently, however, the British yielded to our persuasions and agreed that it was probably as well to run over the whole field in Berlin before going back to Moscow. This, as it was reported to them from Berlin and Moscow, appeared to be our position. It was implied in your cable to Smith on this point.2 Bevin is away although he can be reached by scrambler. Strang is not prepared to agree to a fundamental change of policy without consultation with Bevin. Strang said that in reviewing the developments in Berlin this morning with Bevin the latter was disposed to adhere to the policy which we had implicitly taken and to which he had been persuaded. At that time of course Bevin was unaware of the change in the modification of our policy. The best I can therefore do at the moment is to go over the matter in greater detail with Strang so that he can discuss it fully with Bevin. I will communicate with you again later. Do you want this further communication from me today?

washington

Subject 2.

Procedure envisaged in our subject 1 would not apply of course if Sokolovsky at today’s meeting recedes from position taken last night.

london

Subject 2.

As an addition to the procedure which is outlined in your subject 1 as modified by your subject 2, I put forward the following suggestions:

That the Military Governors be instructed to call Sokolovsky’s attention to the two fundamental points of principle which Sokolovsky has apparently repudiated (a) the power of the financial commission over the German bank of emission and (b) the removal of restrictions on all communications between Berlin and the Western Zones. As to (a) the conversation with Stalin is ample confirmation of the Soviet Government’s acceptance of the principle. As to (b) the record of conversations in Moscow made it clear that it was agreed that the restrictions on transportation and communication, etc., as to which restrictions would be removed was prior to June 18.

That they say to Sokolovsky these two fundamentals were agreed to at Moscow and were incorporated in the directive to them and that they are not appropriate subjects for negotiation among the Military Governors but that they are principles to be implemented by the Military Governors.

That the three Military Governors put the question bluntly to Sokolovsky whether he proposes to accept these two principles and to negotiate as to their implementation or whether he proposes to continue to deny them.

If Sokolovsky’s reply is in the latter sense then the Military Governors of the Western Powers might respond to the effect that they are not authorized to discuss principles. They must still continue, however, to discuss the implementation of other matters in the directive.

We can then, depending upon the substance of Sokolovsky’s reply, take up these two questions in Moscow or not as the case may be.

The only point in your analysis about which I have some doubt is that it is not clear that Sokolovsky has instructions designed to produce a break in Berlin. He may merely be trying to push us. We should, I think, be careful not to act upon a presumption but rather only on demonstrable facts. This is the reason for the suggestion which I put forward above. If followed, we can determine as a fact whether Sokolovsky is prepared to accept the two basic principles and to negotiate as to their implementation or whether he is not.

Further re your suggestion 1:

Paragraph 2 (c) and paragraph 3, I presume your reference to new instructions to Sokolovsky means a clarification to bring his action into accord with the Moscow agreement. I did not suggest that the two basic questions be discussed further with Sokolovsky. Quite the contrary. I realized that the three Military Governors of the Western Powers challenged Sokolovsky’s position but I did not find in the record of the proceedings in Berlin either (a) that they put the question which I suggested clearly and unmistakably to Sokolovsky or (b) that they told Sokolovsky with equal clarity and bluntness that these two matters were not subjects for negotiation among the Military Governors, since they were principles which had been agreed to in Moscow but, were before them rather, solely for the purpose of implementation. They approach (b) in the language which they used as it was reported but they did not state it unmistakably.

washington

Subject 3.

In view of present situation in Paris3 we assume the best way to coordinate with French would be through Massigli.

london

I agree completely with the analysis of the proceedings so far in Berlin and with the procedure which you have outlined in subject 1 qualified by your subject 2.

While this is being sent to you I will talk with Strang. Please wait a few minutes until I have discussed the situation.

As to your subject 3 I think it is preferable to coordinate with the French through Massigli here if you concur.

Strang agrees that the coordination with the French can best be achieved through Massigli here.

washington

Subject 4.

We had not intended to preclude possibility of going to Moscow during Berlin talks but had not intended to—had not wished to go only on the first sign of disagreement as we anticipated other major points of difference would come up.

However Sokolovsky’s repudiation of the agreement on lifting blockade restrictions is so gross a violation of the agreed directive that we now believe both fundamental points should be called directly to Molotov’s attention particularly since our entire objective was to secure lifting of blockade and we only agreed to discussion of currency to obtain a practical solution. If Soviets won’t lift blockade as Stalin specifically agreed there is little value in discussing other points except for tactical reasons in Berlin to permit major issues to be met in Moscow which in our opinion is most important.

Subject 5.

Reference your addition to our suggested procedures we do not consider that in view of Sokolovsky’s repudiation of the two basic issues, they should be discussed further with him. See instruction to Clay—Army’s Warx 88764, repeated to you through Military attaché.4

Replying to your comments re: Sokolovsky, Military Governors have already challenged his position and very bluntly. Further attempts to debate in Berlin may give Sokolovsky chance to engineer break.

Subject 6.

Please get British and French views and reply urgently as soon as possible.

That is all here.

Subject 7.

The only demonstrable fact is that Sokolovsky has repudiated the Moscow agreement on lifting the blockade—unless he has shifted his position today when Clay was to challenge his previous statements and to refuse to discuss blockade on this basis.

london

Subject 3.

As to the United Nations in your suggested procedure, the British have agreed, in the event of a break, to submit the issue to the appropriate organ of the United Nations. They are, I think, more favorably disposed to the Security Council now than they were before my last discussion with them.

The French never agreed to submit the issue in the event of a break to the appropriate organ of the United Nations. They merely committed themselves to consider the submission of the issue to the United Nations. Even if there were a government in France that could make a decision on this question, and it would take several days to persuade the French not only to go to the United Nations but to the Security Council, there is no government in France or at least there was not this morning. Indeed, my information indicates that Schuman after experiencing difficulties in forming a cabinet has told Auriol that he either is unable to form a government or wishes to be relieved of the responsibility for forming one. When a government may be formed in France is hard to tell. After it has been formed, when it will be able to make a decision on this question, is still another matter.

Hold on, please, more coming.

Your subject 7

I have just received through the Military attaché a copy of the Army’s instructions to Clay. If I read them correctly they, in effect, instruct him to do precisely what I was suggesting. I doubt, however, if they would have been received in time for him to follow them today.

Nothing further here but do not look for any agreement on the United Nations or Security Council from the French in any great haste. I think I may have made real progress with Massigli at the last meeting.

washington

Subject 8.

Re—your comments on new instructions to Sokolovsky—yes. Our purpose is to bring his instructions in line with directive.

Nothing further here.

Pending report of today’s meeting in Berlin, believe we have covered all ground possible now. We hope you can persuade British to accept procedure outlined at beginning of conference, at least as to first step of reference to Moscow. Please let us know British views urgently. Lovett has gone on—and other Conferees have to leave. Unless you have question requiring immediate answer, further comments could be cabled.

Nothing further here.

london

Subject 4.

In view of Bevin’s absence and the fact that Massigli is out of town for the evening, do not expect anything from me before tomorrow morning London time. That’s all.

1 The precise sequence of the transmissions in the source text has not been followed. Instead, the transmissions from Washington have been followed, where possible, with the appropriate responses from Embassy London.

2 The reference here is to telegram 1050, September 2, to Moscow, p. 1104 [Pg. 1104 is part of Doc. 636].

3 The reference here is presumably to the current French cabinet crisis.

4 Not printed; see footnote 4 to message CC–5804, supra, for a summary of these instructions.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–448: Telegram

[Document 641]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Berlin, September 4, midnight.

2240. The meeting today lasted from 1500 hours to 1730 hours, with Robertson presiding.1 It was opened by the report from the Trade Committee which had been unable to even agree as to what it would discuss. General Robertson stated that the difference seemed to result more from the order of the discussion and suggested that the committee be instructed to proceed to discuss first the items on the Soviet agenda and then the items proposed by our experts. Koenig agreed. Sokolovsky replied that this seemed useless unless we could first agree as to who would be responsible for the supervision of Berlin trade. At this point, I stated that it seemed to me we needed something even more positive for a basis of discussion. I pointed out that [with more train paths available the western zones could now supply addition]2 coal and raw materials and semi-finished products for Berlin and were prepared to do so under suitable arrangements. I suggested that the Trade Committee draw up a quarterly program, listing the quantities to be brought in; and that under the Trade Committee a German organization be established to license individual manufacturers and enterprises to obtain these materials. These materials would be paid for in Eastern marks to be deposited to the account of the respective zonal export-import agencies. The finished products, which would exceed materially the value of the imports, would be divided in three ways by the Trade Committee: first, to provide the funds to pay for the raw materials and coal brought in for manufacture, whether from the Western zones or the Soviet zone; secondly, for sale within Berlin, to meet the needs of Berlin; and, thirdly, for general export divided between the Eastern and Western zones. Any exports to the Western zones in excess of the money obtained from the sale of industrial coal and raw materials would be paid for from the money derived from the sale of food and other coal brought in from Western zones. I pointed out that this would enable maximum Berlin recovery and would be helpful to all. I stated that I was not concerned with imports brought into the Soviet sector from the Soviet zone nor exports from the Soviet sector, except those that were made from imports from the Western zones; and that the reason for my lack of interest was since there was no currency problem involved free and maximum trade would help Berlin. Marshal Sokolovsky then suggested that the controlling body might well be the Berlin magistrat. General Robertson agreed with this, provided it was under quadripartite supervision. Sokolovsky neither accepted nor rejected Robertson’s comment, except to say that licensing for the past three years had been a Soviet responsibility. He was advised that while the Soviets had claimed this responsibility, it had never been recognized by the three Western Powers. It seemed clear to me that Sokolovsky was interested in but did not fully understand my proposal and had nothing definite in his own mind. He was quite willing for subject to be referred back to the Trade Committee for further consideration in the light of our own discussions. Of course, I had advised Robertson and Koenig just prior to the meeting of what I proposed to say, but since it had not been worked out in detail in advance they really had very little time to fully grasp its implications. I was sorry that Robertson accepted the suggestion of the magistrat so readily, as I am convinced of Soviet intent in the not too distant future to replace the present magistrat by one of their own choosing; in which case we would be in the position of either accepting the Soviet magistrat or losing the advantages of our trade agreement. It was for that reason that I preferred an allied bureau with German personnel working for it.

After it was agreed to return this discussion to the Trade Committee, General Robertson again brought up the transport question and asked if it were possible for the matter now to be referred back to the Transportation Committee. At this time, I repeated to my colleagues that it was the understanding of my Government that the Moscow directive dealt only with the removal of all restrictions which had been imposed since March and not with the imposition of additional restrictions. I stated that in March our military passenger trains carried Americans and non-Germans who had been approved for visits to Berlin, and that the only restriction was in an understanding which I had had with Marshal Sokolovsky that only Germans working directly for us would be carried on these trains. The removal of restrictions, therefore, for train travel meant to me the return to this condition. At the time the restrictions were imposed, there were no restrictions on air lift; and, therefore, it was not subject to discussion. However, I pointed out that I had already expressed my willingness to consider certain safeguards on the movement of currency and goods, and that I was prepared to have a German inspection service, under quadripartite supervision, inspect all German cargo and passengers to enforce such regulations with respect to movement of goods and currencies that might be agreed, that I was further prepared to provide a passenger list for each military train movement and to provide my own inspection service to see that this passenger list was checked and that any regulations which may be agreed with respect to currency and goods were enforced. I stated that I was prepared to make the same arrangements for air, that is, a German inspection of German passengers and cargo and my own inspection of other passengers and cargo arriving and leaving the American sector. I said that my representative on the Transport Committee would be prepared to discuss any questions which could be considered which would not involve restrictions other than those I had just described.

I also stated that we were prepared, except for those travelling on official duties, for the payment of railroad fares to be divided in a just ratio between the East and West zones, as might be agreed by the Reichsbahn officials. Marshal Sokolovsky then stated that it was necessary to reiterate his previous position and that was that no controls or inspections could be undertaken in the Soviet zone except by Soviet personnel. He indicated quite clearly that he still had in mind a limitation of passengers on military trains to military personnel and the inspection of these trains by Soviet personnel. He further reiterated the contention that our air lift did not accord with previous agreements and that it would be necessary to restrict air lift. Generals Koenig and Robertson were prepared to let the question go to the Transport Committee in spite of Marshal Sokolovsky’s statement. I, of course, did not wish to cause a break on this question without having discussed it with them in advance. Moreover, I still feel it too early to cause a break even in this question without further exploration of details. Therefore, I stated that it seemed to me a useful purpose might be performed by the Transport Committee in clearly expressing in writing the differences in our views so that we coud examine these differences at an early meeting to determine if it were possible to go on with any hope of accomplishment; and that under these conditions I would agree to the question being referred to the committee again. This was accepted. The Transport and Trade committees were given until Monday to report back so that they would have sufficient time to prepare reports. Since it was not certain that the Finance Committee had made sufficient progress to make a report, the meeting of the four Governors for tomorrow is tentative and will be deferred until Monday unless General Koenig, who will be the chairman, advises us that the Finance Committee has progressed sufficiently to report.

After the meeting had concluded its business, Marshal Sokolovsky then said he had an announcement to make. His announcement was that Soviet air maneuvers on an extensive scale would be held beginning 6, September for several days; and that it would be necessary for these maneuvers to extend into the air corridors and over Berlin. He made the announcement to assure his colleagues that this was the normal maneuvers for this time of year for the Soviet forces and had no other significance. This was amusing since in the four summers we have been in Berlin we have never heard or seen these maneuvers previously. General Robertson thanked Marshal Sokolovsky for giving us this information and hoped it would not interfere with the air corridors. To this, Marshal Sokolovsky replied, “certainly”; although I am not sure whether this meant “certainly, yes” or “certainly, no”. I, too, thanked Marshal Sokolovsky for his information, which I said I understood and that I hoped that the German people would understand also; however, I must point out to Marshal Sokolovsky that the air corridors to Berlin and in Berlin were now crowded with non-military type planes bringing food and other essentials to Berlin, and that in the interests of the American airmen who were flying in the corridor I must remind him that maneuvers in the corridors were prohibited by our agreed safety regulations and that such maneuvers could not be conducted in the corridors with certainty; that it seemed to me there was sufficient air for any type and kind of air maneuvers without utilizing the corridors. Marshal Sokolovsky denied that such air safety regulations existed and insisted that they must use the corridors. I made no further reply and the meeting adjourned.

Subsequently, I met with Robertson and Koenig, both of whom believed Sokolovsky was slightly more yielding today and that agreement was quite possible. I must admit that I am completely unable to diagnose the events which lead to such conclusions on their part. Robertson, interestingly enough, began to suggest possible compromises with respect to inspection of military passengers and cargo, to which Koenig objected strongly. Koenig pointed out that our right of entry must be protected as an essential to our right to be in Berlin. Both advised me that they were without authority to discontinue discussions on any question without specific instructions from their Governments. I reported to them the general substance of your cable to me on transport restrictions and advised them that I would take no action to create a break on this question without giving them ample time to discuss it with their Governments.

I did not advise the meeting today that my Government had authorized me to take a final position with respect to the removal of transport restrictions, as I felt it better to wait until we have heard once more from the Transport Committee and Robertson and Koenig thereafter have time to report to their Governments.

I am advised that the Finance Committee is having great difficulty in agreeing even simple details. A rather important detail is the Soviet insistence on having the right to investigate the holdings of B marks of the individual to determine if they are legitimate holdings which should be exchanged. While we are quite prepared to make such an investigation, we could not consent to the investigation being made by Soviet representatives as, of course, this could be used for punishment as well as for political purposes.

I am sorry that I am unable to give a more encouraging report and perhaps I am too pessimistic since my colleagues still feel quite hopeful. We will continue to plug along exploring each detail in the hope that we may at least narrow the issues to a relatively few, easily understandable points.

Foregoing telecon was sent by Army to War No. TT–1146 from CINCEUR personal from Clay to Dept of Army personal for Under Secretary Draper.

Sent Dept; repeated London personal for Ambassador Douglas 571, Moscow personal for Ambassador Smith 481, Paris personal for Ambassador Caffery 586.

Murphy

1 The agreed report of the meeting was transmitted in telegram 2239, September 4, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–448).

2 Correction derived from a copy of this telegram included in the USPolad Germany files.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–548: Telegram

[Document 642]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, September 5, 1948—7 p. m.

3527. In view of Brit attitude and the time factor, we agree it will be necessary to withhold any approach to Moscow until after the date set for the Mil Govs to report back to their Govts. There was never any intention on our part to walk out of committees or to foreclose discussions in Berlin. We feel it is of utmost importance that if a break is to occur it should be over the basic issues and should not take place in Berlin. Instructions to Clay with regard to tomorrow’s meetings will repeat this point. Copy of these instructions will be sent you through the MA.2

Unless there is a change in the Sov attitude, it appears very doubtful that the Mil Govs in the course of the next two days will be able to make any real progress towards settlement. We should therefore like to utilize the agreed date for submission of the Mil Govs’ report to enable an approach to be made to Moscow as soon as possible in order to bring back the Berlin discussions, if they are to continue, to the agreements reached in Moscow. If this fails on the grounds that the Sovs are unwilling to abide by Stalin’s and Molotov’s commitments on the two central points, namely, the lifting of all the restrictions imposed since March and control by the finance commission on the German Bank of Emission’s operations in Berlin, it will then be clearly manifested that the Sov Govt has no intention of reaching any agreement. We would therefore like at the present time to prepare the ground for this approach since it seems unlikely that Sokolovsky’s attitude in Berlin will change in the course of the next 48 hours and we should delay as little as possible.

We propose that we should agree that instructions be sent by the three Govts to their reps in Moscow to seek an interview with Molotov as soon as possible after the meeting on Sept 7 and to hand him a written communication which should include a statement calling attention to Sokolovsky’s breach of the clear understanding reached with Stalin and Molotov with respect to the date and complete lifting of transport restrictions and to the powers of the finance commission and also point out that Sokolovsky had suggested new restrictions which were not contemplated in the directive. If the Sov Govt is prepared to issue new instructions to Sokolovsky this would enable conversations in Berlin to continue on the basis previously agreed in Moscow. If Molotov refuses or evidences an unwillingness to issue these instructions, the three reps could then state that they would be compelled to report to their Govts the apparent unwillingness of the Sov Govt to abide by assurances given by Generalissimo Stalin and Mr. Molotov. We are still giving consideration to this phase of the approach, including possibly other material for the statement and will keep you informed.

It seems likely that the discussions in Berlin will not have reached a point by Sept 7 to enable the Mil Govs to submit a final report and that an effort may be made by Sokolovsky to extend the time so the discussions may continue. Clay is being instructed in such an event to state that the Mil Govs have no authority to extend the date, but the question must be referred to the Govts. There might then be some advantage in deciding to let the Mil Govs continue in Berlin while in Moscow the basic issues raised by the report or reports of Sept 7 are being met. If it becomes apparent that time will be lost by efforts to obtain a joint report by the Mil Govs to their Govts, the directive, in our view, requires that the Mil Govs must report, either jointly or separately, to their respective Govts by Sept 7 concerning results of their meetings.

Please discuss this promptly with Bevin and Massigli, letting us know their views.

Marshall

1 Repeated to Paris as 3460, Moscow as 1070, and Berlin as 1582.

2 Not printed.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–548: Telegram

[Document 643]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

top secret Berlin, September 5, 1948—7 p. m.

482. Personal for Ambassador Smith, Eyes Only. Re urtel 363, September 2.1 We have noted carefully your opinion regarding Sokolovsky’s possible position regarding the bank of emission and the jurisdiction of the financial commission. You expressed the opinion that Sokolovsky will probably yield ground on this issue before letting Berlin discussions fail. We hope you are right. Thus far, Sokolovsky has not shown the slightest indication of yielding an inch in this respect nor has Soviet Financial Adviser sitting on the Finance Committee given any indication of willingness to make concession in this field.

You ask for brief estimate of Berlin views on this question and I quote the comment of the US Finance Adviser, Berlin, in which General Clay concurs: “We obviously do not expect finance commission to control zonal activities of emission bank. Unless, however, we are to be completely in the hands of the emission bank, and therefore, of the SMA on money, credit, and budget matters in Berlin, we must have some means of supervising these activities. At the same time, we recognized that small comfort is derived from a control by the finance commission over the relations between Berlin and the emission bank since a Soviet vote could block any or all measures which the western members of the finance commission might consider imperative to protect the interests of the western sectors. Nevertheless, since the control to be provided by the finance commission will be the only control over the finances of the city and the only means of protecting the western sector population from discriminatory acts by a Soviet dominated body, we should attempt to establish the power of the commission in clear terms.

“Our directive provides that the currency circulation in Berlin is to be regulated by the emission bank. This can be subject to the widest interpretation and appears thus far to be given the widest interpretation by the Soviets here. The power over all finances in Berlin is, therefore, given to the emission bank except as limited by the specific terms of any agreement by the four Military Governors or by the general control exercised by the finance commission. We shall, of course, try to have spelled out in the agreement here as many of the protective provisions as possible, but the fact remains that the ‘regulation’ and the implementation rests with the emission bank. The emission bank, it is true, must in accordance with the agreement, act through the credit institutions of Berlin. We have not so far established and may not be able to establish that the finance commission will have power of control over the credit institutions superior to that of the emission bank. We should like to envisage the finance commission as a superior voice in the financial and budgetary operations of Berlin. As such, it would control the credit policies of the credit institutions and the budget of the city. As such, it would likewise control the decisions of the emission bank in so far as these decisions affect the credit policy of the Berlin credit institutions, the availability of adequate funds to the Magistrat and other public organizations and the availability of adequate funds to the credit institutions to prevent these institutions from having to bow to Soviet demands under financial stress.

“We shall, of course, try to work into our agreement the terms of an agreement between the Stadtkontor and the emission bank whereby Berlin will be ensured sufficient bank notes initially to cover the liabilities of credit institutions after allowing for the value of their realizable assets and to cover a reasonable operating reserve; whereby loan and discount privileges for the Stadtkontor may be guaranteed by the emission bank on no less favorable terms, conditions, and amounts than are granted by the emission bank to member banks in the Soviet zone; and whereby the Berlin city administration may be allowed to borrow from the emission bank on no less favorable terms, conditions, and amounts than are the public administrations in the Soviet zone. Even with such an agreement, however, which is by no means certain, we could hardly expect satisfactory results if the implementation of the agreement is left merely to the Stadtkontor and the emission bank and the Magistrat and the emission bank. The pattern of Soviet control over individuals, enterprises, and public authorities through lavish or stringent money rationing, as the case suits their purpose, a pattern which they are already applying in their zone after monetary reform is well known. They have attempted to control the Berlin Magistrat by not allowing them free withdrawals from their bank accounts to which they are entitled under the law, and our ability to provide the Magistrat with western B marks has alone frustrated this effort.

“The directive provides that the Military Governors must safeguard the Soviet zonal currency circulation from disorganization. This will be the peg upon which the emission bank will hang all refusals of adequate currency and credit to Berlin. Although control through the finance commission, which will be subject to Soviet veto would be weak indeed, it does provide a four-power body—in fact, the only four-power body where the problem may be aired and from which appeals can be justly and accurately made to the Military Governors and by them to govts. Without this control, even if in name only, we do not have any more than the Soviets offered on June 22 before instituting their currency reform law in Berlin. In fact, we should have less since we did then have the Berlin four-power Kommandatura.”

Sent Moscow personal for Ambassador Smith, Eyes Only 482, Dept 2242, Eyes Only for Secretary and Lovett, London 573, and Paris 588, Eyes Only for the Ambassadors.

Murphy

1 Not printed; for a summary of this telegram, sent to Washington as 1841, see footnote 6 to telegram 1050, September 2, to Moscow, p. 1104 [Pg. 1104 is part of Doc. 636].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–548: Telegram

[Document 644]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact London, September 5, 1948—3 p. m.

3978. For the Secretary and Lovett (Eyes Only) from Douglas.

I. Subject your telecon message afternoon September 4.1

Have just finished a long conversation with Strang who has been in communication with Bevin and who transmitted to me the latter’s views. They are as follows:

1. It would have been preferable had we referred back to Moscow the question of the powers of the financial commission when the first signs of Sokolovsky’s departure from the Moscow agreements appeared at the meeting of the Military Governors on September 1.

2. (A) a. Since, however, we did not then during the early days of the discussion among the Military Governors follow this course;

b. Since the issue of the powers of the financial commission was referred to a committee and has not subsequently formally been submitted to the Military Governors for discussion;

c. Since it was agreed yesterday in Berlin that the transport committee should complete its work indicating the items in which there is agreement and the items on which there may be disagreement, and that this report was to be, when finished, submitted to the Military Governors for discussion; and

d. Since the next meeting of the Military Governors is to be held on Monday, the 6th, one day prior to the agreed date on which they are to submit the results of their discussions to their respective governments:

Bevin feels that we should now await this report before making any representations in Moscow.

2. (B) It is Bevin’s strongly held opinion that even though discussion of all details implicit in the implementation of the Moscow directive may not have been completed by the 7th, the report of the Military Governors should, nevertheless, be made to their Governments on the agreed date.

2. (C) He thinks that meanwhile, between now and the 7th, it would be a mistake for us to walk out of any one of the committees that have been formed and to refuse to participate in their labors. It is too late, in his judgment, to take this action.

2. (D) Meanwhile, that is to say between now and the 8th, the Military Governors should so point up the discussions in Berlin that Sokolovsky’s position will be made unmistakably clear as to whether he accepts for implementation the two basic principles: Namely, first the powers of the financial commission over the Bank of Emission in regard to the continued issuance and circulation of currency in Berlin; and second, the lifting of transport restrictions. In this connection Robertson will be instructed to follow this course.

If this course is followed, even though discussion of many of the details will not have been completed, we will have a clear view of the fundamentals.

2. (E) The three governments, having received the report of the Military Governors, will then be in a position carefully, considerately and in an orderly fashion to take stock of the situation as it then exists and to arrive at a consolidated and united position. This, Bevin feels, may be crucial.

3. (A) Bevin is not clear that the Soviet are pressing for a break. He thinks the evidence is inconclusive on this point and not sufficient at the moment to justify a judgment one way or the other.

(B) Bevin feels, on the other hand, that we should not on our part try to maneuver deliberately for a break.

4. (A) Bevin is absolutely firm that the transport restrictions which have been imposed prior to June 18th must be lifted, and that we cannot agree to the implementation of any additional restrictions except those necessary, as outlined by Clay, to protect the Berlin currency position. In this regard, however, he thinks we should not be too rigid in the position we take covering inspection for the use of the military trains; that too much emphasis has been placed on the use of military trains and not enough on the critical question of the use of transport facilities for the purpose of supplying the city of Berlin. He feels, also that we should not be too rigid in providing the reasonable protections against the misuse of transportation facilities in such a way as to adversely affect the currency situation in Berlin.

(B) He is equally firm that the powers of the financial commission over the German Bank of Emission, in so far as the continued use and circulation of the Soviet mark in Berlin are concerned, must be adequate.

II. ReDeptel 3526, September 4.2

After reviewing Robertson’s report on Sokolovsky’s announcement of the forthcoming Soviet air maneuvers and Clay’s comments, the former of which carried a somewhat milder note than the latter, it is Strang’s view that official notice should be taken by HMG. This he feels, particularly because Sokolovsky went out of his way to inform us officially of the contemplated exercises of the Soviet Air Force.

Whether, however, this notice should be taken through representations in Berlin or Moscow, he is not so clear.

I pointed out to Strang that doubtless Sokolovsky was acting under instructions when he made his declaration to the three western Military Governors, and that, therefore, any representations which we make on the subject should properly be in Moscow and not in Berlin. Strang wants to consider the precise language which HMG may use in making their representations either in Berlin or Moscow.

On this point, Strang will give me further information this afternoon after having communicated with Bevin. Since it is now 3:30 in Moscow, it is doubtful, should Bevin conclude to communicate with the Soviet Government, that instructions could be received by Roberts in time to act today.3

III. In regard to going to the GA or SC in the event of a break, Strang indicated, tentatively, that after Bevin had seen the report of our conversation, reported in Embtel 3937, September 1,4 he will be able to give me a definitive answer. Probably, however, HMG will be prepared to agree with us that we should appeal to the SC.

IV. 1. I also discussed with Massigli at considerable length the substance of your telecon message of yesterday afternoon. He is putting the matter to his Government, and will have a reply at about 5:00 o’clock this afternoon after it has been discussed with Schuman.

Massigli’s tentative reaction was that it was probably too late to act in Moscow prior to the 7th.

2. I also discussed with Massigli the substance of Deptel 3526, September 4, and gave him the background information which he had not previously received. He will give me an answer on this question at the same time that he gives me an answer on the substance of paragraph IV.–1. above.

3. On the subject of invoking the UN, while Massigli said that he was impressed with the argument that had been made at our meeting reported in Embtel 3937, September 1. he felt that his Government, before giving an answer, would want to know what course of action or alternative courses of action we are considering taking after our appeal to UN has been completed, and that his Government probably would not consider our commitment to take no step which might precipitate serious trouble without full consultation as a wholly satisfactory answer. I repeated again the arguments that had previously been made, and ended with the question which I have on many occasions put to Massigli: “If not the UN, what course of action should we take?” At any rate, Massigli said quite frankly that he thought this question was a good one.

Sent Department as 3978, repeated Paris for Caffery Eyes Only as 572; Berlin for Murphy and Clay Eyes Only as 486. Department please pass Moscow for Smith Eyes Only as 240.

Douglas

1  Ante, p. 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 640].

2 Not printed.

3 In subsequent telegrams, Douglas and Caffery reported the British and French would not protest Soviet air maneuvers in the corridors to Berlin. The United States delivered its note in Moscow on September 5, and the Soviet Government replied September 7. The texts of the notes and related documentation are in file 740.00119 Control (Germany).

4 Not printed; it reported tentative British and French agreement on the necessity of taking the Berlin question to the Security Council if the negotiations with the Russians broke down (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–148).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–648: Telegram

[Document 645]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, September 6, 1948—6 p. m.

3987. Supplement to Embtel 3983.1 in response to Deptel 35272 of September 5.

1. Since sending Embtel 3983 of today, Strang has talked with Bevin. Bevin, who is exhausted, had to leave London, as previously reported, last Wednesday afternoon for a week’s absence in Cornwall. My only method of communicating with him at the moment is through Strang. Strang reports that Bevin’s position is as follows: (a) Robertson has been instructed to make Sokolovsky’s position on the two matters of principle, namely the lifting of restrictions on transport prior to June 18 and the powers of the financial commission, unmistakably clear.

(b) It is Bevin’s view that the report of the military governors, either jointly or separately, should be submitted to the respective governments after the close of the meeting in Berlin on September 7.

(c) After the receipt by the respective governments of the reports of the military governors referred to in (b) above, the three western powers should determine, collectively, the identical representations to be made in Moscow.

(d) While Bevin is not prepared to make a commitment, now in advance of the receipt of the report from the military governors as to whether there should be continued discussions in Berlin or whether, depending upon the substance of the report, attempt to reach a settlement should be made in Moscow.

(e) While Bevin is firm on the two fundamental principles involved he is not inclined to make any commitment as to any course of action [based] upon a presently hypothetical state of affairs.

(f) There are two reasons which, according to Strang, move Bevin to take this position: first, he, officially, does not want to prejudge the outcome of the conversations in Berlin; and secondly, before he can commit himself after the receipt of the report of the military governors in which the facts are clearly disclosed, he must consult with his colleagues of the British Cabinet. He does not want this to be construed that he will not follow the procedure on this point outlined in Deptel 3527; he merely, for the reasons stated, wants to reserve his position.

2. Meanwhile, however, Strang is willing, on the understanding that it implies no commitment on the part of Bevin, to consider with Massigli and me a coordinated and united representation to be made to Moscow on certain hypothetical results of the conversations in Berlin.

3. Under Robertson’s present instructions, he has no authority to agree to any request which Sokolovsky may make in Berlin for an extension of the period covered by the discussions beyond September 7. He would, therefore, necessarily have to refer any such request back to his government.

4. While Strang did not raise with Bevin specifically the question of a joint or separate report by military governors, he thinks it reasonable to assume, in view of Bevin’s insistence that a report be submitted by the military governors after the meeting on September 7, that if time would be lost in an effort to obtain a joint report, the military governors should report individually to their respective governments. While he did not put the question to Bevin, but will do so tomorrow morning when he talks with him again on the phone, it is for the moment reasonable to assume that he would prefer, in the event no quadripartite report could be had without the loss of time, an identical report to be submitted to the respective governments by the military governors of the three western powers, so that the three western powers could act on the basis of a similar statement of fact.

It is, however, Strang’s view (given me subsequent to dictating the above) in which he thinks Bevin would concur, that a quadripartite report showing clearly the items of agreement and disagreement, should form the basis of representations to Moscow. Otherwise, if we act solely on the reports of the military governors of the three western powers when we make our representations in Moscow, there may be disagreement in Moscow as to the points on which Sokolovsky disagreed or agreed as the case may be.

Sent Department as 3987; repeated Berlin (for Murphy and Clay—Eyes Only) as 491; Paris (for Caffery—Eyes Only) as 578. Moscow (for Smith—Eyes Only) as 245, Department please pass.

Douglas

1 Not printed.

2  Ante, p. 1122 [Pg. 1122 includes portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642].

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.00/9–748: Telegram

[Document 646]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent Berlin, September 7, 1948—2 a. m.

2249. After events subsided at City Hall September 6 (mytel 2247 September 7 repeated London 578, Paris 593, Moscow 4881 ) City Assembly leaders regrasped initiative they seemed to have lost during day and decided to convene meeting elsewhere. British Military Commandant was again asked to permit utilization of old Reichstag Building. Although this was refused he permitted meeting in Technische Hochschule in British sector.

Suhr Assembly Chairman, invited attendance all four political factions. SED refused; only member that ilk attending reported to be Helmut Brandt, head of CDU splint group and leading figure in new so-called “demo bloc”, who is apparently there as “observer”. Although all other members not present, meeting is said to be well attended and regularity is lent it by presence US, British and French liaison officers. Several SPD burgomasters from Soviet sector Bezirks also present as guest observers.

Suhr designated meeting as “extraordinary” one as regards time and place, but otherwise “ordinary”. All points on agenda of ill fated, often postponed meeting were to be considered in regular fashion.

Meeting began at 7 o’clock and was expected to continue into night as agenda is lengthy. Up to 10 o’clock, it had voted on magistrat election program and fixed November 14 as Berlin’s next election day. It had also voted favorably on Berlin’s representation in west Germany parliamentary council and confirmed nomination of five delegates appointed by SPD, CDU, and LDP. It is encouraging that after feeble performance at City Hall today, Assembly leaders rallied so quickly and immediately convened meeting elsewhere.

Sent Department 2249; repeated London 579, Paris 595, Moscow 490.

Murphy

1 Not printed; it reported in detail on recent, Communist-led demonstrations which had paralyzed the City Assembly and prevented it from meeting in the new City Hall (862.00/9–748). For documentation on these events, see Berlin Senate, Berlin, Quellen und Dokumente, pp. 1610 ff.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–748: Telegram

[Document 647]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 1

top secret Berlin, September 7, 1948—2 a. m.

2251. Personal for the Secretary and Lovett. Eyes Only. Today’s meeting started at 1600 hours and ended at about 2200 hours.2 Prior to meeting, Robertson advised us he was to pick several major points of difference to highlight for inclusion in report tomorrow. Robertson and Koenig both also instructed to report tomorrow.

Today’s meeting started with report of Finance Committee3 on a few additional details. It was marked by lengthy, futile discussions usually pointless;

First issue was Soviet unwillingness to replace unissued “B” marks made available to banks to maintain their solvency.

Second issue was Soviet refusal to exchange “B” marks held by western powers and their personnel. Both issues were returned to Finance Committee without progress.

Third issue was Soviet unwillingness to exchange on one to one basis without their investigation of and decision as to legitimacy of holdings in excess of 500 marks. This was listed as in full disagreement.

Fourth issue was Soviet unwillingness to exchange “B” marks borrowed by magistrat, credit institutions et cetera. These funds were loaned by US acting for Bank Deutscher Laender and a failure to exchange them would place these establishments at Soviet mercy. This question was also returned to committee without progress.

Fifth issue was permission for “B” mark holders to transfer holdings to western zone. This was refused by Soviets. Question was set aside for some future discussion.

Sixth issue was Soviet insistence that bank deposits would be exchanged only to extent cash was on hand in bank and not as covered by loans. This included also refusal of Soviets to credit reichsmarks holding being tax reviewed and not yet converted to “B” marks without investigation or check. Sokolovsky did offer here to complete conversion to “B” marks and then exchange on one for one basis or to convert entirely under Soviet law. Latter would permit, if we understood it, savings banks accounts to be converted at more liberal Soviet rate. However, all was dependent on Soviet investigation and check. This question was then carried over for further discussion at some future meetings.

Seventh issue was the issuance of long term loans against pre-1945 bank accounts. Soviets insisted this be a German economic council (Soviet zone law) and our position being that it must be a magistrat law. This issue was completely disagreed.

Robertson then summed up major points of difference in the issues discussed to date. When he completed his statement I said it had been very helpful and that it proved to me the difficulties we encountered when we discussed details with principles unagreed. I then expressed my regret that I could not find in Soviet proposals any acceptance of the principle agreed in Moscow that the practical implementation of the financial arrangements involved in the introduction and continued circulation of the single currency in Berlin should be under a quadripartite financial commission. I had to repeat that the discussions at Moscow made it clear that while the regulation of currency and its issue would be undertaken for Berlin by the German Bank of Emission through the credit establishments now operating the activities of the Bank of Emission in this connection would be under the control of the financial commission. Highest Soviet authority did not object to control being used in listing the functions of this commission.

The American Delegation had not contended that the bank’s other activities should be in any way under the supervision and control at the quadripartite financial commission. As a practical solution, it had stated its willingness to accept this control by investing in financial commission the power of approval of instructions applicable to Berlin issued by the Bank of Emission and the supervision of the execution of such approved orders by the Berlin credit establishments. This would have assured equal and nondiscriminatory regulations which did not appear assured by Soviet proposal.

The American Delegation can not accept this apparent theory that the quadripartite financial commission is limited in its authority to observing and pointing out instances which may occur in the issue and regulation of currency which do not accord with general agreements. It is obvious that under such an arrangement, it would be advisory only and in no way able to exercise the control and supervision envisaged in the Moscow discussions which resulted in the joint directive to the four Military Governors. I suggested that since tomorrow was the date for our report, it might be well to have our Finance Committee develop and define clearly just what each of us proposed for the commission. I hoped to draw Sokolovsky out but he refused to say anything except that we knew his position and it was unchanged. The Finance Committee was instructed to line out our differences in its report tomorrow.

Amazingly, Sokolovsky had complained of being tired so the reports equally futile of transport and trade committees were carried over until tomorrow.

Koenig asked if we would prepare a joint or separate reports tomorrow. Robertson and I agreed on desirability of joint report if possible. Sokolovsky stated he did not see what we would have to report. Koenig asked for an early meeting so we would have time to hear the committees and prepare a report. Sokolovsky indifferently suggested 17 hours and under presure accepted 16 hours being completely uninterested in Koenig’s suggestion for a morning meeting. I think this significant.

At no time during these conferences have Soviets agreed to early meetings or to continue meetings for long hours. This as you know is not characteristic and can only result from the desire to stall. Moreover, in meetings their attitude is indifferent almost to be contemptuous.

I am sorry we are getting nowhere. I have tried every tactical method I know of. All we have been able to do is to discuss a comparatively small number of details with almost no area of agreement. It is clear Soviets are making only those proposals which would give them complete control so as to make our acceptance impossible. They are then willing to discuss their proposals interminably but never to yield an inch. I can see no sign of a desire on their part to reach agreement.

Meanwhile, their tactics in Berlin are getting rough. Yesterday, a Communist mob prevented City Assembly from meeting. It manhandled three American reporters at the scene. Today a well organized mob was on hand again. The deputy mayor foolishly and without our knowledge took 40 odd plain clothes men from western sectors over to keep order. Uniformed police of Soviet sector under direct orders of Soviet officer started to arrest them. They rushed into offices of three western liaison representatives where some are still at siege. However, Soviet sector police broke into our office and led about twenty of the poor devils off to death or worse.

Sent Department 2251, London 581, Paris 597, Moscow 492.

Murphy

1 The copy of this telegram included in the USPolAd Germany Top Secret Files, Lot F–169, includes the following initial sentence: “Following is repeat of telecon from Clay to Dept of Army personal for Draper.”

2 The agreed U.S.–U.K.–France report on this meeting of September 6 was transmitted in telegram 2245, September 7, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–748).

3 The reports of the finance, trade, and transport committees were transmitted as enclosures to Ambassador Murphy’s letter of September 10 to Bohlen, none printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–748).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–848: Telegram

[Document 648]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 1

top secret Berlin, September 8, 1948—1 a. m.

2254. Personal for the Secretary and Lovett. Eyes Only. Today’s2 meeting with Sokolovsky presiding met at 1600 hours. First discussion was devoted to trade agreement. All items resulted in disagreement. Soviet insisted on exports and imports being licensed by their organization and refused quadripartite control of movements between Berlin and Western zones. Second issue was on quantities involved with Soviets insisting that exports could not exceed raw materials, exclusive of food and power. Obviously this would perpetuate in full the subsidy of Berlin. Sokolovsky under argument did suggest that food and coal brought in specifically to expedite production could be included in the raw imports to be balanced, but this is, of course, a minor concession.

Third issue was method of payment, which Sokolovsky insisted must be through the bank of emission rather than Berlin banks. This item was held in suspense pending report from Truman committee on general accounting later in this meeting.

Fourth issue was Soviet unwillingness to have food, coal, and oil considered as a part of trade agreement which is consistent with their argument that these supplies should be provided without any payment. In this connection, Koenig raised the lifting of restrictions and reminded Sokolovsky that our directives required the removal of all commerce restrictions.

Fifth issue was Soviet demand for lifting of trade restrictions between Berlin and Soviet zone. I said that this was required by Moscow directive but had to be done simultaneously with removal of all restrictions contemplated in directive. Sixth question was the lifting of restriction on interzonal trade and method of payment. This was agreed.

At one point, when Sokolovsky proposed that the Magistrat should be responsible for trade agreements, I said that I would accept this if there were an agreed quadripartite supervisory organization. His reply delivered in his most cynical manner was that the Magistrat was now a tool of the Western powers but this would not last forever. Taken in connection with recent mob denials of use of City Hall by Magistrat and assembly, this may be significant. Also, in these discussions, Sokolovsky on several occasions refused to explain Soviet position and was apparently well satisfied to record disagreement. It was clear he was not interested in finding agreement even when differences were minor.

The meeting then proceeded to consider the report of the Transport Committee.3 Sokolovsky commented correctly that Transport Committee had not completed its work as its report covered only rail transports. He then added there was air, highway, and waterway still to be considered. Koenig then spoke and said he must first know if Sokolovsky was prepared to remove restrictions imposed since 30 March. Sokolovsky evaded reply by stating that this he accepted in as far as what he considered restrictions, but this did not apply to checking of documents, which he did not consider a restriction. Robertson made a useless but sustained effort to obtain an agreed wording. Then Sokolovsky stated his position in full. All restrictions on rail and Autobahn imposed since 30 March would be removed. Rail and highway would be via Helmstedt–Berlin routes. Sixteen trainpaths would be provided daily, of which three would be military. Military personnel, families, and civilian members of military administration may be carried in military train and use Autobahn subject to producing identification cards (this means trains subject to inspection). German employees are not to be carried on military trains. Military freight trains are to carry supplies for occupying powers and train chief is to present way bill at documentation point. German cargo to be verified by way bills of food and coal with licenses to be produced for commercial cargo. (This raises the question of who issues the license.) Marshal Sokolovsky accepts principle to establish bipartite control of checking personnel on military trains and on Autobahn at demarcation points. Please note that this is Sokolovsky’s interpretation of my proposal which was for each zone commander to check his own military trains under agreed regulations.

Sokolovsky then proposed quadripartite order prohibiting military train and auto passengers between Berlin and Western zones from carrying either east or west marks. Air traffic is to be carried out to meet the requirements of the occupying powers under the decision of the Control Council of November 1945. Robertson inquired if allied military missions would be included in those authorized to travel in military trains. Sokolovsky replied in the negative and that they would have to secure Soviet consent. I inquired if American passengers would include all Americans authorized to visit Berlin by American Military Government and his reply was in the affirmative. I then pointed out that there had been difference in interpretation between us with respect to the Control Council air regulations of November 1945, and that my consideration of his proposals was based on my interpretation. However, I do not like his wording. To this, he did not object. The question of waterways was then raised. Sokolovsky agreed to their opening for interzonal trade but would not agree this included food and coal for Berlin. He would consider special agreements for such movements. Sokolovsky has agreed to present his proposal in writing.

This proposal of Sokolovsky after his cynical handling of trade paper comes amazingly close to carrying out the Moscow directive in this field. It is, in my opinion, a last minute device to place Soviet Government in better bargaining position at Moscow to obtain the trade and financial supremacy which is their real aim.4

We are still in session and I am sending interim reports as we consider each subject so, that you may have additional time to study them.

The meeting next proceeded to discuss the report of Finance Committee.5 First issue was the previous disagreement relative to exchange of D-marks held by Western powers personnel and organizations which was now agreed with maximum amounts to be so converted at 750,000 DM for UK and 1,000,000 DM for US and France. Second issue was exchange of B-marks received by institutions as grants which had hitherto been rejected by Soviets, but was now accepted subject to accounts being used under cash rules of bank of emission. Western powers accepted subject to reservation that Financial Commission would have proper relationship to bank of emission in this respect. Third issue was on conversion of Reichsmarks. Soviet proposed simple 1 to 1 exchange and withdrew completely demand for investigation of accounts in excess of 500 DM.

Fourth issue was the exchange of accounts still in Reichsmarks subject to tax review which Soviets had demanded right to investigate. Soviets agreed to consider Western powers check and to make exchange under Soviet law 111 which was more favorable than western law. However, Soviets reserved final right of investigation and decision land under their law could for instance refuse to convert Siemens–Hoeske account as a war producer. On the other hand, 1 to 1 exchange based on western law would result in substantially less money for these accounts. This question was not agreed as Western powers reserved their position with respect to the investigation, being willing however to otherwise apply Soviet law 111. Sokolovsky was here emphatic that it was either the western law without investigation but discriminatory, or the Soviet law with its more liberal terms but with Soviet investigation and determination of legality of account under the much more restrictive provisions of the Soviet law.

We then proceeded to discussion of the functions of the Finance Commission. Here Robertson raised the question as to the approval of implementing instructions of the bank of emission by the Finance Commission and pointed out that this was the fundamental issue in finance field which must be resolved if we are to reach agreement. Without acceptance of this principle, Robertson stated he could only refer this question to his government. He placed himself in complete agreement with my statement on this subject of yesterday.6 Koenig accepted Robertson’s position as approximately his own. He also asked if the decisions of Finance Commission had to be unanimous, what would happen to a ruling of the bank of emission in event of disagreement in the commission which could not be resolved by the Military Governors and/or governments. Sokolovsky had no comment, except to suggest that the experts continue with their study of remaining items such as occupations costs and balancing of budget. Robertson stated this was not feasible since our directive made it mandatory for USLOM [agreed?] report today. Sokolovsky stated that it was manifest that an agreed report could not be submitted today. Robertson said he hoped a joint report could be made listing our agreements and disagreements. Sokolovsky stated that we needed until Saturday to reach an agreement—that he mentioned Saturday and not a date because he did not want to be definite.

We are discussing the report.

I next went back to the air question and asked Sokolovsky if he contended that we could not bring commercial aircraft into Berlin. He replied yes, contending Control Council agreement referred only to military aircraft. I then stated that I had hoped his transport proposal would provide a basis of understanding, but that I could not consider his proposed restriction of air travel. The directive and the discussions which led to the directive indicated clearly that the question under consideration was the removal of restrictions and not the imposition of additional restrictions. There had been no restrictions in our use of airlift at any time and we could not consider such restrictions now. They were clearly not within the purview of the directive. Therefore, I was unable to accept the Soviet proposal.

I proceeded to state that we were also far apart on trade. We were fully prepared to enter into a fair trade agreement and to have it implemented under quadripartite supervision. We were offered a one-sided agreement completely under Soviet control.

I also stated that we could not agree on the functions of the Finance Commission.

I had hoped we would at least make a joint report on our agreements and disagreements. Since this was impossible I must under the terms of the directive, report to my government at the close of today’s meeting and to request further instructions. Until these arrived, I could not agree to further discussions here. I hoped that we could avoid the impression of a break here and suggested that until we had received our instructions, our only comment would be that we are all studying our papers for a few days before meeting again.

Sokolovsky replied to each of my points, misquoting at least the English version of the Control Council air regulation to sustain his position; arguing that the Soviet trade control was merely what was already in effect, and quoting in detail Smith–Molotov exchange on Finance Commission to sustain his viewpoint. I refused to debate the latter, referring briefly to Smith’s talk of 23 August with Generalissimo Stalin.7

We then agreed to adjourn subject to further call if and when we receive additional instructions from our governments.

Detailed tripartite agreed report of today’s meeting is now in preparation.8 Also, a short 7 September report of the three Military Governors is being prepared.9 It will merely point out Sokolovsky’s willingness to yield today on minor points, probably to improve bargaining position. However, there has been no yield on these basic issues: Restrictions on airlift; participation of Western powers in control of Berlin trade with western zones; and power of Finance Commission to supervise issue and regulation of currency. We will add that it does not appear likely that these issues can be resolved except at governmental level. However, if desired to avoid appearance of break here committees can be continued to discuss details.

There is one major question not yet really tackled and that is payment for food and coal in east marks. We must have these east marks or else we will be unable to finance our activities here such as our radio stations. Likewise, we must have access to these marks to protect political parties, trade unions, etc., if trouble develops again. Also, we must have some favorable balance of trade exclusive food and coal to buy paper and other materials for the papers and magazines in western sectors.

I find it difficult to analyze today’s meeting. During trade discussions, Sokolovsky was cynical and his staff, indifferent. Suddenly, as we shifted to transport, he became amiable and jocular which was transmitted to his staff. I can only surmise he believed that his proposal on transport would be so pleasing we would swallow Soviet trade and finance control. In any event, they would claim major concessions on their part in Moscow and demand concessions from us on the real fundamentals. Robertson and Koenig again optimistic. I have my fingers crossed although I rather believe we could obtain substantial trade concessions. Clay.

Sent Department 2254, repeated Paris 598, London 582. Department pass Moscow 493.

Murphy

1 The copy of this telegram in the USPolAd Germany Top Secret Files includes the following additional first line: “Following is Clay’s TT–1171 to Dept of Army for Draper.”

2 September 7.

3 The report of the Transport Committee was transmitted as an enclosure to a letter from Murphy to Bohlen, September 10, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–748).

4 The full text of Sokolovsky’s proposal was transmitted in telegram 2256, September 8, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–848).

5 This report was sent as an enclosure to a letter from Murphy to Bohlen, September 10, neither printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–748).

6 See telegram 2251, supra.

7 See telegram 1728, August 24, from Moscow, p. 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619].

8 The text of the report under reference was transmitted in telegram 2255, September 8, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–848).

9 Presumably the reference here is to the joint report of the United States, United Kingdom, and French Military Governors, dated September 7; for the text of that report, see Cmd. 7534, pp. 56–57 [Pgs. 56–57 include portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34], Documents on Berlin, pp. 84–86, or Berlin Senate, Berlin, Quellen und Dokumente, pp. 1506–1507.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–848: Telegram

[Document 649]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, September 8, 1948—8 p. m.

1081. To assist Douglas in preparation with Brit and French of aide-mémoire for presentation to Molotov we sent following in telecon 2 with London today:

“Following for background info on our thinking:

Sokolovsky’s partial retreat on surface communications has blurred the clarity of that basic issue and thereby made it more difficult to obtain the necessary safeguards from the Sov Govt on this basis of Sokolovsky’s attitude in Berlin alone. We are disturbed by tendency to regard Sokolovsky’s slightly less blatant repudiation of the agreement on lifting the blockade as a ‘concession to our point of view’.

We have tried to work out a practical solution through the agreed directive plus Stalin’s confirmation of our interpretation without meeting head on fundamental issue of rights. This has been to date visibly a failure and it seems clear now that no clarification on specific points in directive will solve the problem. Sov actions in Berlin make this plain if nothing else does.

It seems to us that we either accept Sov delaying tactics and start a new round of fruitless talks while Sovs proceed to take over city Govt or we face squarely up to fundamental question of rights. We therefore feel very strongly that time has come to get back to fundamentals. The main points of disagreement seem to be generally as outlined your 40083 with minor modifications. All these, however, derive directly from the position of the Sovs that we have lost our juridical rights in Berlin. We do not accept this view and we have consistently asserted our co-equal rights as victors and by agreements among Four Powers. The time has come therefore to recognize that all the troubles stem from this wide open difference and we are convinced that we must now insist that the Sovs recognize these rights.

Consequently we want to stop yielding to the obvious delaying tactics and the manifest bad faith being shown and demand an admission of our co-equal status by appropriate clarification of the directive.

We will give our views on the procedure and approach in a few minutes. Above is for info.

1. As to procedure we suggest as first step that the three western reps should present aide-mémoire containing following points: (A) It should be made clear that unless directive clearly reflects the objectives we had in mind and the understanding reached with Stalin, it has been shown that the Mil Govs have an impossible task. Therefore we feel the directive ought to be amended to cover three points: (a) that all restrictions should be lifted as of Mar 31 (Sokolovsky has only agreed to a partial lifting of surface transport restrictions and has called for new restrictions on air and water transport); (b) the powers of the finance commission to control the operation in Berlin of the German bank of emission, which could be accomplished by re-insertion of ‘under the control of the finance commission’ in the penultimate para and (c) protection against unilateral Sov control of trade. This point should be mentioned in aide-mémoire.

(B) The aide-mémoire should also refer to the fact that the Sovs have not only permitted but have intervened to assist minority groups to disrupt with violence the orderly functioning of the duly elected city administration, thus violating previous agreements.

2. In the event that Molotov refuses to amend directive or attempts to bargain on these points the three western reps should state that it is obvious that as long as the fundamental question of the co-equal rights in Berlin remains in dispute no real basis exists for a practical solution of the Berlin situation. They should inquire whether the Sov Govt recognizes that we are in Berlin by right and therefore have coequal rights, duties and obligation in regard to the administration of the city. If Molotov indicates that the position of the Sov Union remains unchanged then the three western reps will state they have to report accordingly to their Govts.

If the procedure just sent you is acceptable we feel the approach should be made to Molotov. To go to Stalin would almost certainly inaugurate a new round of discussions in Moscow revolving around the same old points and approach to Stalin only preferable when informal discussion would be useful. Presentation of written communication is best done to Molotov rather than Stalin. Classic Sov tactic is to be absolutely adamant up to and including Molotov’s level in the confident belief that the west will come to plead with Stalin and thus afford the opportunity for further bargaining on points which should already have been agreed.

In the event that this approach to Moscow fails to produce any results and three reps report back to their Govts, we would then favor sending parallel communications from the three Govts including reference to placing matters before UN. Reber is bringing rough draft of such a note when he leaves this afternoon.4

In para 1(A) above we referred to need for clarification of objectives in the directive. In this connection we used the expression ‘directive ought to be amended to cover three points’. What we have in mind is not technically an amendment but the issuance of agreed written instructions clarifying the intent and objectives of the present directive. This could be done either by the issuance of agreed Four-Power instructions to the Mil Govs along the lines we outlined or, if the Brit and French consider preferable, the language in the directive itself could be re-worked. We point out, however, that the directive is an agreed document and that attempting to re-work it may give Molotov opportunity to claim we are going back on our undertaking. Our main point is that the instructions as to specific points raised must be clarified in some form in writing, as we have seen in Berlin that oral statements, even from Stalin, have not been sufficient to bring Russians into line.”5

Marshall

1 Repeated to Paris as 3509 and Berlin as 1596.

2 Not printed; the transcript of this telecon is in file 740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3018).

3 Not printed; in it Douglas listed three main points of disagreement: the powers of the financial commission, Soviet insistence on the control of trade by Soviet authorities, and Soviet insistence on restricting air transport (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–848).

4 Not found in Department of State files. Following the failure of the Military Governors in Berlin to reach agreement, the United States, United Kingdom and France worked on the text of a final note to the Soviet Government. The coordination of the various drafts was done by Strang, Massigli and Douglas in London, ad referendum, to their respective Governments. The texts of the various drafts and related documentation are in file 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–848 through 9–2648. The text of the final draft, delivered to the Soviet Embassy in Washington September 26, is printed, p. 1184 [Pg. 1184 includes portions of Doc. 664 and Doc. 665].

5 In telegram 2289, September 9, from Berlin, not printed, Murphy reported his own and Clay’s concurrence with the substance of this telegram (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–948).

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–948: Telegram

[Document 650]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, September 9, 1948—8 p. m.

1930. Eyes Only for the Secretary. I read Department’s 1081 of September 81 and while I am obliged to record the fact that I do not agree entirely with the Department’s line of thought as indicated in the first three paragraphs thereof, I shall limit my comments to the following:

This message says, correctly, that all main points of disagreement derive directly from the position of the Soviet Government, that we have lost our juridical rights in Berlin, that we do not accept this view, and that we have consistently asserted our co-equal rights as victors. So far so good. The message then says, “The time has come to recognize that all the troubles stem from this wide open difference and we are convinced that we must now insist that the Soviet Government recognize these rights.”

It seems to me that after this statement, if it means what it says, the balance of the telegram is rather unnecessary. The Soviet Government will not recede from the juridical position it has taken on this question during our entire conversations. Both Stalin and Molotov have asserted this repeatedly as we have repeatedly asserted our own juridical position. Consequently, during our conferences here both sides have tacitly recognized the irreconcilability of their respective positions on this fundamental question and have presumably sought a modus vivendi for Berlin which would remove conditions of duress and permit high level discussions during which the fundamental point of issue, i.e., our juridical rights in Berlin, might possibly be resolved concurrently with the solution of other outstanding questions regarding Berlin and Germany. It has been my understanding from the beginning that this is all we could hope or indeed were instructed to do, and this fact has certainly been made clear in all our reports.

Paragraph 2 of suggestions on proposed aide-mémoire states that Western conferees here should inquire whether Soviet Government recognizes that we are in Berlin by right and therefore have co-equal rights, duties, and obligations in the city; and that if Molotov indicates that the position of the Soviet Union remains unchanged, the three Western representatives would report accordingly to their governments. I can assure you that Molotov, or Stalin for that matter, will answer such a question with a categorical “no” as both of them have done on repeated occasions during the past month.

Since we have consistently taken the line here that the modus vivendi on which we were seeking agreement would be entered into by the three Western powers without prejudice to their juridical rights in Berlin, and have so informed Molotov, it is now, in my opinion, too late to decide to break on the juridical issue itself. The fact that we continued to talk for over a month after juridical positions had been made clear on both sides would inevitably become known and would be capitalized by Soviet propaganda, I believe it would be preferable to take as an issue, not Soviet refusal to recognize our rights juridically, but demonstrated Soviet determination to terminate those rights unilaterally and destroy our position in Berlin in practice, i.e., by failure to honor Stalin’s commitments regarding control functions of Finance Commission, by proposed new restrictions on transport and trade, and by their continuing efforts to destroy unified, duly elected Berlin city government. Proposed final statement to Stalin (Deptel 958, August 17, as amended2 ) seems in fact prepared on this basis and would still be used for break with minor modifications to bring it up to date.

Incidentally, I do not see why the continuation or termination of conversations would in any way affect our ability to resist Soviet Government action toward taking over the city government of Berlin. If we cannot effectively fight the devil with fire now, I doubt if we can do it later. Possibly we are too nice on such matters.

In three previous messages (Embtels 1772, August 273 ; 1749, August 254 ; and 1663, August 175 ) I have stated in effect that if any agreed solution is reached, it will necessarily be a compromise, without clear Soviet admission of quadripartite authority, but that if a compromise solution is not reached and the struggle for strength continues at an accelerated pace, everything will depend not only on our willingness and ability to face the issue in Berlin on a long-term basis, but even more on the willingness and ability of our allies and the population of Berlin’s Western sectors. I have also pointed out that our governments must decide whether we are prepared to deal indefinitely with the situation now existing in Berlin in the event of breakdown of present conversations, or if our ability to cope indefinitely with the Berlin situation is doubtful, what concessions we would be willing to make to relieve the situation. I have indicated that these concessions might have to be substantial. In none of the replies that I have received has there been an indication that this basic strategic question has been considered and a definite line of action, beyond immediate reference to UNO, decided upon. I do not ask to know what this decision is, but it would certainly help my digestion if I knew that it had been taken.

Sent Department 1930. Department pass Berlin Eyes Only for Clay and Murphy as 373; Paris Eyes Only for Caffery as 319; and London Eyes Only for Douglas as 207.

Smith

1  Supra.

2  Ante, p. 1053 [Pg. 1053 includes portions of Doc. 614 and Doc. 615].

3 Not printed.

4  Ante, p. 1078 [Pg. 1078 is part of Doc. 625].

5  Ante, p. 1047 [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1048: Telegram

[Document 651]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, September 10, 1948—6 p. m.

1092. For the Ambassador (Eyes Only). Depts 10812 consisted of summary and excerpts from our messages to Douglas sent during the course of five-hour teleconference. For that reason they probably did not express in full clarity the development of our thinking on the subject of our juridical rights in Berlin.

We have been conscious, as you have, that the Soviet denial of our continuing rights in Berlin has been the underlying basic issue throughout the entire discussions. Almost all of our messages to you have referred in one form or another to our understanding on this point and our 9583 was built entirely around this issue for use in the event that Stalin in the second meeting had proved to be adamant on the specific points under discussion.

We believe we were all in full agreement that the possibility of working out some practical arrangement to deal with the immediate situation in Berlin should be put to the test, with complete reservation on both sides of their position, but with the obviously reasonable assumption that of course no action would be taken by the Soviet Govt to prejudice our position. The practical arrangement which the United States, United Kingdom, and France sought with the Soviet Union in the Moscow discussions was intended to make possible the negotiation by the four Occupying Powers in a subsequent meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers all outstanding questions concerning Berlin and Germany as a whole. At no time, even tacitly, did we accept the Soviet thesis that we had lost our rights in Berlin and indeed maintained consistently during the conversations precisely the opposite. The practical arrangement, for settlement of the currency and trade issue, we were prepared to try to work out obviously required for any chance of success Soviet acceptance in good faith of the obvious necessity of refraining from taking a position in the discussion or taking action on the spot, which would have the purpose or effect of unilaterally nullifying our rights or rendering our position in Berlin untenable. Sokolovsky’s position during the meetings in Berlin and with even greater force the Soviet-inspired disorders designed to overthrow the city Government legally elected under quadripartite supervision make it plain that the Soviet Government seeks to nullify our rights in Berlin. In such circumstances, it seems clear to us that the question of rights can no longer be adequately handled by unilateral reservation on our part. The fact that we have not previously brought this issue to a head but have been content merely to maintain our position, does not, in our view, in any sense preclude us from raising it definitely now in the face of the Soviet attempts unilaterally to destroy these rights in violation of existing agreements. On the contrary, since we have never accepted the Soviet thesis of the loss of our rights, we feel that in the face of their present attitude and actions we have not only a right but an obligation to make our position perfectly clear at this stage. As to the manner of raising it, we are very much impressed with the points made in your 19304 and as you will have seen from the text of the statement on the subject of rights5 to be made in the event that the Soviets refuse to change the attitude taken by Sokolovsky on the directive, we have embodied therein a good deal of your language.

We have had careful consideration given to this point by the Legal Adviser and feel that we are on completely solid ground. It is his view that the light of the three major assaults upon our equal rights in Berlin, i.e., (1) blockade, (2) refusal to implement quadripartite currency control, and (3) attack on Magistrat, we must refrain from actions which might be construed as acquiescence on our part and that conduct as well as words can be viewed in such circumstances as waiving contested rights. Therefore we believe that any further discussions in Moscow must treat these three facts as part of a general Soviet plan to nullify our juridical rights in Berlin.

We feel that we should either require from the Soviets that they expressly recognize our equal rights or that they refrain from taking action inconsistent therewith, the latter being a minimum demand.

As you will have seen from our draft, we take the latter course and feel we can do no less. If the Soviets refuse, they would be faced with the ultimate necessity of having to justify in the UN not merely a failure to recognize our rights but also unilateral violation on their part of existing agreements.

As to the more fundamental questions raised in your telegram under reference, you may be sure that the major consideration of our future course of action has been under constant study here, the Defense establishment and the National Security Council.

Marshall

1 Repeated to London as 3588, Paris as 3553, and Berlin as 1605.

2 September 8, p. 1140 [Pg. 1140 includes portions of Doc. 648 and Doc. 649].

3 August 17, p. 1053 [Pg. 1053 includes portions of Doc. 614 and Doc. 615].

4  Supra.

5 The reference here is to a draft statement of rights, transmitted during a telecon between Washington and London September 10, the transcript of which is not printed. It read: “As the Soviet Government is aware, throughout these discussions, the Governments of France, the U.K. and U.S. have consistently maintained that they are in Berlin by right deriving from the defeat and surrender of Germany and defined in quadripartite agreements, and as such have co-equal rights, duties and obligations in regard to the administration of the city of Berlin. The three western governments were, however, willing to consider in good faith any practical arrangements for dealing with the existing situation in Berlin which would not prejudice and impair their rights and duties as occupying powers.

“As a result of the discussions in Berlin and in particular the attitude adopted by the Soviet Commander in Chief and the actions tolerated and even encouraged by the Soviet military authorities in complete denial of these rights, it is obvious that the Soviet Government is acting on the principle that these rights no longer exist. As has been made plain throughout these discussions, this is a position which the Governments of France, the U.K. and U.S. cannot and will not accept.

“It is obvious, therefore, that so long as the Soviet Government continued to pursue a unilateral course of action designed to nullify the rights of the western powers in the city of Berlin and to undermine their position there, no foundation exists upon which to conclude any satisfactory arrangement of a practical nature to deal with the problem of communications and trade between Berlin and the western zones and the currency for that city.

“In the interest of creating conditions necessary for successful conclusion of these conversations, the Governments of France, the U.K. and the U.S. would like to know whether the Soviet Government is prepared to confirm that it will honor the principle of quadripartite administration of the city and refrain from any course of action prejudicial to the rights, duties and obligations of the three western powers as co-equal occupying authorities.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/6–3048)

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1148: Telegram

[Document 652]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, September 11, 1948—7 p. m.

1610. Personal for Clay and Murphy. We have been engaged for the past few days in trying to resolve the difference of views between ourselves on the one hand and the Brit and French on the other.

This morning the Brit Amb brought in to the Secretary a personal message from Bevin 1 which made it clear that no matter what we say the Brit Govt will not accept the line of approach as set forth in our aide-mémoire.2 The French are taking the same position.

Accordingly, we have just sent the following to Douglas by telecon.3

“We are confronted here with an important difference in policy between the British and French on the one hand and ourselves on the other. This fact has been apparent from the very beginning of the consideration of the approach to Moscow. Please let us therefore not confuse the issue by ascribing the difference to draftmanship, minutia, et cetera, but deal solely with this main issue.

Our preferred line of approach, supported by Clay, Murphy and Smith, is that our next approach to Stalin should be in such manner as to bring the matter to a head in such a way as to permit the governments to make the fundamental decision as to whether or not it is worthwhile to continue the discussions. This, in our opinion, could only be done if the Russians are given clear evidence of our willingness to break if they persist in their attitude.

The British and French on the other hand clearly, either because they believe it or because they wish to believe it, are inclined to leave the issues blurred and offer the Russians an opportunity to prolong the discussions on what we would regard an unsatisfactory basis and under most humiliating conditions in Berlin.

We feel that this difference is so deep as to confront us with the following alternatives: 1. To put the importance of three-power unity ahead of everything else and, in effect, go along for one more round with the British and French, or

2. To follow what we genuinely believe to be correct policy in regard to the Soviets and the Berlin situation and insist upon our views even at the expense of different approaches in Moscow.

It is these alternatives that we have been debating today with the Secretary and Senator Vandenberg who is here in Washington and Sec Royall and Draper.

We have come to the conclusion that on balance the importance of maintaining tripartite unity is the controlling factor and while profoundly disturbed by the dangers of the British and French type approach, we will reluctantly go along for that reason.

The foregoing is for your information only since we do not formally wish to record our reservations to the British and French. We do feel, however, that if we are to adopt the general lines of the London aide-mémoire at the present meeting that there is little point at the same meeting of raising the question of Soviet actions in Berlin even in a separate document. The only point, in our view, in so doing would be to link it with the continuance of the conversations. Even to raise it in a separate document will undoubtedly bring forth a strong Soviet rejection of protest probably plus a justification of the action of the Communists in Berlin which would make it very much more humiliating for us to then proceed with discussions in Berlin. Unless we are prepared to make a cessation of these actions a condition precedent for continuance we had better not raise it at the next meeting. With this understanding, we would be prepared to accept, in order to meet British and French views, the following procedure from now on: 1. A presentation of the London aide-mémoire with stronger language in regard to instructions. We therefore feel that for the last two sentences of the penultimate paragraph of the London aide-mémoire there should be substituted the following language:

‘The divergencies which have accordingly arisen on these questions are so serious that the Governments of France, the United Kingdom and the United States feel compelled to inquire whether the Soviet Government is prepared to affirm the understandings outlined herein and to issue the necessary instructions to the Soviet Military Governor, confirming the agreed intention of the directive in regard to

(a) the lifting of all restrictions on communications, transport and commerce imposed after March 30, 1948, without imposition of any new air or other restrictions; and

(b) the control by the financial commission of the financial arrangements contemplated in the agreed directive, including control of the operations of the Bank of Emission with respect to Berlin as specifically confirmed by Premier Stalin; and

(c) a satisfactory basis for trade between Berlin and third countries and the western zones of Germany, based on control by the four occupying powers, recognizing the continuation of the right of each of the occupying powers to import food and fuel for the use of the Berlin population and to control the proceeds from the sale of all goods imported into its sector.’

2. If the Soviets refuse to issue such instructions, the representatives should be instructed to state that they must report the Soviet attitude to their governments and terminate the interview.

3. In this event, there must be a firm and unmistakable commitment on the part of the French and British for the immediate dispatch of a note along the lines of the draft Reber brought with him plus the reference to the Soviet action in Berlin as a reason for the impossibility for further discussions and inclusion of the statement on rights along the lines of our draft on this subject. This note to be agreed on textually and to be dispatched as soon as the Soviet refusal of the aide-mémoire has been received.

4. Should Stalin agree that the necessary instructions should be sent to the Governors, we would be willing to accept a reference back to Berlin for a period not to exceed 72 hours at the most and that this time limit is to be announced publicly.

5. In the event that the Military Governors do not reach a clear and satisfactory agreement during that period, on equally firm British and French commitments there should be no further conversations in Moscow but the final note appropriate revised should be then sent to the Soviet Government.

The foregoing must be regarded as a whole and we would not be prepared to accept the British aide-mémoire unless the commitments in regard to the dispatch of the note in 3 and 5 are unequivocal and clear.

We are not putting this forward for bargaining purposes but as the absolute outside limit that we could go in order to meet the British and French views. You should make this entirely plain in presenting it to Bevin.”

Sent USPolAd, Berlin, for Clay and Murphy, rptd Moscow, personal for the Ambassador, and Paris, personal for the Ambassador.

Marshall

1 Not printed; a copy of Bevin’s message is attached to a memorandum of conversation by Bohlen, September 11, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1148).

2 Not printed; the text of the aide-mémoire under reference here was transmitted in telegram 1089, September 10, to Moscow (repeated to Paris as 3539), not printed. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1048) For the agreed tripartite text, presented to Molotov September 14, see telegram 1101, September 12 to Moscow, p. 1152 [Pg. 1152 includes portions of Doc. 654 and Doc. 655], and footnote 3 thereto.

3 The transcript of this telecon is not printed.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1248: Telegram

[Document 653]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Moscow, September 12, 1948—1 p. m.

1950. Eyes Only for the Secretary. Dept’s 1098.1 I am glad you have taken decision that maintenance of tripartite unity is overriding factor and am sure this is correct. However, do not believe recent Soviet actions in Berlin should be completely ignored and while I agree with Department’s views that separate document would simply evoke usual strong Soviet rejection to effect that “democratic forces” in Germany will assert themselves regardless of our efforts to suppress them, I think matter can be handled in another way. Believe that at end of discussion on other subjects I should make a very blunt statement to Stalin to general effect: that in spite of our previous representations to Molotov on necessity for creating favorable conditions for negotiations in Berlin, the aggressive and provocative line taken by Communist minority there has not only continued but has intensified; that we are not such fools as to believe for one minute that this aggression could have begun or could continue without active support and prompting of SMA; that while we have so far deliberately restrained ourselves (Berlin’s 411, August 19 from Clay 2 ), we are perfectly capable of continuing discussions in atmosphere of calm and courtesy in conference room and at the same time meeting such aggression and opposing it on the ground with all means at our disposal; that he must recognize, as we have, that this means a wider range of unresolved problems to be settled by negotiation; but that he and Molotov certainly underestimate us if they believe us so blind to reality as to continue, under present circumstances, to permit our rightful position in Berlin to be made untenable or to be undefended simply in hope that by timid conciliatory attitude the atmosphere of negotiations would be made more fragrant.

Of course, we will have to back up any such statement and this means that in Berlin it would be necessary for us to act exactly as though the discussions had failed completely until we knew definitely that they had succeeded. I know our people in Berlin are already reacting to aggressive Communist attitude but would appreciate Clay’s opinion regarding some such statement as that outlined above.3

I have seen Bevin’s private instructions to Roberts regarding next step and our proposed aide-mémoire and I am sure both he and Chataigneau would associate themselves with a strong statement to Stalin if it can be supported by action in Berlin.

Sent Dept 1950.

Dept pass Eyes Only to Berlin 379, London as 211, Paris 323.

Smith

1 Same as telegram 1610, supra.

2 Not printed.

3 In telegram 2309, September 13, from Berlin, not printed. Murphy reported Clay’s views on such a statement. Clay believed that it would be most desirable, because of the necessity of softening the western approach to Moscow in order to obtain the agreement of the three governments. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1348)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1248: Telegram

[Document 654]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, September 12, 1948——9 p. m.

1100. Transmitted herewith are your instructions for next approach in Moscow regarding Berlin situation.

1. You are requested to seek immediately, together with your British and French colleagues, an interview with Stalin and Molotov and to present to the latter the agreed aide-mémoire (text sent in separate telegram1 ).

1. [2] In presenting the aide-mémoire you should mention to Stalin and Molotov that if the Soviet Government agrees to send fresh instructions to the Soviet Military Commanders which will make it possible for the discussions in Berlin to continue, we insist that the four Military Governors must report back to their Governments within four days after they are authorized to resume discussions in Berlin. Such discussions would be renewed as soon as possible after notification to you that the conditions laid down in the aide-mémoire have been accepted by the Soviet Government.

3. In the event that Stalin and Molotov, after having read the aide-mémoire, refuse to consider sending instructions to the Soviet Military Commander clarifying and confirming the understanding on the basic points of the directive, or give an evasive answer amounting to rejection, you should then inform them that you are obliged to report their views to your Government and you should thereupon terminate the interview.

4. Should Stalin and Molotov request time to consider the aide-mémoire, you should agree and express the hope that a reply can be received as soon as possible. We consider a written reply is preferable because in the event of Soviet acceptance, such acceptance in writing would avoid any misinterpretation in Berlin. However, we would not insist if British and French do not concur.

5. If Stalin and Molotov agree to accept the terms of the aide-mémoire and to send new instructions to the Soviet Military Commander, you should make the oral statement given below before taking leave of them. This statement should only be made if agreement is reached, since in the contrary event we desire that no reference be made in Moscow to the specified developments in Berlin which will be reserved for treatment in our subsequent note to the Sov Govt. We have carefully considered your Niact 1950 but still believe our suggested procedure is the best one to follow. “It is obvious that the successful implementation of any agreement reached as a result of the discussions regarding Berlin will depend upon the maintenance of conditions in which the legitimate administrative machinery of that city is able to function. The US Govt therefore assumes that the Military Governors responsible for the administration of Berlin will take all measures necessary to maintain such conditions.”

6. You should avoid discussion of technical details and confine yourself simply to ascertaining whether or not the Soviets are willing to give satisfaction on the three basic issues which we insist must be settled before the discussions can be taken up again at Berlin. In the present Moscow interview you should likewise avoid any further discussion of the question of the London decisions on Germany.

Code Room: Send to Moscow. Repeat to London as 3608; Paris as 3576; Berlin as 1612.

Marshall

1 Telegram 1101, September 12, to Moscow, infra.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1248: Telegram

[Document 655]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, September 12, 1948—9 p. m.

1101. Following is text of aide-mémoire which in accordance with our instructions sent you in separate telegram,2 you are requested to present, together with your British and French colleagues, to Stalin and Molotov: “1. The Governments of France, the United Kingdom and the United States having received and studied reports from their Military Governors of the discussions in Berlin find it necessary to draw the attention of the Soviet Government to the fact that the position adopted by the Soviet Military Governor during the meetings in Berlin on a number of points deviate from the principles agreed at Moscow between the four Governments and contained in the agreed directive to the four Military Governors. As the Soviet Government is aware, the terms of this directive were finally agreed after long and careful consideration, and after clarifications as to interpretation had been received from the Soviet Government.

2. The specific issues on which in the opinion of the Governments of France, the United Kingdom and the United States, the Soviet Military Governor has departed from the understandings reached at Moscow relate to: (1) restrictions on communications, transport and commerce between Berlin and the western zones; (2) the authority and functions of the financial commission, and in particular its relation to the German bank of emission; and (3) the control of the trade of Berlin.

3. As to the first, the Soviet Military Governor has presented a proposal which falls outside the agreed principle that the restrictions which have recently been imposed on communications, transport and commerce be lifted. He has proposed that restrictions upon air traffic, not heretofore existing, should now be imposed, and in particular that air traffic to Berlin should be strictly limited to that necessary to meet the needs of the military forces of occupation.

4. As the Soviet Government is aware, the directive makes no mention of air transport and this question was not discussed at Moscow. The directive reads: ‘Restrictions on communications, transport and commerce between Berlin and the western zones and to and from the Soviet zone of Germany which have recently been imposed shall be lifted.’ There have been and are no such restrictions on air traffic. The purpose of the directive is to lift restrictions and not to impose new ones. The proposal of the Soviet Commander-in-Chief, therefore, falls outside the scope of the present discussions and is unacceptable.

5. Secondly, on the question of the authority and functions of the financial commission there should be not the slightest grounds for any misunderstanding. At the meeting on August 23 attended by Premier Stalin and Mr. Molotov and the representatives of the Governments of France, the United Kingdom and the United States, the intention of the directive in regard to the powers of the financial commission including its power to control the operations in Berlin of the German bank of emission was clearly and specifically confirmed by Premier Stalin. The Soviet Military Governor has refused to accept both the meaning of the directive and the clear understanding of the Four Powers reached at Moscow.

6. Thirdly, there is the question of the control of the trade of Berlin. The position of the Soviet Military Governor during the discussions in Berlin in regard to matters relating to the control of trade between Berlin and the western zones of Germany amounts to a claim for exclusive Soviet authority over such matters. Such a claim is a contradiction of the spirit and meaning of the directive to the four Military Governors to which the four Governments gave their approval and is therefore unacceptable.

7. In bringing these major points of difference to the notice of the Soviet Government, the Governments of United States, the United Kingdom and France do not wish to imply that these are the only points of difference which have arisen during the conversations in Berlin.

8. The Governments of France, the United Kingdom and the United States have understood clearly the principles agreed to in Moscow and the assurances given by Premier Stalin. Their Military Governors in Berlin have acted in accordance with these principles and assurances. The position taken by the Soviet Military Governor, on the contrary, has constituted a departure from what was agreed in Moscow and strikes at the very foundation upon which these discussions were undertaken. The divergencies which have accordingly arisen on these questions are so serious that the Governments of France, the United Kingdom and the United States feel compelled to inquire whether the Soviet Government is prepared to affirm the understandings outlined herein and to issue the necessary instructions to the Soviet Military Governor, confirming the agreed intention of the directive in regard to (a) the lifting of all restrictions on communications, transport and commerce imposed after March 30, 1948, without imposition of any new air or other restrictions; and

(b) the control by the financial commission of the financial arrangements contemplated in the agreed directive, including control of the operations of the Bank of Emission With respect to Berlin as specifically confirmed by Premier Stalin; and

(c) a satisfactory basis for trade between Berlin and third countries and the western zones of Germany in accordance with an agreement to be reached between the four Military Governors which does not involve the unilateral control of such trade by the Soviet Trade Administration and which recognizes the rights of the occupying powers to import in fulfillment of their responsibilities, and to control the proceeds from, food and fuel for the use of the Berlin population and industry.

9. The Governments of France, the United Kingdom and the United States believe that only if the steps proposed in the aide-mémoire are taken would it be possible for the Military Governors to continue their discussions.”

Above is agreed text of aide-mémoire but we feel meaning might be clearer if concluding portion of point (c) read as follows: “and which recognizes the right of each of the occupying power’s to import in fulfillment of their respective responsibilities, and to control the proceeds from, food and fuel imported for the use of the Berlin population and industry”. If your British and French colleagues agree we would like to have this change made.3

Marshall

1 Repeated to London as 3609, Paris as 3577, and Berlin as 1613.

2 Telegram 1100, supra.

3 Telegram 1977, September 14, from Moscow, not printed, indicated that the British and French representatives in Moscow had been instructed to accept this amendment. For the final text of the aide-mémoire as delivered to Foreign Minister Molotov, see The Berlin Crisis, pp. 44–16, Cmd. 7534, pp. 58–59, or Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, pp. 595–597.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1248: Telegram

[Document 656]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, September 12, 1948—9 p. m.

1102. It is our hope that you will not be drawn into detailed discussions of the technical matters dealt with in the aide-mémoire.1 The following background material for your guidance only is transmitted as of possible assistance to you:

Point 1. Transportation restrictions. This is so clean cut that further material seems unnecessary.

Point 2. It is quite apparent that the financial commission would be powerless to discharge its functions assigned to it under the directive “to control the practical implementation of the financial arrangements” for Berlin which are to be worked out by the four Military Governors along the lines indicated in Paragraphs A, B, C and D of the directive, unless the commission were endowed with the power to control, insofar as Berlin is concerned, the operations of the financial institution from which the currency requirements of Berlin are to be supplied. This fact was recognized in the discussions with Premier Stalin and Mr. Molotov on August 23, when specific assurance was obtained from Premier Stalin that the operations of the Bank of Emission, insofar as they relate to the introduction and continued use of German marks of the Soviet zone in Berlin, would be subject to the “control” of the financial commission and the four Military Governors. It was only in reliance upon this specific commitment that the three Western Powers were prepared to accept a directive to the four Military Governors in which this relationship was not specifically and categorically established.

In view of these circumstances, the Western Powers are unable to understand the position which has been taken by the Soviet Military Governor in the Military Governors’ recent discussions in Berlin, namely that the German Bank of Emission should in no respect be subject to the control or direction of the Financial Commission. It is therefore proposed that the Soviet Government instruct the Soviet Military Governor in Berlin that the Financial Commission should be empowered to control the operations of the German Bank of Emission insofar as they relate to the introduction and continued use of the German Mark of the Soviet zone in Berlin, and to direct the Bank of Emission to take such steps as are necessary to implement the financial arrangements for Berlin agreed to by the four Military Governors, including the provision of the necessary supplies of currency for that purpose.

Point 3. The position taken by the Soviet Military Governor in the recent Berlin discussions that the control of the trade between Berlin and third countries and the western zones of Germany should be exercised unilaterally by the Soviet military administration does not constitute a reasonable approach to “a satisfactory basis for trade between Berlin and third countries and the western zones of Germany” as provided in the directive. The Western Powers consider that the arrangements agreed upon by the four Military Governors with respect to such trade of Berlin should, insofar as they concern exports and imports (other than food and fuel imported in fulfillment of their responsibilities) provide for administration of trade regulations under the control of the four occupying powers. At the same time, each occupying power in view of its special responsibilities for maintaining the health and welfare of the civilian population in its sector of Berlin, must maintain its continued right to import at its descretion food and fuel for purposes of civilian consumption. Furthermore, each occupying power should be entitled to control the disposition of the proceeds in German Marks of the Soviet zone derived from the sale of food and fuel imported in fulfillment of their responsibilities into its sector from third countries and the western zones of Germany.

It is therefore proposed that the Soviet Government instruct the Soviet Military Governor in Berlin that a satisfactory basis for trade between Berlin and third countries and the western zones of Germany should be reached between the four Military Governors which does not involve the unilateral control of such trade by the Soviet Trade Administration and which recognizes the right of each of the occupying powers to import in fulfillment of their respective responsibilities, and to control the proceeds from, food and fuel imported for the use of the Berlin population and industry.

The above is not a statement but is only for your background guidance.

Marshall

1 Text transmitted in telegram 1101, supra.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1448: Telegram

[Document 657]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Moscow, September 14, 1948—11 p. m.

1976. Eyes Only for the Secretary.

1. Met with Molotov and Smirnov.1 When we referred to our original desire to see Stalin, Molotov repeated with emphasis that Stalin really was away on a vacation and that “his treatment would not permit of interruption.” He made this so definite that we did not see any point in pressing further to see Stalin.

2. We presented Molotov with aide-mémoire 2 with brief explanation that it dealt with the three main questions of principle on which the four Military Governors had failed to reach agreement. We emphasized that we did not wish to go into details here since these were more suitable for discussion in Berlin.

3. Molotov, after reading document, said he could only express his first impressions. He thought that it had been drawn up in a one-sided manner, his own information being that the Soviet Military Governor in Berlin had acted in strict conformity with the directive. He therefore proposed that we should now ask the four Military Governors to provide us with a joint report on the results of their work which would bring out the points of agreement and the points of disagreement. This would give us something on which to work better than a one-sided document directed against the other side.

4. We stated that it was precisely because of the divergencies on these three fundamental points that it had been impossible for the Military Governors to produce an agreed report. We already had full records of what had passed in Berlin, and presumably Molotov also had them. No progress could be made in Berlin or anywhere else unless there was agreement on the interpretation of these three basic principles which had been discussed (and we thought agreed) in Moscow and not in Berlin.

5. Molotov repeated his proposal which he maintained would be more businesslike and would expedite our work. He emphasized that the Soviet Government’s position was completely in accordance with the agreed directive and that the Soviet Military Governor in Berlin was guided only by that. He therefore proposed that the four Military Governors should be given two days in which to prepare a joint report showing the points of agreement and disagreement, which would form a working document for us here.

6. We pointed out again that, since we all had full reports from our Governors and since the basic issues listed in the aide-mémoire were fundamental, it would be useless to go back to Berlin without agreement on these three principles.

7. Molotov argued that without such a joint report we might discuss for a week or more and remarked that the three points in our aide-mémoire were already familiar to him from the American, and British and French press. He could not work on a basis of accusations against the Soviet commander and needed the exact views of all four Military Governors.

8. We repeated that unless the three basic principles to which our governments attached fundamental importance could be decided, it would only waste time to go back to Berlin, although we personally saw no objection to asking the Military Governors for such a report provided Molotov was ready without delay to answer our three questions satisfactorily. These questions related to issues which had never been referred to Berlin and which emerged solely from our discussions here. They could therefore only be settled in Moscow, and we hoped by Molotov tonight. If Molotov was prepared now to answer them satisfactorily, then the Military Governors might proceed with their discussions in Berlin with reasonable hope of reaching an agreement.

9. Molotov admitted that he had full reports from Berlin but repeated his proposal, arguing that it would be an even greater waste of time if the Soviet Government now sat down to prepare a one-sided reply to our one-sided document. We replied that the Soviet Government should find no difficulty in dealing with the points at issue, as they were neither new nor one-sided but concerned matters already discussed (and we thought agreed) here.

10. Molotov then said that there were two possible alternative procedures and we could choose which we preferred. The first, and in his view the more correct and quicker, method was the one he had proposed. The second would be slower since the Soviet Government would have to study our document carefully, and Marshal Sokolovsky in Berlin would have to be consulted before they could reply. However, if we insisted, he would be compelled to accept this method.

11. We then drew Molotov’s attention yet again to the nature of the three fundamental questions asked, and repeated our suggestion for combining the two procedures.

12. Molotov said that he had read the whole of our document. He considered it a one-sided and incorrect statement of the Soviet Military Governor’s position and also an incorrect version of the directives agreed between us in Moscow. However, he must study it more carefully and would then give us the Soviet Government’s reply. But he warned us that this might take some time.

13. We said we could not see why there need be any consultation with Berlin on these points and that we simply had to know whether our interpretation of the directive in these three basic matters was in the Soviet Government’s view correct or incorrect. Apparently Molotov had already given us a partial answer in his previous statement. But there was no point whatever in asking the Military Governors to produce a joint report when it was well known that their disagreements in Berlin all stemmed from disagreement on three basic issues we believed had been discussed and settled in Moscow. We saw no reason why it should take Molotov much time to reply, and if he felt he could not reply then we could only report this fact to our governments.

14. Molotov took some pains to point out that he had not said it would take much time, and that he had not said our memorandum was substantially inaccurate, but only that it was not quite exact. As regards time, he only wished to remind us that much time had passed on previous occasions when we had exchanged documents. In reply to our explanation that we had to coordinate between three governments, he argued that he now had to coordinate between Moscow and Berlin, but he extended this argument beyond the point of saying that it might take more than two days although he would try to expedite matters.

15. We repeated that there was no point in wasting even two days by a further reference to Berlin since these three basic questions had to be answered and no progress could be made until they were. It was not so much a choice between two procedures as the simple fact that without an agreed interpretation of these three basic questions, no progress could be made in Berlin.

16. Molotov then said that it was unnecessary to become polemical tonight and that he would give us the Soviet Government’s reply as soon as possible.

17. We then summarized our position by telling Molotov that our three governments were convinced that these conversations could only be productive if the steps set out in our aide-mémoire were taken. The three principles on which our three governments requested clarification, and an answer from the Soviet Government, were matters discussed in Moscow and on which it had not previously been considered necessary to consult Berlin. We had consistently taken the line here that we were not competent to discuss details or technical questions which were better left to the four Military Governors. But we were now dealing with matters of basic principle which had, we thought, already been established either in the directive itself or by oral understandings among us. Our governments felt that these three questions must be dealt with in Moscow and could be answered one way or the other right here. This also explained why our three governments were convinced that in the absence of definitive and clarifying Soviet replies it would be useless to refer back to Berlin for reports on disagreements of detail. Until satisfactory answers were received from the Soviet Government, further talks in Berlin would be useless. We would accordingly leave our aide-mémoire with Molotov and ask him for the earliest possible reply.

18. We stated that we were at his disposal for any explanation or clarification which he might require. He said that the aide-mémoire seemed to him to set out the position of our three governments quite clearly enough. He would study it and then draw up the Soviet Government’s reply, which would throw further light on all the questions raised in it.

19. Our interview confirmed the pessimistic impression we reported last night.3 We believe there is now little prospect of agreement. It is my estimate that Molotov’s attitude tonight made it clear that (1) the Soviet Government is playing for time; (2) that to this end it is prepared to prolong the discussions in one form or another indefinitely, and (3) they want to place on us the onus of a break. Roberts agrees entirely. Chataigneau is not positive.

We will get a written reply. My guess is that this will take one day longer than the two days Molotov allowed for reference to the Military Governors—say Friday. It will probably be couched in apparently reasonable terms, neither accepting or rejecting our aide-mémoire but intended to provide a basis for further exchanges.

Sent Department 1976. Department pass Berlin for Clay and Murphy as 384, London for Douglas as 216, Paris for Caffery as 329.

Smith

1 Participating in this meeting, held at the Kremlin at 6 p. m., were Smith (U.S.), Roberts and Lunghi (U.K.), Chataigneau and Boyer de Fonscolombe (France), and Molotov, Smirnov, Troyanovsky, and Yerofeyev (U.S.S.R.). A detailed record of the meeting was transmitted to the Department in telegram 4171, September 18, from London, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1848). In his telegram 1964, September 14, from Moscow, not printed, Ambassador Smith reported that the original request by the three Western representatives for an interview with Stalin had been denied on the grounds that the Generalissimo was on vacation. Smith and his colleagues therefore decided to seek instead an early interview with Molotov. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1448)

2 For the text of the aide-mémoire under reference, see telegram 1101, September 12, to Moscow, p. 1152 [Pg. 1152 includes portions of Doc. 654 and Doc. 655], and footnote 3 thereto.

3 The report under reference was made in telegram 1964, September 14 (1 a. m.), from Moscow, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1448).

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1648: Telegram

[Document 658]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent Moscow, September 16, 1948—5 p. m.

1989. Eyes Only for the Secretary. Post-mortem of Berlin discussions to date leads me to following estimate:

Believe that when we first went to Stalin, Kremlin estimated two possibilities: western governments might be prepared to make a trade on basis of suspension of London decisions in return for truce in Berlin, or as second and more likely alternative, west was looking for a face-saving solution in Berlin and would accept formula leading to actual Soviet control while providing for time being some color of quadripartite participation. My opinion is Kremlin discounted completely the possibility that we might actually force the issue to point of hostilities, just as we estimated no similar intention on their part, and that their belief has been reinforced during protracted course Moscow talks. Presumably Politburo ruled out likelihood of first alternative during early stage of conversations here (Embtel 1663, August 171 ) and decided to develop possibility of second alternative by discussion in Berlin, as we decided similarly to test their willingness to make satisfactory agreement. It must have become evident to them during first two days in Berlin that we are by no means to be satisfied with purely face-saving agreement. Thereafter they intensified their pressure tactics and apparently began to maneuver for favorable position in preparation for next stage.

Our intention to turn to the UN has been rather thoroughly advertised, and believe as stated in my 1976 September 142 that Kremlin is determined to place onus of a break on US by attitude of reasonableness, willingness to continue discussions and rejection of any suggestion that such continuation would not produce satisfactory solution.

It appears to us that Soviets are in favorable position. While we may obtain ⅔ majority of those voting in General Assembly, large number of abstentions (entire Far and Near Eastern bloc, Scandinavia, India and Pakistan and possibly a few Latins) would rob such a vote of the implication of world condemnation of Soviet tactics. Soviet offer to feed Berlin draws teeth of inhumanity charge and waverers in UNO will grasp this and Soviets’ willingness to continue discussion as indication of reasonable attitude on their part and unreasonableness on ours. Soviet representatives in UNO will play a symphony on “democracy” and acclaim the Berlin disturbances as “resurgence of democratic forces which will inevitably make themselves felt despite oppressive efforts of reactionary imperialists”. Meanwhile as Kremlin sees it entire grain harvest will be in while west will begin to feel effects of winter weather. Undoubtedly Russians have estimated adverse effect of their policy on German public opinion, whether correctly or not it is of course impossible for us to tell. We can be sure, however, that their estimate has been made in cold blood and they are counting on hunger and unemployment to induce in population western sectors that acceptance of Communist control and despair of the effectiveness of western assistance which propaganda has so far failed to produce. From Soviet viewpoint ultimate result of above should be situation comparable to that which would have been produced by second alternative mentioned in first paragraph, i.e., Soviet control of political and economic life of Berlin with western garrisons tolerated but impotent.

Hope reply to our aide-mémoire will prove me incorrect in all this.

Sent Department as 1989. Department pass Berlin as 387, Eyes Only for Clay and Murphy, London as 220 Eyes Only for Douglas, Paris as 333 Eyes Only for Caffery.

Smith

1  Ante, p. 1047 [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613].

2  Ante, p. 1157 [Pg. 1157 is part of Doc. 657].

The Soviet Ministry for Foreign Affairs to the Embassies of the United States, the United Kingdom, and France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1848

[Document 659]

The Soviet Ministry for Foreign Affairs to the Embassies of the United States, the United Kingdom, and France 1

[Moscow, September 18, 1948.]

Aide-Mémoire

1. The Government of the USSR has acquainted itself with the aide-mémoire dated September 14 last of the Governments of France, the United Kingdom and the US,2 which gives a unilateral account of the course of discussions between the four Military Governors in Berlin and which presents incorrectly the position adopted by the Soviet Military Government during those discussions.

The Soviet Government believes that consideration of the difference referred to in the said aide-mémoire, which arose during the Berlin discussions in regard to the interpretation of the directive to the Military Governors would have been facilitated and expedited had the four Military Governors submitted to their governments a joint report with an account of the course of discussions. In that event the discussions in Moscow would not have been based on any unilateral communications but on an accurate statement of the positions adopted by all four Military Governors both on points already agreed between them and on points left outstanding. Since however, the representatives of the three governments have refused to follow that method of discussion, the Soviet Government finds it necessary to reply to the questions raised in the aide-mémoire.

The aide-mémoire of September 14 refers to the following 3 questions: (1) Restrictions on communications, transport and commerce between Berlin and the Western zones; (2) the authority and functions of the financial commission, and in particular its relation to the German Bank of Emission; (3) the control of the trade of Berlin. At the same time it is asserted that the Soviet Military Governor allegedly deviated from the understanding reached on these questions in Moscow.

The Soviet Government believes this assertion to be without foundation because during the Berlin discussions the Soviet Military Governor strictly followed the agreed directive and the clarifications which had been given by Soviet Government when it was being drawn up in Moscow. Study by the Soviet Government of all materials relating to the Berlin discussions has shown that the reason for the differences which arose during the Berlin discussions lies in the desire of the US, the UK and the French Military Governors to interpret the directive agreed upon in Moscow in a unilateral manner and Soviet Government to give it an interpretation which had not been implied when it was being drawn up and which constitutes a violation of the directive, and with this the Soviet Government is unable to agree.

2. The directive to the four Military Governors states the following in regard to the first question referred to in the aide-mémoire of September 14: “restrictions on communications, transport and commerce between Berlin and the Western zones and on the traffic of goods to and from the Soviet zone of Germany which have recently been imposed shall be lifted.”

The concrete proposals submitted by the Soviet Military Governor on this point are in full conformity with the directive and have for their purpose the lifting of all restrictions on communications, transport and commerce, which have been imposed after March 30, 1948, as was stipulated when the directive was drawn up. During consideration of this question the Soviet Military Governor pointed to the necessity of the other three Military Governors complying strictly with the regulations imposed by the Control Council’s decision of November 30, 1945 on air traffic for the needs of the occupation forces and this had never been disputed by any of the Military Governors since the adoption of these regulations three years ago. There is no foundation whatsoever for regarding this justified demand of the Soviet Military Governor as an imposition of new restrictions on air traffic, because these regulations had been imposed as far back as 1945 and not after March 30, 1948. Nevertheless, the USA has attempted to deny the necessity of observing the regulations which had been imposed by the Control Council on air traffic of the occupation forces and which remain in force to this very day.

In view of the above, the Soviet Government believes that the position of the Soviet Military Governor on this question is absolutely correct, while the position of the USA Military Governor, far from being based on the agreed directive, is in contradiction with it. An interpretation to the contrary might lead to an arbitrary denial of any decision previously agreed upon by the Control Council, and to this the Soviet Government cannot give its assent.

3. The directive to the Military Governors also contains a clear statement regarding the authority and functions of the Financial Commission and regarding the German Bank of Emission: “The arrangements relating to the currency changeover and to the continued provision and use in Berlin of the German mark of the Soviet zone shall ensure: (a) No discrimination or action against holders of Western marks in connection with the exchange of those Western marks “B” issued in Berlin. These shall be accepted for exchange for German marks of the Soviet zone at the rate of 1 for 1.

(b) Equal treatment as to currency and provision of fully accessible banking and credit facilities throughout all sectors of Berlin. The four Military Governors are charged with providing adequate safeguards to prevent the use in Berlin of the German marks of the Soviet zone from leading to disorganization currency circulation or disrupting the stability of currency in the Soviet zone of occupation.

(c) A satisfactory basis for trade between Berlin and third countries and the Western zones of Germany. Modifications of this agreed basis to be made only by agreement among the four Military Governors;

(d) The provision of sufficient currency for budgetary purposes and for occupation costs, reduced to the greatest extent possible, and also the balancing of the Berlin budget.

The regulation of currency circulation in Berlin is to be undertaken by the German Bank of Emission of the Soviet zone through the medium of the credit establishments operating at present in Berlin.

A financial commission of representatives of the four Military Governors shall be set up to control the practical implementation of the financial arrangements indicated above, involved in the introduction and the circulation of a single currency in Berlin.”

This directive was drawn up in full conformity with the preliminary clarifications on this matter made by Premier J. V. Stalin on August 23, and referred to in the above-mentioned aide-mémoire.

It will be seen from the above text that the authority and functions of the financial commission and of the German Bank of Emission are precisely laid down in the directive, and it was by this that the Soviet Military Governor was guided. According to that directive and to the understanding reached in Moscow by the four Powers, the financial commission should not exercise control over all operations of the Bank of Emission in regard to Berlin, but only over those operations of the Bank of Emission in Berlin which are specifically provided for in paragraphs (a),(b), (c), and (d) of the directive. The proposal to establish control of the financial commission over the whole activity of the German Bank of Emission in Berlin was not accepted during the discussion of this question in Moscow because this would have led to such interference on the part of the financial commission in matters of the regulation of currency circulation as is incompatible with the Soviet Administration’s responsibility for the regulation of currency circulation in the Soviet zone of occupation.

Accordingly, the Soviet Government cannot agree to the incorrect interpretation of the agreed directive given in the aide-mémoire of the Government of France, the UK and the USA, and believes it necessary that the directive should be strictly followed.

4. As to trade, the previously agreed directive is confined to an instruction to the Military Governors to work out a satisfactory basis for trade between Berlin and third countries and the Western zone of Germany. It will be recalled that on August 23 during the discussions in Moscow, the Soviet Government submitted a definite proposal on this subject, but the question was not considered in detail and was referred to the Military Governors for discussion.

The proposals on this subject made by the Soviet Military Governor give no reason to assert that they are a contradiction of the spirit and meaning of the agreed directive. On the contrary, the intention of those proposals is to have the directive fulfilled in accordance with the agreements reached in Moscow.

However, for the purpose of expediting the drawing up of practical arrangements in Berlin the Soviet Government proposes that the Military Governors be given more detailed instructions on this matter than those contained in the agreed directive. The Soviet Government agrees to have trade between Berlin and third countries and the Western zones of Germany placed under the control of the quadripartite financial commission, which control should provide at the same time for the maintenance of the existing procedure regarding the traffic of goods in and out of Berlin under license of the Soviet Military Administration. The Soviet Government believes that such an instruction would be of help in the drawing up of a concrete agreement on matters of trade with Berlin.

5. The Soviet Government believes that discussions between the Military Governors in Berlin can yield positive results only in the event that all the Military Governors follow strictly the directives and instructions agreed between the Governments of France, the UK, the US and the USSR.

1 The source text was transmitted to the Department in telegram 2033, September 18, from Moscow, not printed. That telegram explained that this text was an “unofficial translation” prepared by the Soviet Foreign Ministry. The original Russian text of the aide-mémoire was handed to Smith, Roberts, and Chataigneau by Molotov at their meeting on the afternoon of September 18 (see telegram 2034, September 18, from Moscow, infra). For another Soviet translation, presumably the official one, see The Soviet Union and the Berlin Question, pp. 49–53. The text printed here also appears in The Berlin Crisis, pp. 46–50 and Cmd. 7534, pp. 59–61.

2 See telegram 1101, September 12, to Moscow, p. 1152 [Pg. 1152 includes portions of Doc. 654 and Doc. 655], and footnote 3 thereto.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1848: Telegram

[Document 660]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Smith) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Moscow, September 18, 1948—9 p. m.

2034. Eyes Only for the Secretary. Molotov received us alone and handed us aide-mémoire (mytel 2033).1 After we had read it he asked whether we had any comments and seemed disconcerted when no spontaneous reply. He then asked what impression the Soviet aide-mémoire made on us.

US Ambassador said the first impression was similar to Molotov’s after reading our aide-mémoire.2 As regards repetition that Military Governors should have prepared joint report he had studied again the records of the Berlin talks which showed that they had not previously been able to do so. Therefore the view of our three governments on this matter appeared justified. As regards section on traffic restrictions we could see no justification for the Soviet attitude. We were of course willing once the restrictions had been removed to discuss methods of regulating air traffic in order to protect legitimate Soviet interests but could see nothing in Soviet proposal but an added restriction. As regards Financial Commission his view was that Soviet interpretation was unsatisfactory. There was no intention on the part of the three western governments to extend control of the Financial Commission over the German Bank of Emission beyond its functions pertaining to Berlin, but it was clear that the Financial Commission could not exercise its controlling functions as provided in directive unless the Financial Commission had powers of control over the bank in respect of its activities in Berlin. He pointed out that his intention in placing the paragraph on the Financial Commission at the end of the directive was to show clearly that its functions of control applied to all the preceding paragraphs “indicated above” including the relating to the functions in Berlin of the German Bank of Emission. It was in reliance on what we interpreted as specific Soviet commitment that these operations of the bank would be subject to the control of the Financial Commission that we had agreed to send the directive to the Military Governors although it failed to establish this relationship as specifically as we wished. We were fully conscious of the Soviet Government’s responsibilities for safeguarding their currency in the Soviet zone but we must insist on the basic principle of control by the Financial Commission in regard to Berlin itself.

As regards trade we had repeatedly made it clear that while anxious to find a satisfactory basis we could not accept a solution placing unilateral control of Berlin trade in the hands of the Soviet military administration. No agreements for the control of trade in Berlin could be satisfactory unless they provided for the joint responsibility of the four occupying powers. The US Ambassador went on to explain our position in regard to food and fuel imported into Berlin and our insistence upon controlling the disposal of the proceeds derived from such imports.

He emphasized that while willing and anxious to reach an acceptable agreement and so to settle the present grave situation in Berlin we did not intend to sacrifice our participation in the control of the economic and financial life of Berlin or to give up our rightful position there. Our position could be safeguarded without weakening the position of the Soviet military administration in Berlin. But we were not seeking a face-saving arrangement which only left us in Berlin as unwelcome guests with no control over the financial and economic life of our sectors. At first sight the Soviet interpretation of the three basic points set out in our aide-mémoire would produce just such a result. It was because we feared this that we had insisted on trying to work into the directive a clear-cut interpretation of the basic provisions on which we had been arguing for the past six weeks.

Turning to final paragraph of Soviet aide-mémoire US Ambassador said the four Military Governors in Berlin had been working on these lines but had failed to agree on meaning of directive. There was a difference of interpretation of our own discussions in Moscow. Our present purpose was to obtain and reduce to writing a full understanding on these oral exchanges. Since that apparently was not possible we could only refer back to our respective governments.

French Ambassador said last paragraph of the Soviet aide-mémoire did not reply to our questions but merely put another question. Our aim had been to ensure that the four Military Governors in Berlin interpreted the directive in same way. As regards Soviet reference to air traffic, Control Council decision of November 30, 1945 foresaw no restrictions in regard to matter of occupying powers. As regards Financial Commission, we had never asked to control activities of Bank of Emission in Soviet zone, but only the circulation of currency in Berlin and to ensure that credit establishments there were in as good a condition as those in the Soviet zone. As regards Commerce, insofar as there were exchanges between the four sectors there must be quadripartite control of such exchanges.

Roberts said that while this exchange of documents had been useful in clarifying respective views, questions at issue were so important that we should certainly have to refer the Soviet reply to our governments. His comments supplementing those of US and French Ambassadors were therefore only provisional. As regards traffic he noted that Soviet aide-mémoire accepted date of March 30 as that from which restrictions should be withdrawn. Insofar as the question of new air restrictions was raised, this was question which would be open for consideration once the blockade was lifted. We would no doubt wish ourselves to raise matters outside defined scope of present conversations. Control Council decision of November 30, 1945, however read as follows: “Flight over these routes will be conducted without previous notice being given by aircraft to the missions governing Germany.” There was no restriction in this decision and although in the discussions preceding the decision the Soviet and British representatives and possibly also the American and French, had put forward their wishes, their wishes could not be regarded as any agreed decision. Decision did not relate to the needs of the occupying forces, but to those of occupying powers in regard to Berlin, which naturally included fulfillment of their responsibilities in regard to Berlin. As regards functions of the Financial Commission, he fully agreed with US Ambassador. He would add, with view to showing general British approach to this problem, a quotation from a message from General Robertson, who had suggested that the relations between the Financial Commission and the bank might be established roughly as follows: “The regulation of currency circulation in Berlin would be undertaken by German Bank of Emission of Soviet zone through medium of credit establishments operating at present in Berlin. Activities of German Emission Bank in this connection would be under supervision of Financial Commission as indicated in final paragraph of the directive. As a practical method of implementing this principle Financial Commission would approve instructions issued by German Bank of Emission for regulation of currency circulation in Berlin and would supervise execution of these approved instructions by the credit establishments operating at present in Berlin.”

This was mentioned to illustrate point of view. As regards trade, he welcomed passage in the Soviet aide-mémoire that trade of Berlin would be under general control of the Finance Commission, but thought his government would have grave doubts about additional reference to “existing procedure” to licensing by the Soviet military administration. In any case introduction of separate currencies into Berlin and the western zones involved changes in the trade procedure, and past position was therefore irrelevant. However, any suggestion that Soviet military administration should have exclusive control over Berlin’s trade was unacceptable, since this must be on four-power basis. As regards importation of food and fuel he agreed with American Ambassador. His government thought it essential that we have our proper say in the use of proceeds of such imports.

Molotov said he would like to add following statement to his aide-mémoire, with reference to our remarks. The regulation of air transport referred to in our aide-mémoire of September 14 had no connection with any decisions taken this year, and air transport decision dated back to November 1945. But situation was now different as there were two currencies in operation, and regulation covering currency and trade in respect of surface transport must be considered for air traffic as well. It was essential to conform to the Control Council regulations of 1945, and Soviet Government must insist on compliance with these regulations. As regards the Financial Commission, degree of control provided for in directive should be carried out, but attempt to provide for other functions than those in directive would mean there was no real responsibility for currency circulation in Berlin and therefore in Soviet zone. Soviet Government could not agree to this. As regards trade with western zones and third countries, Soviet Government agreed it should be controlled by the Financial Commission subject to certain minimum conditions. Soviet licensing procedure should be maintained and quadripartite control which did not previously exist should be introduced. As regards our requirements in connection with the import of food and fuel into Berlin, Soviet Government thought these should be discussed in Berlin in greater detail. They agreed that we had right to import food and fuel for the inhabitants and industries of our sectors, and to receive proceeds. Concrete aspects should be subject to negotiations in Berlin, taking into account interests of all four powers. Referring to a remark of the US Ambassador, Molotov added that Soviet Government’s reply did not touch upon the question of juridical rights, since this had not been touched upon in the directive.

As regards French Ambassador’s comments on last paragraph of aide-mémoire, this was only conclusion proceeding from whole of the text. As regards Roberts’ references to trade, he noted that reply of Soviet Government satisfied western desire that this should be controlled by Financial Commission, but trade question had not been worked out carefully enough in Moscow and Soviet Government hoped this would be done by the Military Governors in Berlin. Since, however, it has been referred back to Moscow, they considered it necessary to formulate their position in terms of their aide-mémoire. If anything still remained vague, he would be glad to explain it.

US Ambassador said that he thought we understood one another perfectly after lengthy discussions. Therefore he would summarize position of three western governments. As to traffic restrictions, there were not insuperable obstacles. On the last day in Berlin Military Governors had made progress towards agreement. We realized that Soviet Government needed certain safeguards and these could easily be provided, but our three governments interpreted Marshal Sokolovsky’s proposal as limiting air traffic. This was now our only sure means of communication with respective sectors, and we had no intention of accepting any actual limitations. Reference trade, agreement had been reached in Berlin on inter-zonal trade but there was deadlock on control of trade between Berlin, western zones and third countries. Soviet representatives insisted that Soviet military administration had exclusive responsibility for controlling such trade and issuing licenses, whereas we could accept nothing less than quadripartite control. Present Soviet aide-mémoire indicated such control but also required maintenance of “existing procedure” of Soviet military administration licenses. Implications not clear, and might not be clear in Berlin, but if this meant unilateral control it was unacceptable. If there was agreement on basic issue of four power control trade question should not be too difficult to solve. The functions of the Financial Commission were sticking point. While we had not mentioned our respective juridical positions in directive, their ghosts lingered in conference rooms and could not be ignored. We were willing to accept Soviet currency in Berlin but not under conditions which would militate against maintenance of our rightful position in Berlin. We had good will to assist Soviet Government to protect Soviet zone currency, but could not agree to depriving the Financial Commission of authority to control emission of currency in western sectors. Soviet representatives in Berlin were unwilling to decentralize control and insisted on restricting functions of the Financial Commission to points (A) to (D) in the directive. This was major difference of over-riding importance and brought us back to the fundamental question of whether Soviet Government would meet our requirement of four-power control in Berlin. Relevant passage in Soviet aide-mémoire was too limiting, and too restrictive, and if insisted upon it would lead to a situation where technical difficulties might also interrupt the use of Soviet zone marks in the western sectors. We had already pointed out that it would be very foolish of us to exchange our present transportation difficulties for corresponding financial difficulties, hence position taken by our respective governments over control functions of the Financial Commission.

French and British representatives said US Ambassador had stated positions of their governments in this respect accurately.

US Ambassador repeated that unless we could make further progress in our discussions today, and so remove differences of interpretation, there was nothing for us to do but to refer back to our governments. The Soviet trade proposal might be helpful to certain extent, but real sticking point remained the control functions of the Financial Commission.

Molotov said he could give the following reply.

Regarding Financial Commission Soviet Government would follow directive strictly but it could not allow it to be widened. Regarding US Ambassador’s reference to the possibility that implementation of directive might place western sectors in a difficult position on finance, he pointed out that eastern sector would be in exactly the same position as the western sectors and that this would be under the control of the Financial Commission of representatives of the four powers. The main guarantees were contained in the directive. All four powers were in the same position and the Soviet Government was equally interested as otherwise it would have difficulties in its own sector. Regarding trade he had already said that Soviet Government did not think that discussions in Moscow had gone far enough to produce a clear directive. However, much time had elapsed and he had hoped the Military Governors would do this. But since they had failed, Soviet Government had drawn up a more concrete directive in aide-mémoire.

US Ambassador said that consideration of two aide-mémoires and directive brought us back to the functions of the Finance Commission. He quoted the final paragraph of directive to show that it covered not only sections (A) to (D) but everything above it including the penultimate paragraph about functions in Berlin of the German Bank of Emission. That was our position but the Soviet representatives in Berlin had said the control only applied to section (A) to (D). There was not much chance of agreement in Berlin unless we could reach agreement here on this important policy question. We were not trying to enlarge the scope of the directive but to find out what it meant. We had tried to clear this up orally without success and we now tried to do this in writing but apparently had failed again as his government would be unlikely to be satisfied with the explanation in the Soviet aide-mémoire.

Molotov said the Soviet Government had followed and would continue to follow the decisions reached between us. As regards German Bank of Emission Soviet Government believed that Financial Commission should control work of Bank on matters in (A) to (D) of directive but could not agree to interpretation which did now follow from directive and which placed the whole activity of the bank under the control of the Financial Commission. (We pointed out that this was not our interpretation.) Soviet Government believed that controlling functions of Financial Commission should be limited to points listed in (A) to (D) and thought this followed from text of directive. US Ambassador said that his reading of the text showed clearly that not only (A) to (D) but the penultimate paragraph as well were all covered by the final paragraph. We did not wish to put any further interpretation on the directive but nothing less would be acceptable. Arrangements on such a basis need not jeopardize Soviet currency but any lesser interpretation would jeopardize the whole western position in Berlin and our governments could not possibly agree to that.

Molotov thought it best to follow what had already been agreed which fully took into account interests of all four parties without jeopardizing position in Soviet zone.

American Ambassador said we were willing to provide Soviets with essential safe guards but would not abandon our own. He did not think that our exchange would help Berlin much to reach agreement. We had done the best we could in Moscow and could not be accused of lack of patience. Molotov said that he still hoped that the present Soviet proposal would help towards a solution.

US Ambassador asked whether Molotov would assist us in reporting to our governments by giving his views on relationship between the Financial Commission and the Bank of Emission with regard to Berlin currency. Molotov said he was quite prepared to discuss the question further although much had already been said.

Roberts read out General Robertson’s suggestions on this subject,3 stating that it had been put forward as a practical illustration of the way British Military Government at least would like to see things working in Berlin. Molotov said that it was difficult for him to enter into details such as those mentioned by General Robertson but he believed that there were no obstacles which could not be disposed of in negotiation. Of course a more concrete formula was needed than that in the directive itself and General Robertson had attempted to provide one. It was difficult to tell at first sight whether this attempt was acceptable or not. Undoubtedly certain points were acceptable but he could not say now which ones were unacceptable. He believed that when the question was raised Whether Financial Commission would control regulation of the circulation of currency by the Bank of Emission reply would be found in the directive. Financial Commission would have control of currency circulation in Berlin since there were four groups of questions listed under (A) to (D) in the directive which related to currency circulation. There was therefore no issue of principle. But whole question should be made more concrete. There were useful points, for instance, in suggestions of General Robertson as read by Roberts.

The meeting ended with our statement that we would refer Soviet aide-mémoire to our governments.4

Sent Department 2034, repeated London 229 for Douglas, Paris 349 for Caffery, Berlin 400 for Murphy and Clay.

Smith

1 Participating in this meeting, held at the Kremlin at 6 p.m., were Smith, Roberts, Chataigneau, and Molotov. The Soviet aide-mémoire under reference is printed supra. Regarding the telegram under reference, see footnote 1 to the aide-mémoire.

2 See telegram 1101, September 12, to Moscow, p. 1152 [Pg. 1152 includes portions of Doc. 654 and Doc. 655], and footnote 3 thereto.

3 Apparently the reference here is to the agreed western position on the functions of the Bank of Emission, transmitted in telegram 2286, September 9, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–948).

4 In his next telegram (2035, September 18, from Moscow, not printed) Smith reported the comments of the three heads of mission on the interview with Molotov. They agreed that the Russians were no longer attempting to reach an agreement and were merely trying to spin things out. Molotov seemed to be playing his hand for the record, sensing that, perhaps, this would be the last meeting with the western representatives (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1848). Ambassador Douglas also commented on the aide-mémoire, expressing his and Strang’s opinion that it was a more categorical rejection of the western aide-mémoire than had been anticipated. (Telegram 4175, September 18, from London, not printed, 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–1848)

Minutes of a Meeting of the Secretary of State With the Foreign Ministers of the United Kingdom and France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–448

[Document 661]

Minutes of a Meeting of the Secretary of State With the Foreign Ministers of the United Kingdom and France 1

[Translation]

top secret Paris, September 20, 1948.

Present

France United Kingdom United States

Mr. Schuman Mr. Bevin General Marshall

Mr. Chauvel Mr. McNeil Mr. Douglas

Mr. Couve de Murville Sir Oliver Harvey Mr. Caffery

Mr. Alphand Sir William Strang Mr. Foster Dulles

Mr. Clappier Mr. Tomkins Mr. Bohlen

Mr. de Bourbon-Busset

Mr. Andronikof, Interpreter

Mr. Schuman : We are meeting at Mr. Bevin’s request, and the French Government is very happy that this meeting is taking place. It makes it possible for us to study the questions to be placed on the agenda of the United Nations, as well to study other problems which can more easily be settled by direct discussion between the three Governments. I believe that Mr. Bevin would like to suggest the order in which these questions might be considered.

Mr. Bevin : In the light of events in Berlin, my Government believes it necessary to reach a decision on the various questions before us: the reply to be addressed to the Soviet Union, and the consequences of a break with the Soviet Union at Berlin. While we know our opinions regarding this reply, since each of the steps which we may be led to take is vital, we must study together all the aspects of the matter in order to reach the same conclusions.

Mr. Schuman : That is my Government’s opinion also.

Mr. Bevin : It is obvious that the note2 prepared in London means a break and that the question is to be referred to the United Nations. Consequently we must decide if we are going to send a written statement or proceed once more to oral discussions. I have already spoken with Mr. Marshall about this,3 and we must settle this question definitely. But other questions arise. After consulting the Military Governors, should we attach to this note a statement of our own terms? Up to now, as a matter of fact, we have merely replied to the Soviet Government. We have attempted to elucidate and interpret Stalin’s words. Shouldn’t we now state what we consider our minimum requests. Moreover, the matter should be referred to the United Nations not on the basis of the discussions at Moscow but on the basis of our clearly defined attitude and requests. Therefore should we limit ourselves simply to the note prepared at London? Also, in referring the matter to the United Nations, should we bring it first before the Security Council or before the Assembly? My Government believes that it would be better to refer it directly to the Assembly in order that a resolution may be drawn up, addressed to the Security Council and requesting it to take action. On the other hand, the United States Government would prefer to refer the matter first to the Council and then to the Assembly. On this question of procedure, I am authorized by my Government to discuss the matter with my colleagues and to concur in a decision reached by common agreement. Therefore we must study carefully what our general attitude should be in connection with the settlement of the problem that is finally adopted. For example, as far as the “air ferry” is concerned: in case of a break, what additional obstacles would be created by the Soviets? What would be the effects on the population of Berlin? What currency difficulties would arise? We would have to know how we could even bring western currency into Berlin. Likewise, we will have to take into account the time factor: how much time would be required to set up a Government of Western Germany? Consequently I propose that in two or three days our three Governments draw up a general outline of the situation. But I would like to assure Mr. Schuman and Mr. Marshall that we do not suggest a program which will require as much time as a Council of Foreign Ministers. It is not a question of our reconsidering our principles or our determination, but of closely reviewing all the elements in the case, since we desire to establish the methods for our action, in order not to improvise any more, as we have done in the past.

Mr. Schuman : Mr. Bevin has just described the program as a whole. I would like to limit myself, to begin with, to the first question: what answer are we going to send to Mr. Molotov. For I believe that we are all in agreement that we must reply. It would not, in fact, be sufficient, merely to take cognizance of the break; we must take into account the impression it would make on public opinion and on the United Nations. A person unfamiliar with all the negotiations should be able to understand the situation. We must state clearly the basis of the problem and avoid disagreement, in order to make it thoroughly understood that we are not willing to make any concessions on vital questions which, up to the present time, have produced only negative replies from the Soviets. The decision to be taken is a very serious one: not only because of its consequences in Berlin and elsewhere, but also as far as opinion within the United Nations is concerned. It is essential that this opinion be favorable when the question is brought up. Therefore we must consider carefully and as rapidly as possible the reply which we must send to Moscow. I do not intend, any more than my colleagues do, to cause delays in this matter, which would make us lose not only time, but also authority and prestige. We must act in such a way that every honest person can say: it is not your fault if there has been a break. I propose that we take up the other questions after we have reached a decision on this question.

Mr. Marshall : In a message which I received in Washington before my departure, Mr. Bevin had already stated these questions, adding that it would be desirable to have a meeting of the principal negotiators, and not only the Ministers, but also the Military Governors as well as Ambassadors Douglas and Smith. We agree to reviewing all the facts rapidly and also, as you suggest, to working out together the first step in our procedure. We definitely believe (and this has been our opinion from the beginning) that our note should commend itself to the United Nations and to world opinion. But in addition to this aspect, we have attempted to see the situation clearly, and we have kept up to date a “white paper” which could be published immediately, as well as an official statement to the press.4 However, the essential thing is the note. My Government considers that there are certain basic principles on which it would be fatal to give way. Therefore let us realize fully the importance of the conditions under which the question is referred to the United Nations. I think it would be advisable for us to meet again tomorrow for an exchange of views after having considered what has already been said this evening.

Mr. Bevin : I would agree that we should meet again tomorrow. However, my Government earnestly desires that our report be studied carefully and thoroughly. In fact, while the London draft interprets correctly, for example, legal rights, it does not set forth in concrete terms either the settlement which we are considering or the steps which we would take if our requests are met. In this connection there are two fundamental questions: the blockade and currency. If they are not dealt with in a manner sufficiently clear and precise, I fear further delays.

Mr. Marshall : In accordance with Mr. Schumann suggestion, I propose that tomorrow morning we discuss what our note shall be, and then how we shall refer the matter to the United Nations, and finally, that we decide on the order in which we will study the questions presented by Mr. Bevin.

Mr. Bevin : Does that mean that we will send the note first, and that we will study the consequences afterwards?

Mr. Marshall : Not at all. I propose that we study tomorrow the character which this note should assume, and the procedure for referring the subject to the United Nations, as well as the other factors of which you have spoken.

Messrs Schuman and Bevin express their agreement.

It is then decided to appoint a drafting committee which will work on the note in the light of the exchange of views which has just taken place and in consultation with the Commanders-in-Chief.

1 The meeting took place at Schuman’s office at the Quai d’Orsay. These minutes were apparently prepared by the French Delegation. Bevin and Marshall were in Paris attending the General Assembly of the United Nations.

2 The reference here is to the note under preparation in London by representatives of the United States, United Kingdom and France following the failure of the negotiations in Berlin. For the text of the note as delivered to the Soviet Embassies in Washington September 26, and in Paris and London, September 27, see p. 1185 [Pg. 1185 is part of Doc. 665].

3  Bevin and Marshall had discussed the next step to be taken by the three Western powers before the meeting at the Quai d’Orsay. A brief summary of their discussion was transmitted in telegram 4926, September 20, from Paris, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–2048).

4 The “White Paper” under reference here is the Department of State publication The Berlin Crisis: A Report on the Moscow Discussions 1948 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1948). The publication was released to the press on September 26. For the text of the statement referred to here and issued to the press on September 26, see the circular telegram of September 26, p. 1185 [Pg. 1185 is part of Doc. 665].

Minutes of a Meeting of the Secretary of State With the Foreign Ministers of the United Kingdom and France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–448

[Document 662]

Minutes of a Meeting of the Secretary of State With the Foreign Ministers of the United Kingdom and France 1

[Translation]

top secret Paris, September 21, 1948.

Present

France United Kingdom United States

Mr. Schuman Mr. Bevin Mr. Marshall

Mr. Massigli Mr. McNeil Mr. Douglas

Mr. Chauvel Sir Oliver Harvey General Clay

Mr. Couve de Murville Sir William Strang Mr. Bohlen

General Koenig General Robertson Mr. Murphy

Mr. Alphand Mr. Patrick Dean Mr. Caffery

Mr. Seydoux Mr. Tomkins

Mr. de Guiringaud Mr. Jamieson

Mr. Andronikof, Interpreter

Mr. Schuman opens the meeting by stating its object: to draft a note to the Soviet Government. Several drafts have been submitted to the Ministers, in particular, a British draft (by General Robertson) and an American proposal (by Mr. Douglas).

Mr. Marshall , drawing a conclusion from the exchange of views which took place during the morning and the afternoon between the experts, considers that, on the whole, it has been agreed to send a further note to the Soviets. The problem which arises is the following: shall this be a new note recognizing the break, or a note raising new questions?

Mr. Bevin states that he is in favor of a new note, that he would like a new note to be sent and that he would like them to wait for a reply through diplomatic channels. It is not a question of reopening the Moscow discussion or negotiations. Nor is it a question, in this new note, of making lengthy comments on the negotiations which have taken place, or on our position. This is precisely the subject of a “white book” which is already in process of preparation. It is merely a question of making our position clear in case of a probable break.

Mr. Bevin believes that by combining the two drafts, British and American, they could attain their aim.

Mr. Schuman states that he agrees with Mr. Bevin.

Mr. Bevin states that certain expressions in the proposal of the American Delegation (proposal made by Mr. Douglas at the afternoon meeting) are only partly satisfactory to him. He believes that it is neither timely nor tactful to describe the blockade as “illegal.” In our eyes the blockade is obviously illegal, but in the eyes of the Soviets the currency reform is likewise illegal. If we embark on that subject we are giving the Soviets further opportunities for controversy.

Mr. Marshall states that he is willing to omit the words “illegal” and “unlawful”. He asks if Mr. Bevin would accept a substitute wording to the effect that the blockade is a violation of our rights.

On the other hand, he believes that the note should not become involved in technical questions. It should remain on the level of principles and of the blockade. However, Mr. Marshall feels that while the blockade is perhaps an appropriate subject for popular opinion, it is not the fundamental thing for us; what is fundamental is Russian activity in Berlin and in all that part of Germany under Russian control. We have broken the blockade by the air ferry. At this point Mr. Marshall gives some details of the operation of the air ferry. He calls on General Clay for further information, and states that except for the unusual case of a storm lasting several days in a very severe winter, the air ferry counteracts the blockade very well and will take care of the needs of the western sectors of Berlin for as long as we wish. It is not even as expensive as one might expect.

In every field, continues Mr. Marshall, the Russians are retreating. From now on, Berlin is the only foothold which they have against us; everywhere else, and particularly in Germany, they are losing ground. We have put Western Germany on its feet and we are engaged in bringing about its recovery in such a way that we can really say that we are on the road to victory. The attitude of the Russians in Berlin and the manner in which they will continue their attack, will be a real indication of their intentions toward us.

However, adds Mr. Marshall, the American Government understands very well the position of the French and British Governments. If the latter believe that we should make still another approach to the Russians, raising definite questions with them, he cannot object, and he will agree to this, provided that it be concise and unequivocal.

Mr. Schuman thanks Mr. Marshall for this statement, and he concludes that the problem under consideration is not only one of drafting and phraseology. A lengthy exchange of views follows between Mr. Bevin and Mr. Schuman on the basis of the English text, in which an attempt is made to include the substance of the draft prepared by Mr. Douglas in the afternoon.

Mr. Schuman states that he cannot agree to the final sentence in Mr. Douglas’ draft, asking the Russians to raise the blockade “in recognition of our rights”, as such an expression would obviously make it impossible for the Russians to agree to our requests. What we want, adds Mr. Schuman, is not to have the Russians recognize our rights but to have them raise the blockade.

Mr. Marshall and Mr. Bevin show a certain hesitation, but Mr. Schuman maintains his viewpoint which is accepted, and the expression in question is struck out of the draft.

Mr. Marshall then states that if he agrees to send a further note to the Soviets and makes a concession to the point of view of the French and British Governments, it is because he believes that it is clearly understood now between us, that if the Russian reply is not satisfactory, without any other alternative, we are absolutely decided to bring the matter before the United Nations.

Mr. Bevin and Mr. Schuman state definitely that they agree with Mr. Marshall on this point.

Mr. Schuman states that if it is desired to mention in this note that the next step in our procedure will be to bring the matter before the United Nations, he would have no objection.

Mr. Marshall also has no objection.

Mr. Bevin is not very favorable to the insertion of such a statement.

They again read the draft which has been drawn up in a general way and which includes in substance the beginning of the British draft, then the main points of Mr. Douglas’ proposal, and finally the last paragraph of the British draft.

Mr. Bevin states that the final wording should be prepared by the experts. He suggests that they start to work on it at once. As it appears in general outline, the note seems satisfactory to him because it states a definite question to which the Russians must reply with Yes or No.

Mentioning possible recourse to the United Nations would not produce any greater effect and would only weaken the note by depriving it of its character as a formal notice or summons.

Mr. Marshall agrees to omit mention of recourse to the United Nations if it is clearly understood, as he said earlier, that such recourse will be the next step if the Russian reply is not satisfactory.

Mr. Schuman and Mr. Bevin again agree to this unofficial understanding.

Mr. Marshall makes it clear, for the benefit of the experts who will now go to work, that they should take care not to word the present note in such a way as to make it an invitation to further discussions. This will perhaps be difficult, but it is necessary.

The experts (Mr. Massigli, Sir William Strang, Mr. P. Dean, Mr. Douglas and several members of each delegation) withdraw in order to prepare the exact wording of the document, in accordance with the general outline decided on by the Ministers.

After their departure, Mr. Marshall, with General Clay’s assistance, gives his colleagues detailed information on the operation of the air ferry.

The Ministers’ meeting ends about 7:30 p. m., and the Drafting Committee finishes its work about 8:30 p. m.2

1 This meeting took place at 6 p. m. at the Quai d’Orsay. These minutes were apparently prepared by the French Delegation.

2 The draft text of the note prepared by the Drafting Committee was transmitted to Washington in telegram Martel 3, September 21, from Paris, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–2148). The final agreed text of the note was completed on the morning of September 22 and transmitted to Washington in telegram 4955, September 22, from Paris, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–2248). The note transmitted to Ambassador Panyushkin on September 22 is printed infra.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–2248

[Document 663]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin)1

top secret

The Acting Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the Ambassador of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and has the honor to transmit the following communication:2 (1) The Government of the United States, together with the Governments of France and the United Kingdom, has now reviewed the discussions which have taken place on the Berlin situation and which have culminated in the Soviet reply of September 183 to the aide-mémoire of the three Governments of September 14, 1948.4

(2) The three Governments find that the Soviet unwillingness to accept previous agreements, to which reference is made in their aide-mémoire of September 14, is still preventing a settlement. The reply of the Soviet Government in its aide-mémoire of September 18 is unsatisfactory.

(3) The final position of the three Governments on the specific points at issue is as follows: (a) They cannot accept the imposition of any restrictions on air traffic between Berlin and the Western zones.

(b) They insist that the Finance Commission must control the activities of the German Bank of Emission of the Soviet zone in so far as they relate to the financial arrangements for the introduction and continued use of the Soviet zone mark as the sole currency in the city of Berlin.

(c) They insist that trade between Berlin and the Western zones and other countries must be under quadripartite control, including the issuance of licenses.

(4) After more than six weeks of discussion, the Governments of the United States, France and the United Kingdom feel that the Soviet Government is now fully acquainted with the position of the three Governments, and that further discussions on the present basis would be useless.

(5) It is clear that the difficulties that have arisen in the attempts to arrive at practical arrangements which would restore normal conditions in Berlin derive not from technical matters but from a fundamental difference of views between the Governments of the United States, France and the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Government as to the rights and obligations of the occupying powers in Berlin, their right to have access by air, rail, water and road to Berlin and to participate in the administration of the affairs of the city of Berlin. The blockade imposed by the Soviet authorities together with other of their acts in Berlin are in violation of the rights of the three Western occupying powers.

(6) Accordingly the Government of the United States, in agreement with the Governments of France and the United Kingdom, asks the Soviet Government whether, in order to create conditions which would permit a continuance of discussions, it is now prepared to remove the blockade measures, thus restoring the right of the three Western occupying powers to free communications by rail, water, and road, and to specify the date on which this will be done.

(7) The Foreign Ministers of the three Governments will be meeting shortly in Paris, and they will be glad to have the reply of the Soviet Government as soon as possible.

Washington, September 22, 1948.

1 This note was sent to the Soviet Embassy on September 22 at 2 p. m.

2 The United Kingdom and French Governments sent identic communications to the Soviet Government.

3 See the Soviet aide-mémoire, September 18, p. 1162 [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659].

4 See telegram 1101, September 12, to Moscow, p. 1152 [Pg. 1152 includes portions of Doc. 654 and Doc. 655], and footnote 3 thereto.

The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) to the Acting Secretary of State 862.515/9–2543

[Document 664]

The Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) to the Acting Secretary of State 1

[Translation]

No. 177

The Ambassador of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics presents his compliments to the Acting Secretary of State of the United States and, upon instructions from the Soviet Government, has the honor to communicate the following: 1. The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has acquainted itself with the note of the Government of the U.S.A. of September 22, 19482 concerning the negotiations of the four powers which have taken place in Moscow and Berlin on the question of introducing the German mark of the Soviet zone as the sole currency in Berlin and of removing the restrictions on communication, transport, and trade between Berlin and the western zones of Germany.

In this connection the Soviet Government considers it necessary to state that the position taken by the Government of the U.S.A. not only does not facilitate but on the contrary makes more difficult the reaching of an agreement concerning the settlement of the situation in Berlin which has arisen as a result of effecting a separate currency reform and introducing a special currency in the western zones of Germany and the western sectors of Berlin, which constituted a measure that was most far-reaching in execution of the policy of dismemberment of Germany on the part of the Governments of the U.S.A., Great Britain, and France.

2. In its note the Government of the U.S.A. points out three questions at issue which were mentioned by the Governments of the U.S.A., Great Britain, and France in their aide-mémoire of September 143 and the Government of the U.S.S.R. in its aide-mémoire of September 18, 1948.4

The Government of the United States of America states that a further continuation of negotiations on the aforesaid questions on the present basis would be useless and considers that, in order to create conditions which would permit a continuation of negotiations, it is necessary to remove the provisional restrictions on transport between Berlin and the western zones which were introduced by the Soviet Command to protect the interests of the German population as well as the economy of the Soviet occupation zone and of Berlin itself.

Such a statement of the Government of the U.S.A. is a direct contradiction of the agreement reached on August 30 in Moscow between the four Governments (the directive to the Military Governors5 ) in which it was said: “The Governments of France, the United Kingdom, the United States, and the U.S.S.R. have decided that, subject to agreement being reached among the four military governors in Berlin for their practical implementation, the following steps shall be taken simultaneously: “(a) Restrictions on communications, transport and commerce between Berlin and the western zones, and also on the movement of cargoes to and from the Soviet zone of Germany, which have recently been imposed, shall be lifted;

“(b) The German mark of the Soviet zone shall be introduced as the sole currency for Berlin, and the Western mark ‘B’ shall be withdrawn from circulation in Berlin.”

From the text of the agreement cited above it is evident that during the negotiations in Moscow the four governments agreed on the simultaneous lifting of restrictions in respect to trade and communications between Berlin and the western zones and on the introduction of the German mark of the Soviet zone as the sole currency for Berlin. The Soviet Government insists on this, because the situation created by the separate measures of the western powers means that the three governments do not confine themselves to their sovereign administration of the western zones of Germany but wish at the same time to administer also the Soviet zone of occupation in currency and finance matters by introducing their own separate currency in Berlin, which is in the center of the Soviet zone, thus disrupting the economy of the eastern zone of Germany and, in the final analysis, forcing the U.S.S.R. to withdraw therefrom.

The Soviet Government considers it necessary that the agreement reached in Moscow be carried out and believes that further negotiations can be successful only if the other three governments also adhere to this agreement. If the Government of the U.S.A. repudiates the agreement reached on August 30, only one conclusion can be drawn therefrom, namely, that the Government of the U.S.A. does not wish any agreement between the U.S.S.R., the U.S.A., Great Britain, and France on the question of settling the situation in Berlin.

3. In as much as the position of the Governments of the U.S.A., Great Britain, and France was stated in the note of September 22 concerning the three questions at issue, the Soviet Government considers it necessary to do likewise: a) As regards air communication between Berlin and the western zones, the establishment by the Soviet Command of control over the transport of commercial cargoes and passengers is just as necessary as in the case of railway, water, and highway transport. The air routes cannot remain without control, since an understanding has been reached between the four governments to the effect that the agreement must provide for the establishment of appropriate control in regarding to currency circulation in Berlin and trade between Berlin and the western zones.

b) In the directive to the Military Governors adopted by the four governments on August 30 the control functions of the four-power financial commission in regard to the execution of financial measures connected with the introduction and circulation of a single currency in Berlin were explicitly provided for.
The Soviet Government considers it necessary that this agreement be carried out, including the maximum reduction of occupation costs in Berlin as provided for in that agreement, and the establishment of a balanced budget in Berlin, which has not been considered in the Berlin negotiations to date.

c) The Soviet Government has already expressed its agreement that trade between Berlin, third countries, and the western zones of Germany be placed under the control of the four-power finance commission. The Soviet Government now declares its willingness to establish four-power control over the issuance of import and export licenses also, provided agreement is reached on all other questions.

4. Thus the reaching of agreement on the question of the situation in Berlin depends now, first of all, on whether the Governments of Great Britain, the United States of America, and France aspire to such an agreement.

Washington, September 25, 1948.

1 The Soviet Government transmitted identic notes to the United Kingdom and French Governments. For the Soviet Government’s translation of this note, see The Soviet Union and the Berlin Question, pp. 54–57.

2  Supra.

3 See telegram 1101, September 12, to Moscow, p. 1152 [Pg. 1152 includes portions of Doc. 654 and Doc. 655], and footnote 3 thereto.

4  Ante, p. 1162 [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659].

5 See telegram 1776, August 27, from Moscow, p. 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], and footnote 3 thereto.

Record of Meetings of the Secretary of State With the Foreign Ministers of the United Kingdom and France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–448

[Document 665]

Record of Meetings of the Secretary of State With the Foreign Ministers of the United Kingdom and France 1

top secret Paris, September 26, 1948.

The following are a record of the meetings and decisions taken by the three Ministers of Sunday, September 26, concerning: (1) a final confirmation of the decision to refer the Berlin matter to the Security Council;

(2) agreement on the text of final note to the Soviet Government and time of its dispatch; and

(3) the release of communiqué and time of publication of final note.

Following the news of the publication by the Soviets of the Tass communiqué on the Moscow and Berlin discussions, which was received by the Delegation somewhat before 9 o’clock on Sunday morning, after consultation with the British and French it was agreed that the three Ministers would meet shortly before one o’clock. In talking with Mr. Couve de Murville about 11:30 a. m. he said he could make this engagement for Mr. Schuman who was temporarily absent at a High Mass at Notre Dame but would be back at the Quai d’Orsay between 12:15 and 12:30. Mr. Couve de Murville subsequently confirmed the arrangement.

The three Ministers met shortly before one o’clock at the Quai d’Orsay to consider the situation produced by the Soviet breach of the agreement to hold the conversations confidential. The three Ministers had an opportunity to study the Soviet note of September 252 and were unanimously of the opinion that in the light of the Soviet refusal contained in that note there was no purpose in attempting to continue discussions directly with the Soviet Government. There was no suggestion, direct or indirect, from any official present to the contrary. Mr. Schuman said that the French Government was prepared to agree with the United States that the matter should now be referred to the United Nations and specifically to the Security Council.

Secretary Marshall, in order to clarify the point that the decision to go to the United Nations was the independent decision of the three Governments concerned and not merely to meet the wishes of the United States, stated that as the other Ministers were aware the United States Government has always felt that when the Moscow conversations came to an end that the only logical next step was reference to the United Nations but that nevertheless he would like to know if either of his colleagues had any suggestions for alternative courses of action. Both Mr. Schuman and Mr. Bevin replied that their Governments could see no other course of action except to refer it to the Security Council.

The discussion then turned to the desirability of the issuance of a communiqué immediately on the part of the Ministers announcing their decision. Secretary Marshall pointed out that so far nothing had come from the three Governments while the Soviet version of the breakdown was being spread all over the world by radio and press without opposition. He read in this connection a message just received from Mr. Lovett to that effect. He therefore urged that the Ministers should immediately issue a communiqué to the world in order to counteract this Soviet propaganda and inform their public opinions as to their position. Mr. Bevin at first had some objection to this course of action on the grounds that since the three Governments were agreed to dispatch a final note to the Soviet Government3 stating that the Soviet reply of September 25 was unsatisfactory and reviewing their basic position in these discussions it would perhaps be better to wait until the text of the note was finally agreed that afternoon, delivered and then make it public. Such a procedure he felt would put the main elements of the position of the three Western Powers before the public. He felt that the proposed short communiqué might convey the impression that we had acted in haste solely because of a Tass communiqué. The Secretary pointed out that to wait until the final note was ready would be to give Soviet propaganda several additional hours to blanket the world. Mr. Schuman agreed with the Secretary and Mr. Bevin also finally agreed and it was decided to issue the short communiqué at 3 p. m. Paris time.4

Drafting and Acceptance of Final Text of Note to the Soviet Government

The Drafting Committee met during the afternoon and agreed upon a final text of the note to be sent by the three Governments to the Soviet Government.

At 9:30 p. m. the Ministers met and after a few minor drafting changes approved the final text of the note which in the last paragraph made it plain that the three Western Governments did not regard the continuance of negotiations possible in existing circumstances.

There was considerable discussion as to the time of delivery and release to the press of the agreed note because of the difference in time between the three capitals. It was finally decided that because of this difference of time the United States Government would deliver its note on Sunday, September 26, and the other two Governments would either deliver it on the twenty-sixth or, in view of the lateness of the hour, on the twenty-seventh, and that release would be made to the press at any time after delivery in the discretion of each Government. Because of the fears of Mr. Bevin of the effect of an ultimatum which might be produced by too quick a release after delivery it was decided after communication with Washington that the note would be delivered in Washington as soon as possible to 6:30 p. m. Washington time and given to the press but for release not before midnight Eastern Standard Time.

Throughout the discussion between the Ministers on Sunday at no time was there any suggestion from any of the three Ministers that negotiations should be continued in Moscow nor was there any division of opinion concerning the necessity of going forthwith to the United Nations or to presenting the case to the Security Council under Chapter VII as a threat to peace and security.

1 This record was prepared by Charles E. Bohlen.

2  Supra.

3 See the Acting Secretary’s note of September 26 to Ambassador Panyushkin, p. 1180 [Pg. 1180 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663].

4 The text of the communiqué under reference is included in the circular telegram of September 26, infra.

The Acting Secretary of State to American Diplomatic and Consular Officers 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–2648: Circular telegram

[Document 666]

The Acting Secretary of State to American Diplomatic and Consular Officers

Washington, September 26, 1948—1 p. m.

Mr. Schuman, Mr. Bevin and Mr. Marshall met shortly after noon at the Quai d’Orsay to consider the Soviet Note of September 25, 19481 relating to the situation in Berlin, caused by the imposition and continuance of the Soviet blockade of rail, road and water communications between Berlin and the Western zones of occupation in Germany.

In view of the fact that the Soviet Government in violation of the understanding between the Four Powers has chosen to make public unilaterally its version of these negotiations,2 the three Ministers authorized the following statement: “The Governments of France, the United States and the United Kingdom are in agreement that the Soviet note of September 25 is unsatisfactory. The Soviet Government fails to provide the assurance requested in the notes from the three Governments of September 22, 19483 that the illegal blockade measures will be removed. In addition it demands that commercial and passenger traffic between the Western zones and Berlin, by air as well as by rail, water and road, be controlled by the Soviet command in Germany. This demand of the Soviet Government is restated with emphasis in the official communiqué issued in Moscow. Moreover, in regard to currency, the Soviet note is evasive and does not answer the clear position stated by the three Governments.

“Accordingly, the three Governments are transmitting a note4 to the Soviet Government fully setting out their position and informing it that in view of the insistence of the Soviet Government upon maintaining the blockade and upon the institution of restrictions on air communications they are compelled, in compliance with their obligations under the Charter of the United Nations, to refer the matter to the Security Council.”

Lovett

1  Ante, p. 1181 [Pg. 1181 includes portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664].

2 The reference here is to an article circulated by the Soviet news agency Tass on September 26 which attributed the breakdown of the Berlin negotiations to the Western Powers.

3  Ante, p. 1180 [Pg. 1180 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663].

4  Infra.

The Acting Secretary of State of the Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–2648

[Document 667]

The Acting Secretary of State of the Soviet Ambassador (Panyushkin)1

The Acting Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency, the Ambassador of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and has the honor to transmit the following communication: 1. The Governments of the United States, France and the United Kingdom, conscious of their obligations under the Charter of the United Nations to settle disputes by peaceful means, took the initiative on July 30, 1948 in approaching the Soviet Government for informal discussions in Moscow in order to explore every possibility of adjusting a dangerous situation which had arisen by reason of measures taken by the Soviet Government directly challenging the rights of the other occupying powers in Berlin. These measures, persistently pursued, amounted to a blockade of land and water transport and communication between the Western zones of Germany and Berlin which not only endangered the maintenance of the forces of occupation of the United States, France and the United Kingdom in that city but also jeopardized the discharge by those Governments of their duties as occupying powers through the threat of starvation, disease and economic ruin for the population of Berlin.

2. The Governments of the United States, France and the United Kingdom have explicitly maintained the position that they could accept no arrangement which would deny or impair the rights in Berlin acquired by them through the defeat and unconditional surrender of Germany and by Four-Power agreements. They were, however, willing to work out in good faith any practical arrangements, consistent with their rights and duties, for restoring to normal the situation in Berlin, including the problems presented by the existence of two currencies in that city.

3. After long and patient discussion, agreement was arrived at in Moscow on a directive to the four Military Governors2 under which the restrictive measures placed by the Soviet Military Government upon transport and communications between the Western zones and Berlin would be lifted simultaneously with the introduction of the German mark of the Soviet zone as the sole currency for Berlin under Four-Power control of its issue and continued use in Berlin.

4. In connection with the lifting of restrictions and the maintenance of freedom of communication and the transport of persons and goods between Berlin and the Western zones, the agreed directive provided that restrictions recently imposed should be lifted. Generalissimo Stalin during the discussions personally confirmed that this meant the removal also of any restrictions imposed prior to June 18, 1948.

In connection with the currency situation in Berlin, the Soviet authorities insisted that the German mark of the Soviet zone be accepted as the sole currency for Berlin. The three Western occupying powers declared that they were ready to withdraw from circulation in Berlin the Western mark “B” issued in that city and to accept the German mark of the Soviet zone subject to Four-Power control over its issuance, circulation and continued use in Berlin (i.e. in Berlin only and not in the Soviet zone). After long discussions Generalissimo Stalin, on August 23, 1948, personally agreed to this Four-Power control and himself proposed the establishment of a Four-Power Financial Commission which would control the practical implementation of the financial arrangements involved in the introduction and continued circulation of a single currency in Berlin and which, Generalissimo Stalin specifically stated, would have the power to control the German Bank of Emission of the Soviet zone insofar as its operations with respect to Berlin were concerned.

5. It was with these understandings, personally confirmed by Generalissimo Stalin, that the agreed directive was sent to the four Military Governors in Berlin to work out the technical arrangements necessary to put it into effect.

6. Despite these clear understandings, the Soviet Military Governor soon made it plain in the discussions held by the four Military Governors that he was not prepared to abide by the agreed directive.

Although the directive called for the unqualified lifting of the restrictions on transport and communications between the Western zones and Berlin, the Soviet Military Governor failed to comply. What is more he demanded that restrictions should be imposed on air traffic. He endeavored to support his demand by a false interpretation of a decision of the Control Council of November 30, 1945. Actually during the discussions leading up to the decision of the Control Council of November, authorities in Berlin had suggested that the traffic in the corridors should be limited to the needs of the military forces. Neither the Control Council, however, nor any other Four-Power body accepted this proposal and the traffic in the corridors has since been subject only to those safety regulations which were agreed on a Four-Power basis. Other than these agreed safety regulations, no restrictions whatsoever have been or are in existence on the use by aircraft of the occupying powers of air communications in the corridors between Berlin and the Western zones of Germany.

In regard to Four-Power control of the German mark of the Soviet zone in Berlin, the Soviet Military Governor refused to admit, despite the agreement in Moscow, that the Financial Commission should exercise control over the operations with respect to Berlin of the German Bank of Emission of the Soviet zone.

Furthermore, with respect to the question of the control of the trade of Berlin, the position of the Soviet Military Governor amounted to a claim for exclusive Soviet authority over the trade of Berlin with the Western zones of occupation and with foreign countries. This claim was a contradiction of the clear meaning of the agreed directive to the four Military Governors.

7. Even while discussions were in progress, the Soviet authorities in Berlin tolerated attempts on the part of minority groups sympathetic to their political aims forcibly to overthrow the legal government of the city of Berlin, constituted by democratic elections held under Four-Power supervision. On August 30 the representatives of the three Western occupying powers in Moscow had drawn Mr. Molotov’s attention to the disturbed situation in Berlin. They suggested that instructions be sent to the four Military Governors that they should do all in their power to preserve a favorable atmosphere in Berlin, but Mr. Molotov claimed that such instructions to the Soviet Military Governor were unnecessary. Nevertheless, after that date these attempts to overthrow the city government increased in violence.

8. On September 14, 1948 the representatives of the Governments of the United States, France and the United Kingdom, acting on specific instructions, called the attention of the Soviet Government to the Soviet Military Governor’s disregard of the agreements reached during the Moscow discussions and requested that he be instructed to give effect to them.3

9. The Soviet Government’s reply of September 18,4 however, upheld the Soviet Military Governor’s position. The Soviet Government further confirmed its intention to disregard its commitment to lift the restrictions imposed on transport and communications by seeking to impose restrictions which had not before been in effect.

With respect to trade, the Soviet requirement that the licensing of trade with Berlin be placed in the hands of the Soviet military authorities made plain the Soviet Government’s intention to obtain exclusive control over the trade of Berlin.

As regards the powers of the Four-Power Financial Commission, the Soviet reply asserted that the Western occupying powers desired to establish control over all operations of the German Bank of Emission. In fact the United States, the United Kingdom and French Military Governors sought only to secure the Soviet Military Governor’s acceptance of the agreed principle that the Four-Power Financial Commission should control the operations of the Bank with respect to the financial arrangements relating to the currency changeover and to the continued provision and use of the German mark of the Soviet zone in the city of Berlin, (i.e. in Berlin only and not in the Soviet zone). In the light of Mr. Molotov’s statements during the discussion of the Soviet reply, it became clear that no assurance was given that the Soviet Military Governor would be prepared to proceed on the previously agreed basis. Thus in this matter, as in others, the intention of the Soviet Government was manifestly to impose conditions nullifying the authority of the Western occupying powers and to acquire complete control over the city of Berlin.

10. For the Governments of the United States, France and the United Kingdom to continue discussions when fundamental agreements previously reached had been disregarded by the Soviet Government would have been futile. It would have been equally fruitless to continue such discussions in the face of the unmistakable intention of the Soviet Government to undermine, and indeed to destroy, the rights of the three Governments as occupying powers in Berlin as a price for lifting the blockade, illegally imposed in the first instance and still unlawfully maintained. The three Governments therefore despatched identical notes on September 22nd to the Soviet Government.5 In those notes after restating their position on the specific points at issue they asked the Soviet Government whether it was prepared to remove the blockade measures which it had imposed and thereby to establish conditions which would permit a continuation of discussions.

11. The reply of the Soviet Government in its notes to the three Governments of September 25, 19486 is unsatisfactory.

As regards the introduction and continued circulation and use in Berlin of the German mark of the Soviet zone, the Soviet Government misrepresents the position of the three Western occupying powers. The latter have made it clear from the outset that they do not desire to exercise any control over the financial arrangements in the Soviet zone of occupation, but are insisting on those conditions only which Would provide adequate Four-Power control over the financial arrangements for the introduction and continued circulation and use of the German mark of the Soviet zone as the sole currency in Berlin.

As regards control of the trade of Berlin the Soviet Government contrary to its previous attitude now states its willingness to agree to the establishment of Four-Power control over the issuance of licenses for the import and export of goods provided that agreement is reached on all other questions. It is clear, after more than six weeks of discussions, from the Soviet Government’s persistent refusal to remove the blockade measures and its continued insistence on other conditions which would enable it to destroy the authority and rights of the United States, France and the United Kingdom as occupying powers in Berlin that this conditional concession is illusory.

As regards air traffic between Berlin and the Western zones of occupation, the Soviet Government, while neither affirming nor withdrawing the demand for the particular restrictions put forward by the Soviet Military Governor during the discussions in Berlin and confirmed in its reply of September 18, introduces another requirement to the effect that transport by air of commercial freight and passengers must be placed under the control of the Soviet command.

The Soviet Government’s note of September 25 therefore not only ignores the request of the three Governments that the blockade measures should be removed in order that conditions may be established which would permit the continuation of discussions; it also seeks to impose restrictions on transport and communications between Berlin and the Western zones which would place the maintenance of the forces of occupation of the three Western occupying powers and the whole life of the Berlin population within the arbitrary power of the Soviet command, thus enabling the Soviet military authorities to reimpose the blockade at any moment in the future if they so desired.

12. Accordingly, it is apparent that the Soviet Government had no intention of carrying out the undertakings to which it had subscribed during the Moscow discussions in August. In the face of the expressed readiness of the Governments of the United States, France and the United Kingdom to negotiate with the Soviet Government all outstanding questions regarding Berlin and Germany as a whole in an atmosphere free from duress, the Soviet Government has, in fact, persisted in using duress. It has resorted to acts of force rather than to the processes of peaceful settlement. It has imposed and maintained illegal restrictions amounting to a blockade of Berlin. It has failed to work out in good faith Four-Power arrangements for the control of the currency of that city. Even while the Western occupying powers were seeking agreement on measures to implement the understandings reached in Moscow the Soviet military authorities condoned and encouraged attempts to overthrow the legally constituted municipal government of Berlin. These actions are plainly attempts to nullify unilaterally the rights of the Western occupying powers in Berlin, which are co-equal with those of the Soviet Union and like them are derived from the defeat and unconditional surrender of Germany and from Four-Power agreements to which the Soviet Government is a party. Moreover, the use of coercive pressure against the Western occupying powers is a clear violation of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

13. The issue between the Soviet Government and the Western occupying powers is therefore not that of technical difficulties in communications nor that of reaching agreement upon the conditions for the regulation of the currency for Berlin. The issue is that the Soviet Government has clearly shown by its actions that it is attempting by illegal and coercive measures in disregard of its obligations to secure political objectives to which it is not entitled and which it could not achieve by peaceful means. It has resorted to blockade measures; it has threatened the Berlin population with starvation, disease and economic ruin; it has tolerated disorders and attempted to overthrow the duly elected municipal government of Berlin. The attitude and conduct of the Soviet Government reveal sharply its purpose to continue its illegal and coercive blockade and its unlawful actions designed to reduce the status of the United States, France and the United Kingdom as occupying powers in Berlin to one of complete subordination to Soviet rule, and thus to obtain absolute authority over the economic, political and social life of the people of Berlin, and to incorporate the city in the Soviet zone.

14. The Soviet Government has thereby taken upon itself sole responsibility for creating a situation, in which further recourse to the means of settlement prescribed in Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations is not, in existing circumstances, possible, and which constitutes a threat to international peace and security. In order that international peace and security may not be further endangered the Governments of the United States, France and the United Kingdom, therefore, while reserving to themselves full rights to take such measures as may be necessary to maintain in these circumstances their position in Berlin, find themselves obliged to refer the action of the Soviet Government to the Security Council of the United Nations.7

Washington, September 26, 1948.

1 Identic notes were transmitted by the United Kingdom and French Governments to the Soviet Government on September 27.

2 See footnote 3, p. 1087 [Pg. 1087 is part of Doc. 629].

3 Regarding the aide-mémoire of September 14 under reference here, see telegram 1101, September 12, to Moscow, p. 1152 [Pg. 1152 includes portions of Doc. 654 and Doc. 655], and footnote 3 thereto.

4  Ante, p. 1162 [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659].

5  Ante, p. 1180 [Pg. 1180 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663].

6  Ante, p. 1181 [Pg. 1181 includes portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664].

7 The source text bears the following handwritten notation by John D. Hickerson: “Text of this note correlated at meetings of the three Foreign Ministers, Sept. 25 and 26th.”

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy United States Representative on the Security Council (Jessup) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–2748

[Document 668]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy United States Representative on the Security Council (Jessup)

top secret Paris, September 27, 1948.

Yesterday, at about noon, Ambassador Douglas, Dean Rusk and I met with the Secretary at the Residence to discuss the Berlin Case. During the course of the conversation the discussion turned to the question of our objectives in appealing to the UN. Mr. Douglas pointed out to the Secretary that he had detected some uncertainty among some members of the U.S. Delegation as to whether our appeal to the UN was designed merely to give us strong moral backing for any action which might ultimately become necessary, even contemplating the possible necessity of the utilization of measures of force; or whether the appeal to the Security Council was sincerely designed to assist in reaching some kind of a solution. He said that he thought it was of great importance for me in my preparation and handling of the case to have some directive on this point. I stated my very strong concurrence of this view. I pointed out that not only in terms of our official presentation but also in terms of our essential contacts with other delegates one of the first questions to be answered would be our choice between these two general points of view to which Mr. Douglas had referred. I said that I thought we would be in a very much stronger position if we were able to say that in going to the Security Council we sincerely desired a solution, that we were referring the matter in good faith, and were prepared to abide by a UN resolution. Mr. Douglas, on this last point, noted that some proposal might eventuate from the discussions which would be unpalatable to us and the question was whether we would be prepared to accede to it.

The Secretary said that any statement I made on this line would have to be very carefully weighed since great importance would be attached to it and we had to consider both the immediate situation and the precedent which might be established. He went on to refer to Mr. Douglas’ hypothesis and mentioned as an extreme example a possible resolution calling upon the Western Powers to get out of Berlin. He then remarked that in going into the UN we had to recognize the implications of the step we had taken and had to be prepared to carry through. I did not understand this as a commitment of the specific example which he mentioned but an indication of a general line of approach.

Mr. Douglas told the Secretary that he had prepared a memorandum1 on this issue but that he had not yet transmitted it to the Secretary because he had first wished to show it to Mr. Bohlen, before any meeting with the Secretary, Dulles, Bohlen and myself. In view of the Secretary’s statement, he decided that it was unnecessary to submit the memorandum. He and I in talking it over later felt that the Secretary had given a sufficient indication of our general policy and that the matter need not be pursued further.

1 Not found in Department files.

Minutes of the 286th Policy Planning Staff Meeting, Washington, September 28, 1948, 11 a.m. to 12 noon Policy Planning Staff Files: Lot 64 D 563: Box 20036

[Document 669]

Minutes of the 286th Policy Planning Staff Meeting, Washington, September 28, 1948, 11 a.m. to 12 noon

Washington, September 28, 1948, 11 a.m. to noon

top secret

Present: George Kennan John Davies

George Butler Gordon Merriam

Ware Adams Carlton Savage

Ambassador Bedell Smith

Frederick Oechsner, P

Ambassador Smith gave his views on the outline for an NSC paper on Berlin. The following is not a quotation, but is the gist of his remarks:

I (Ambassador Smith) will give you my personal views on these questions. I have never made any secret of them, so you will probably find little new in them. I offer them solely as my personal views because some of the questions would clearly require general staff studies to provide adequate answers.

I preface these personal views with the remark that I regret very much that we are in Berlin at all. I know that some of our people in Berlin do not agree with me, but for what it is worth I have always felt that we should never have let ourselves get into an exposed salient like Berlin under such conditions. From the military point of view it makes no sense whatever to have U.S. forces in an enclave that could be chopped off with ease. From the political point of view, Berlin has become the important symbol it now is largely because we ourselves have made it so. However, that is all water over the dam; my hope for the future is that the U.N. will offer a chance for us to get out of Berlin.

Turning to the outline, the foregoing is my attitude toward the question of the importance of our remaining in Berlin. To leave Berlin would indeed, as I am told, throw appal [a pall?] over Western European hopes for security, and be an ill omen to the people of Vienna which might be next on the list. I am not competent to discuss the current talks with Canada and the Brussels Treaty Powers.1

Regarding our ability to stay in Berlin, we could in fact stay there. The Russian pressure against us would continue persistently. They would not move in with troops to put us forcibly out of Berlin, but they could and would take indirect measures of many kinds to make it difficult for us to stay. It would suit them to let us stay on indefinitely, suffering the steady drain of the airlift upon resources diverted from our military preparations or from the ERP. Our position in Berlin would tend to have less and less meaning and purpose, but we probably could stay on there for a considerable time, at least as far as maintaining ourselves in our own sectors is concerned, although we could probably not accomplish much for the Germans there. Our present hysterical outburst of humanitarian feelings about the latter keep reminding me that just 3½ years ago I would have been considered a hero if I had succeeded in exterminating those same Germans with bombs. I do not expect the Russians to take any direct military action which would precipitate a conflict. They will harass the airlift; we may occasionally lose a pilot or a plane. Summing up I should say, therefore, that we can, if we wish to, stay in, Berlin, at great cost, at some hazard, and with diminishing effectiveness except for the business of supplying ourselves, mainly to maintain our symbolic presence there.

As to the likelihood of war, there is a real possibility of it in the Berlin situation. If we had no exposed salients like that, but instead a firm continuous line around our own zone—a line which the Russians could not cross without the onus of direct aggression, there would be relatively less likelihood of war because I believe that the Russians do not themselves wish now to face war deliberately, although this question is of course under constant review by them. They are unable to appreciate the violent reaction of our people to any loss of American life, so that there is of course the possibility of a miscalculation on their part of the probable consequences of harassing actions that they might take; but I feel so confident they would not now undertake a deliberate military attack on, say, one of our concentrations of aircraft at Wiesbaden, that I would not hesitate to go there and sit on the field myself. I do, however, think that although a clear-cut zonal line severing us from them would minimize the danger of armed conflict now, the confused relationships existing in Berlin and the corridors leading to it have present potentialities for incidents that could readily lead to war.

As for evacuating Berlin, the problem of getting ourselves and our equipment out is a simple one. The evacuation of Germans who have become openly anti-Soviet would be another problem. The Russians would oppose it of course, in every way possible. At the same time, we do now have a moral commitment to take care of these Germans as a result of what we have done and said lately with respect to them. As for preliminary steps to evacuating Berlin, as I have already said, the matter is now in the U.N. and I would hope that action in the U.N. will provide a means of getting out of Berlin.

I do not want to see us go to war over Berlin. The idea of moving the capital from Berlin to the juncture of the three major zones is, of course, logical and sound and I have always thought that this should be done.

As for the idea of placing Berlin under the U.N., I would say that any U.N. action that enables us to get out of Berlin would be very desirable.

Now that the case is in fact before the U.N., we should encourage any action that would get us out of Berlin. U.N. action looking toward the removal of all occupation forces from all of Germany would be another question, one in which we would have to consider first what could be done to reassure France about her security, maybe by stationing U.S. troops in France.

So much for the specific questions raised. Now for a word about the general outlook. I personally think that time is on our side in the relative strength of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. I think that, especially with our present plans in development, we are gaining strength much faster than the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union’s recovery from the war is progressing slowly. It does not compare with recovery in Western Europe, even in Moscow which itself is the show-case of the Soviet Union. I think that industrial potential is developing slowly there, and that military potential is likewise developing slowly. Without any evidence whatever to go on, I feel, simply from my “woman’s intuition”, that the Russians have not got the “A”-bomb and will not have it in quantity five years from now. They simply have not got the degree of technological precision for large-scale mass production required for atomic bomb processes. Their scientists’ notebooks are no doubt complete with all the necessary scientific data required but the Soviet Union simply does not have the degree of technological precision for mass production that it would take to make atomic bombs in quantity. I have no doubt they have been working as best they can at it and may even have already developed some simpler types of atomic weapons, but I do not think they would be in a position to use atomic bombs during the next five years. Speaking as a soldier, if I were told to choose, I would rather fight the Soviet Union five years from now than at present, because our potential is progressing at a much faster rate than theirs, and will last longer.

1 The reference here is to the negotiations in Washington during the summer and fall of 1948 for a North Atlantic Treaty. Documentation on these negotiations is included in volume iii .

E. The Berlin question at the United NationsE. The Berlin question at the United Nations

[670] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kohler) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 30, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–3048: Telegram

[671] Report by the Policy Planning Staff

Washington, October 1, 1948.

Policy Planning Staff Files: Lot 64 D 563: Box 29

[672] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, October 2, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–3048: Telegram

[673] The Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union (Molotov) to the United States Chargé (Kohler)

Moscow, October 3, 1948.

[674] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Paris

Washington, October 3, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–348: Telegram

[675] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen)

[Paris,] October 4, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–448

[676] Editorial Note

[677] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

Washington, October 5, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–448: Telegram

[678] Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen) to the Secretary of State

Paris, October 8, 1948.

501.BC/10–848

[679] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Acting Secretary of State

Paris, October 11, 1948—6 p. m.

501.BC/10–1148: Telegram

[680] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, October 12, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–1248: Telegram

[681] The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

Paris, October 13, 1948—10 p. m.

501.BC/10–1348: Telegram

[682] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, October 14, 1948—9 p. m.

862.00/10–1448: Telegram

[683] Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen) to the Deputy United States Representative on the Security Council (Jessup)

Paris, October 16, 1948.

501.BC/10–2848

[684] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Acting Secretary of State

Paris, October 16, 1948—9 p. m.

501.BC/10–1648: Telegram

[685] The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

Paris, October 20, 1948—4 p. m.

501.BC/10–2048: Telegram

[686] The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Acting Secretary of State

Berlin, October 21, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2148: Telegram

[687] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, October 22, 1948—1 p. m.

501.BC/10–2248: Telegram

[688] Editorial Note

[689] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State

London, October 26, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2648: Telegram

[690] The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

Paris, October 27, 1948—5 p. m.

507.BC/10–2748: Telegram

[691] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Acting Secretary of State

Paris, October 27, 1948—8 p. m.

501.BC/10–2748: Telegram

[692] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin

Washington, October 30, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–3048: Telegram

[693] Report by the Policy Planning Staff

Washington, November 2, 1948.

Policy Planning Staff Files: Lot 64 D 563: Box 20036

[694] The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretan

Paris, November 3, 1948—1 p. m.

501.BC/11–348: Telegram

[695] Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen) to the United States Deputy Representative on the Security Council (Jessup)

[Paris,] November 5, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–548

[696] The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

Paris, November 12, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1248: Telegram

[697] Editorial Note

[698] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

Washington, November 16, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1648: Telegram

[699] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, November 17, 1948—6 p. m.

501.BC/11.1748: Telegram

[700] The Secretary of State to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

Paris, November 18, 1948—5 p. m.

501.BC/11–1848: Telegram

[701] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, November 19, 1948—6 p. m.

501.BC/11–1948: Telegram

[702] The Acting Head of the United States Delegation to the United Nations (Dulles) to the Secretary of State

Paris, November 23, 1948—7 p. m.

501.BC/11–2348: Telegram

[703] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, November 24, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2448: Telegram

[704] The Acting Head of the United States Delegation to the United Nations (Dulles) to the Secretary of State

Paris, November 24, 1948—5 p. m.

501.BC/11–2448: Telegram

[705] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, November 25, 1948—4 p. m.

501.BC/11–2548: Telegram

[706] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, November 26, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2648: Telegram

[707] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, November 27, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2748: Telegram

[708] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, November 28, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2648: Telegram

[709] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, November 30, 1948.

862.101/11–3048: Telegram

[710] Editorial Note

[711] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, December 7, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–648: Telegram

[712] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, December 13, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1348: Telegram

[713] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, December 16, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1648: Telegram

[714] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, December 18, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1848: Telegram

[715] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, December 21, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–2148: Telegram

[716] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, December 29, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–2948: Telegram

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kohler) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–3048: Telegram

[Document 670]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kohler) to the Secretary of State

top secret Moscow, September 30, 1948—6 p. m.

2198. Breakdown Moscow talks and reference Berlin issue to UN appears to us to promise neither relief from blockade of Berlin nor any solution of situation beyond moral support such direct actions as Western governments can themselves take and enforce.

Consequently, especially in view continued Soviet efforts establish unilateral control and imminent ominous prospect of winter, we hope our military leaders in Berlin now feel themselves released from former restraints (Berlin’s 2081 to Department, August 191 ) and, without awaiting outcome SC discussions, are proceeding, not only with maximum development air-lift, but any other measures required to counter Soviet moves and prepare Western sectors for indefinite operation as going concern under our full control. Such program would appear justified by considerations defense against continued Soviet aggression and explicit reservation in our notes to Soviet Government2 and Secretary-General UN.3 As seen from Moscow, such demonstration our determination should therefore not only not prejudice our presentation Berlin case to SC, but might well have healthy influence on Soviet attitude and actions both in SC and in Berlin.

In our view following steps likely have maximum effect on Soviet authorities: (1) Development adequate stable currency Western sectors (perhaps as indicated Berlin’s 1970 to Department August 74 ).

(2) Full support for municipal government in establishing itself where it can operate without being subject Communist mob violence.

(3) Establishment provisional tripartite kommandatura.

(4) Detailed planning for economy Western sectors (absence of which noted; for example, page 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1] Berlin’s despatch 1291, August 274 ).

(5) Silencing or taking over Soviet-controlled Radio Berlin.

(6) In event Soviets arrest non-Communist municipal leaders for alleged provocative anti-Soviet behavior, immediate seizure KPD leaders throughout Western zones as hostages to induce release Berlin leaders.

Sent Department 2198. Department pass Berlin 422, London 247, Paris 417 for Bohlen.

Kohler

1 Not printed, but see footnote 6, p. 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617].

2  Ante, p. 1185 [Pg. 1185 is part of Doc. 665].

3 Not printed. For the text of this note, see United Nations, Official Records of the Security Council, Third Year, Supplement for October, pp. 9–11.

4 Not printed.

4 Not printed.

Report by the Policy Planning Staff Policy Planning Staff Files: Lot 64 D 563: Box 29

[Document 671]

Report by the Policy Planning Staff

top secret Washington, October 1, 1948.

PPS 40

Berlin Airlift

The Problem: 1. To outline the course of action of the U.S. in the event of partial or complete interruption by the U.S.S.R. of the airlift to Berlin.

Comment: 2. It is assumed that the problem envisages interruption of the airlift as a result of varying forms of physical interference by the Russians with the movement of U.S. planes into or out of Berlin.

3. We are operating our planes into Berlin by right, and consequently any physical interference with that operation would be in violation of the Four-Power Agreement contained in the decision of the Allied Control Council of November 30, 1945 which established agreed air safety regulations. Such interferences also would be either a provocative or a hostile act on the part of the U.S.S.R.

4. The recommendations outline a general procedure only. Each specific case should be handled according to the nature of the possible interference and the circumstances under which it takes place.

Recommendations: 5. Whenever the Government of the U.S.S.R. or its representatives give notification to the U.S. and the other occupying powers of any intention to establish regulations or to take any other action inconsistent with the Four-Power Agreement, which would interfere with the operation of the airlift to Berlin, there should be an immediate and vigorous protest to the Soviet Commander-in-Chief in Berlin, as well as through the Air Safety Center in Berlin.

6. In the event of any physical provocative action, such as the buzzing of U.S. planes by Soviet planes, there should be immediate and vigorous protest to the Soviet Commander-in-Chief in Berlin, as well as through the Air Safety Center in Berlin. These protests should include a statement to the effect that the U.S. intends to continue the airlift operation in spite of such provocative action.

7. In the event of indirect mechanical interference to navigation through such means as jamming of radio control systems, smoke smudges, et cetera, there should be immediate and vigorous protest as outlined in paragraph 6; and these protests should include statements that the U.S. intends to continue the airlift operation, and will hold the U.S.S.R. responsible for the loss of any U.S. plane through such acts.

8. In the event that a U.S. plane is brought down by any act such as collision or firing in the air or by anti-aircraft fire from the ground the U.S. should immediately demand an explanation from the Government of the U.S.S.R. through the U.S. Embassy in Moscow and should include in its communication a warning that the U.S. may be forced to adopt defensive measures to protect U.S. planes against such acts.

9. If the U.S.S.R. denies that any act such as those referred to in paragraph 8 was a deliberate act, the U.S. should demand punishment of those guilty of the act, full compensation for the U.S. loss, and the adoption of measures by the U.S.S.R. to prevent a recurrence of such acts.

10. If the U.S.S.R. accepts responsibility for acts which may result in the further loss of U.S. planes, an immediate and full report should be made to Washington and necessary preparatory steps should be taken to put defensive measures into effect in the event that instructions to do so are sent from Washington. The U.S. Commander in Berlin should assume that there exists a grave risk of imminent war.

11. If there are repeated acts which result in the loss of U.S. planes and which the U.S.S.R. may claim to be accidental, the course of action outlined in paragraphs 8 and 9 should be followed and, in addition, an immediate report should be made to Washington outlining practicable defense action that might be taken against the U.S.S.R. forces within or over the air corridor and requesting instructions with respect to putting these defense measures into effect.

12. The airlift operation should be continued in spite of the interference envisaged in this paper, pending a further review of the situation by the National Security Council.

13. The U.S. should continue to work in closest cooperation with the U.K. and France and should seek their fullest support in all action to overcome interference with the airlift.

14. The U.S. should keep the U.N. fully informed regarding all incidents and developments in connection with the operation of the airlift.1

1 The National Security Council considered this paper October 7, 14, and 21. At the meeting on the 14th it recommended that the President add 66 more C–54’s to the airlift and that steps be taken to secure aviation petroleum products and personnel for the increase. On October 22 the President approved and authorized these recommendations (Executive Secretariat Files).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–3048: Telegram

[Document 672]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 1

top secret
us urgent Washington, October 2, 1948—2 p. m.

3891. For Bohlen. We all agree that reservation in final para of our last note2 to Soviets entitles us to take necessary measures to maintain our position in Berlin (Moscow’s 417 to Paris3 ). On the other hand we have distinct reservations regarding several specific enumerated points in Moscow message since we feel that until Berlin question is clarified in UN we should refrain from actions which might be considered provocative in character. In our opinion our future actions in Berlin should be confined to those which are immediately required for maintenance our position there.

We understand point 1 is now under discussion between Berlin and interdepartmental technical committee here and we are confident that US military governor has given adequate consideration to points 2 and 4 in light of present needs. We look with disfavor on formal establishment now of 3 power Kommandatura (point 3) since we believe that necessary coordination of control can be undertaken informally for the time being. Re point 5 we strongly advise against any direct action now interfering with Berlin radio station since this would be sure to provoke violent Soviet action. Re last point we do not exclude future arrests US zone Communist leaders by way of reprisal for arrest of Berlin democratic leaders but we consider this should be undertaken on basis presentation of legal case against US zone Communists and after checking with Washington, giving however the US military commander authority to deal on the ground with situations of the character which must be handled promptly.

Lovett

1 Repeated to London as 3833, Moscow as 1197, and Berlin as 1688.

2 The reference here is to the note of September 26, p. 1187 [Pg. 1187 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667].

3 Same as telegram 2198, September 30, p. 1197 [Pg. 1197 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670].

The Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union (Molotov) to the United States Chargé (Kohler) [Translation]

[Document 673]

The Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union (Molotov) to the United States Chargé (Kohler)1

Moscow, October 3, 1948.

Mr. Chargé d’affaires: I have the honor to communicate to you, with a request to bring to the attention of the Government of USA, the following answer of the Soviet Government to the note of the Government of the USA of the 26th September2 this year.

1. The Government of the USSR has familiarized itself with the note of the Governments of the USA, Great Britain and France of the 26th September of this year and considers it necessary to state that the responsibility for the situation which has arisen in Berlin rests entirely on the governments of the Three Powers. The very question of the situation in Berlin did not exist before the Governments of the USA, Great Britain and France proceeded to carry through a separate monetary reform in the Western zones of Germany and in the three sectors of Berlin. At the same time it is well known that the aforementioned separate monetary reform was only one of the first and particularly far reaching undertakings for carrying through the policy of dismembering Germany which placed the Western zones of Germany outside the control of the Four Powers. The policy of the dismemberment of Germany was begun by the Government of the US together with the Government of Great Britain by the separate economic unification of the American and British zones of occupation of Germany in 1946, notwithstanding the agreements of the powers on the anti-Hitlerite coalition at the Potsdam conference on the German question. This was a gross infraction also of one agreement concluded earlier between the USSR, USA, Great Britain and France on joint control by the Four Powers in relation to occupied Germany. At that time they justified this on economic grounds and argued that the unification of the two zones would lead neither to the dismemberment of Germany nor to the disruption of the policy of demilitarization and democratization of Germany agreed on between the Four Powers. Actually, the carrying through of this policy of the Three Powers in the Western section of Germany cut off from the rest of Germany contributes increasingly to the strengthening of the influence of anti-democratic and Nazi elements on whom lies the responsibility for the former aggressive policy of the German imperialists and who have not given up their revanchist attempts which are a threat not only to neighboring countries but to the security of the peoples of the whole of Europe. Recently, especially in connection with the setting up of the Marshall Plan there has been created a real danger of the restoration of the military-economic potential in the Western section of Germany, a fact which violates the Potsdam agreement of the Powers and is in opposition to the interests of all peace-loving countries.

From that time the carrying through of this policy of the US, Great Britain and France has gone so far that in the spring of this year at the London conferences of the three Western Powers with the participation of Benelux a plan was adopted for the creation of a west German state separated from the rest of Germany and placed outside the control of the Four Powers. Next in line has been placed the creation of a government for Western Germany. This position of the three Western Powers will lead to the carrying into effect of the political and economic dismemberment of Germany with all its dangerous consequences.

With the purpose of preparing for carrying out the plan of a final dismemberment of Germany in June of this year a separate monetary reform was introduced in the American, British and French zones of occupation in Germany and in the three sectors of Berlin where special money—the Western mark B was introduced. Had it not been for the introduction of a separate monetary reform which in respect of monetary financial relationships dismembered not only Germany but also Berlin, situated in the center of the Soviet zone, no question of the situation in Berlin would have existed generally speaking, as it actually did not exist before June of this year, that is, before the monetary reform carried through by the three Western Powers on a separate basis.

Such a position compelled the Soviet command to permit the issue of the German mark of the Soviet zone and along with it to carry out those transport restrictions without which, in view of the presence of different currencies in different sections of Gem any and Berlin, it was impossible to protect the interests of the German population and secure the normal economic life of the Soviet zone and especially of Berlin from disorganization. This indicates that but for the separate monetary reforms which violated the agreement of the Four Powers and created the danger of disorganization of the whole economic life in the Soviet zone and in Berlin there would have been no necessity for the above mentioned transport restrictions which represent precautionary defensive measures of the Soviet Government against the aggressive actions of the three governments.

The governments of the Three Powers continue to make declarations about their rights in relation to the administration of Berlin based on the well known agreements of the Four Powers on joint administration of Germany and Berlin. But the right to the administration by the Four Powers of Berlin which is situated in the center of the Soviet zone of occupation has meaning only in the event that Germany is recognized as a single state and Berlin as its capital. Inasmuch, however, as the three governments have separated Western Germany from Eastern Germany and are creating there a separate state, the right to the administration of Berlin on the part of these governments loses its meaning. The USA, Great Britain and France by their separate actions in the Western zones of Germany and in the three sectors of Berlin have destroyed the system of quadripartite administration both in Germany and in Berlin, and by the same act have done away with the legal basis which guaranteed them the right to a share in the administration of Berlin. However, the Soviet Government did not object to the presence in Berlin of the occupation troops of the Three Powers, a fact which Premier Stalin also confirmed at the time of his meeting with the representatives of the USA, Great Britain and France on the second of August.

Nevertheless when two months ago the Governments of the US, Great Britain and France put forward the proposal of working out jointly measures for the regulation of the situation in Berlin, the Government of the USSR agreed to this proposal. The talks which took place after this in Moscow and Berlin found incorrect expression in the note of the Government of the USA of the 26th of September, which make it necessary to dwell in greater detail on the factual side of the matter.

2. At the time of the talks which began in Moscow, Premier J. V. Stalin on the second of August made the following proposals to the representatives of the US, Great Britain and France: (a) The Soviet Command abolishes the transport limitations introduced recently between Berlin and the Western zones;

(b) Simultaneously with this in Berlin there will be introduced as the sole currency the German mark of the Soviet zone while the Western mark B will be withdrawn from circulation in Berlin.

In addition Premier J. V. Stalin expressed his insistent desire that the Governments of the USA, Great Britain, and France defer the fulfillment of the London decisions regarding the creation of a Government of the Western part of Germany until such times as the representatives of the USSR, the USA, Great Britain and France could meet for discussion of the question of Germany as a whole. These questions were the subject of subsequent and frequent discussions in the meetings of Premier J. V. Stalin and Minister of Foreign Affairs V. M. Molotov with the representatives of the Three Powers.3

As a result of the talks which took place with the representatives of the above-mentioned Three Powers in Moscow on 30 August an agreement was reached regarding the following directive for the four military commanders of the occupation forces in Berlin: “The Governments of France, the UK, the USA and the USSR have decided that subject to agreement being reached among the four military governors in Berlin for their practical implementation, the following steps shall be taken simultaneously: “(A) Restrictions on communications, transport and commerce between Berlin and the Western Zones and on goods traffic to and from the Soviet Zone of Germany which have recently been imposed shall be lifted;

“(B) The German mark of the Soviet Zone shall be introduced as the sole currency for Berlin, and the western mark B shall be withdrawn from circulation in Berlin.

“In connection with the above, you are instructed to consult together with your colleagues so as to make, in the shortest time possible, the detailed arrangements necessary for the discussion of these decisions, and to inform your government not later than September 7 of the results of your discussions, including the exact date on which the measures under A and B above can be brought into effect. The four military governors will work out arrangements involved in the introduction of the German mark of the Soviet Zone in Berlin.

“The arrangement relating to the currency changeover and to the continued provision and use in Berlin of the German mark of the Soviet Zone shall ensure: “(A) No discrimination or action against holders of western marks ‘B’ in connection with the exchange of those western marks issued in Berlin. These shall be accepted for exchange for German marks of the Soviet Zone at the rate of one for one;

“(B) Equal treatment as to currency and provision of fully accessible banking and credit facilities throughout all sectors of Berlin. The four military governors are charged with providing adequate safeguards to prevent the use in Berlin of the German mark of the Soviet Zone from leading to disorganizing the currency circulation or disrupting the stability of currency in Soviet Zone;

“(C) A satisfactory basis for trade between Berlin and third countries and the western zones of Germany. Modification of this agreed basis to be made only by agreement among the four military governors;

“(D) The provision of sufficient currency for budgetary purposes and for occupation costs, reduced to the greatest extent possible, and also the balancing of the Berlin budget.

“The regulation of currency circulation in Berlin is to be undertaken by the German Bank of Emission of the Soviet Zone through the medium of the credit establishments operating at present in Berlin.

“A financial commission of representatives of the four military governors shall be set up to control the practical implementation of the financial arrangements indicated above, involved in the introduction and circulation of a single currency in Berlin.”

The note of the USA, Great Britain and France of the 26th of September does not contain the text of the above-mentioned agreed directive of the four governors to the military governors in Berlin. The contents of this directive and the statements of Premier Stalin are greatly distorted in the note of the three governments.

It is sufficient to indicate that in the agreed directive of the four governments despatched to the Military Governors in Berlin, as is evident from its text, the functions of control by the quadripartite Finance Commission were clearly indicated in relation to the financial measures connected with the introduction and circulation of a single currency in Berlin, that is, the German mark of the Soviet Zone. In this connection, it is definitely stated in the directive that a quadripartite finance control must be set up for the introduction and circulation of a single currency in Berlin, but nowhere is it stated that this concerns also the issuing of the above-mentioned currency, inasmuch as this might lead to the interference of the Three Powers in the regulation of the monetary circulation in the whole Soviet Zone. It goes without saying that for the issuance of the German mark of the Soviet Zone, responsibility cannot be borne by anyone other than the Soviet command, Which is responsible for (the issuance of this currency by the German Bank of Emission of the Soviet Zone since the whole economic life of the zone depends upon the amount of money in circulation. Just as in the Western Zone the issue of money into circulation is entirely subject to the control of the occupying powers of these zones, so in the Soviet Zone the issue of money must be under the control only of the Soviet command. Meanwhile, at the talks in Berlin the military chiefs of the Western Zones demanded the setting up of control by the Three Powers over the issuance of money in the whole Soviet Zone and by this very fact sought to impose their control over the whole economic life of the Soviet Zone, a condition with which the representatives of the Soviet Union could not agree.

In spite of the assertion of the note of the three governments of September 26, the text of the agreed directive to the four Military Governors does not provide for Four-Power control over the issue of the German mark of the Soviet Zone especially for Berlin, as this was not contained in the statements of Premier Stalin during the preliminary discussion of this directive. The Soviet Government wholly rejects such incorrect assertions which have the aim of concealing the repudiation by the governments of the USA, Great Britain and France of the directive to the Military Governors, agreed between the Four Powers. The attempts to contrast the position of the Soviet Military Commander in Berlin with the position of the Soviet Government as expressed in the directive agreed between the four governments, were rejected by the Soviet Government in its note of September 18.4

The Soviet Government has adhered strictly to the agreed directive of August 30, providing, as simultaneous measures, for the removal of transportation restrictions between Berlin and the Western Zones and the introduction of the German mark of the Soviet Zone as the sole currency in Berlin with the establishment of Four-Power control over the financial measures in Berlin indicated in the directive. Since this directive, in respect of monetary-financial relations, establishes an identical situation and identical opportunities for all four sectors of Berlin, the Soviet Government regards this directive as a satisfactory basis for agreement between the Four Powers.

As concerns trade between Berlin and the Western Zones and third countries, the Soviet Government, as is known, has expressed agreement with the corresponding proposals of the three governments, and consequently no differences exist on this question.

There remained undecided the question of the establishment of control over the transport of commercial cargoes and passengers along the air routes between Berlin and the Western Zones. With the existence of two different currencies in the western and eastern parts of Germany, the necessity of guarantees, for the Soviet Command, with regard to the inadmissibility of the use of air transport for illegal currency and trade operations are perfectly evident. This was acknowledged unanimously during the meeting with Molotov on September 18 by the representatives of the USA, Great Britain and France. In this connection, the US representative declares: “It is completely understandable that the Soviet Government desires to have certain guarantees against the use of air transport for illegal currency transactions or black market operations. Satisfactory guarantees of this kind might be easily provided.”5 If the Government of the Three Powers consider this statement correct, then the Soviet Government considers it fully possible to settle the present question on a mutually acceptable basis.

Thus, with regard to this question as well, the differences can be overcome if there is a desire to achieve an agreement satisfying all Four Powers.

The negotiations on the Berlin question provided an opportunity for achieving an agreement of the Four Powers on a mutually satisfactory basis if the Governments of the USA, Great Britain and France had not put forward claims incompatible with the rights of the USSR in the Soviet Zone of occupation in Germany. The negotiations were broken off, in spite of the insignificance of the remaining differences because the Governments of the USA, Great Britain and France refused to fulfill the directive to the Military Governors, agreed between the Four Powers.

3. In the negotiations between Stalin and Molotov with the representatives of the Three Powers in Moscow in August, not only the Berlin question but also the question of Germany as a whole was discussed. In this connection, on August 27 agreement was reached with regard to the following text of the communiqué which was to be published after the conclusion of the negotiations: “The four governments have also agreed that in addition to meetings of the four Military Governors, meetings among representatives of the four governments, in the form of the Council of Foreign Ministers or other conferences of representatives of the Four Powers, shall be held in the near future to discuss: “1. Any outstanding questions concerning Berlin, and

“2. Any other outstanding problems affecting Germany as a whole.”

There remained unagreed, however, the final part of this communiqué which was to contain the reply of the Governments of the USA, Great Britain and France to the desire of the Soviet Government to defer the execution of the London decisions with regard to the establishment of the Government of the western part of Germany until the representatives of the USSR, the USA, Great Britain and France could meet to discuss the question of Germany as a whole. In this connection, the Soviet Government received an assurance from the representatives of the Three Powers that the London decisions do not exclude the possibility of agreement between the four governments concerning the establishment of a united government for all Germany.6

All this shows that the Governments of the Three Powers could not but recognize the existence of a close connection between the question of Berlin and the question of Germany as a whole. This means at the same time that the decision of the question of Germany, including the Berlin question, must be based on the fulfillment of decisions agreed between the Four Powers and, above all, on the fulfillment of the Potsdam Agreement and the agreement of the Four Powers concerning joint control with regard to Germany.

Since the Governments of the USA, Great Britain and France have made serious violations of the Potsdam Agreement and other agreements between the Four Powers on the German question, they bear responsibility both for the situation which has been created in Germany and in Berlin. These three governments have violated the mechanism of Four-Power control in Germany and in Berlin. They have completely withdrawn the three western zones of Germany from under Four-Power control, violating their obligations. In Berlin, which is located in the center of the Soviet Zone, the three governments are trying to establish a privileged position for themselves, demanding the preservation of rights based on those Four-Power agreements which they themselves have scorned and nullified. The false publicity which they have raised around the “blockade of Berlin” and the insistence on the immediate removal of transport restrictions can mean only a desire to retain the special currency, arbitrarily introduced by them, in Berlin and to free their hands for the uncontrolled import and export of goods, as a result of which Berlin would be converted into a center of speculation in currency and goods, which cannot but lead to the disorganization of the entire economic life in the Soviet Zone. Agreement on the removal of transport restrictions and on the simultaneous introduction of a unified currency in Berlin was not reached in view of the refusal of the three governments to come to terms on the guarantees necessary to prevent disorganization of economic life in the Soviet Zone, and now these governments want to divest themselves of responsibility for disrupting the negotiations. Moreover, under the pretext of protecting their rights in Berlin, the governments of the USA, Great Britain and France are trying, in fact, to govern, in respect of monetary-financial relations, also the Soviet Zone of occupation in Germany in order thus to deprive the USSR of its legal rights in this part of Germany and, in the final analysis, to dislodge the USSR therefrom.

4. Having broken off negotiations, the Governments of the USA, Great Britain and France have been resorting to every kind of unfounded and absurd accusation with regard to the USSR.

By their note of September 26, the Governments of the Three Powers are helping in every way to exaggerate the publicity around the question of the so-called “blockade of Berlin,” although no “blockade of Berlin” exists in reality. Statements about the threat of hunger and epidemics in Berlin are completely unfounded and are a false usage of propaganda. There are adequate supplies of food in Berlin. Measures have already been undertaken by the Soviet Government to provide the people of Berlin with all necessities. Neither is anything threatening the supply of the occupation troops.

The so-called “blockade of Berlin” refers to the transport restrictions, imposed by the Soviet Command to protect the interests of the people and to protect the economic life of the Soviet Zone from disorganization and collapse. It is impossible to dispense with these protective measures as long as the question of the introduction of a single currency in Berlin is unsettled, the necessity of which was recognized by the Governments of the Three Powers. Publicity about this question is needed by those who are trying to excite, as much as possible, a feeling of alarm, anxiety and war hysteria, and not by those who are seeking effective regulation of the situation Berlin.

The note of the Governments of the Three Powers contains unfounded statements that the Soviet authorities in Berlin allegedly have permitted attempts by a minimum of the people of Berlin forcibly to overthrow the city administration of Berlin. However, the Soviet authorities in Berlin have had firm instructions from the Soviet Government, in spite of the dissatisfaction among the people of Berlin with the situation which has been created, to guarantee peaceful conditions for the work of the local Berlin organs, which was confirmed by Molotov on August 30 during a meeting with the representatives of the Three Governments. The Soviet Command unfailingly adhered to these instructions of the Soviet Government, while disorders, bringing disquiet to Berlin life, took place in that part of Berlin which is not under the control of the Soviet Command and for which the military authorities of the three other powers are responsible.

It is clear from all this that the statement of the Governments of the USA, Great Britain and France that a situation has been created in Berlin, representing a threat to international peace and security, has no foundation whatsoever. Such statements cannot distract attention from the separate and anti-democratic policy which is being conducted in Western Germany, and which is converting it into an obedient tool of the aggressive plans of a certain group of the Great Powers. It is also impossible to deny the fact that if anyone bears responsibility for the present situation in Berlin, then it is precisely the Governments of the Three Powers, which broke off the negotiations for regulating the situation in Berlin. In this connection, the Governments of the USA, Great Britain and France have ignored their obligations to refer disputed questions on Germany and Berlin to the Council of Foreign Ministers, whose competence, as is known, includes the regulation of such matters.

5. Inasmuch as in the note of September 26 on the situation in Berlin the Governments of the USA, Great Britain and France announce that they are submitting the question of the situation in Berlin for review by the Security Council of the UN, the Government of the USSR considers it necessary to make the following declaration: 1. The question of the situation in Berlin is closely connected with the question of Germany as a whole, of the breaking up of Germany, the creation of a separate government in Western Germany and in accordance with Article 107 of the Charter of the UN is subject to the decision of the three governments which bear the responsibility for the occupation of Germany, and is not subject to submission to the SC.

2. The declaration of the Government of the US to the effect that a situation has been created which allegedly threatens international peace and security does not correspond to the actual situation, and is no more than a means of pressure and an attempt to use the organization of the UN for the achievement of its aggressive aims.

3. The Soviet Government proposes to recognize the agreed directive of August 30 to the military commanders as an agreement between the Governments of the USSR, USA, Great Britain, and France on the basis of which the situation in Berlin must be regulated.

4. The Soviet Government proposes to call a Council of Foreign Ministers in order to review the question of the situation in Berlin and also the question of Germany as a whole in accordance with the Potsdam Agreement of the Four Powers.

V. Molotov

1 The source texts for this note are telegrams 2234, October 3, and 2235–6, October 4, from Moscow, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–348 and 448). This text should be compared with the text in The Soviet Union and the Berlin Question, pp. 73–84 for minor textual differences. A copy of the original Russian note, delivered to Embassy Moscow, was transmitted in despatch 723, October 5, from Moscow, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–548). The Russian text was also printed in Pravda, October 4, Izvestia, October 5, and in Vneshniaia Politika Sovietskogo Soiuza, 1948 God, Chast’ II, pp. 70–82.

2  Ante, p. 1187 [Pg. 1187 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667].

3 For Smith’s record of the August 2 meeting with Stalin and Molotov, see telegram 1508, August 3, p. 999 [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 594].

4  Ante, p. 1162 [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659].

5 For Smith’s report on this meeting, see telegram 2034, September 18, from Moscow, p. 1166 [Pg. 1166 is part of Doc. 660].

6 For Smith’s record of this meeting, see telegram 1777, August 27, from Moscow, p. 1088 [Pg. 1088 is part of Doc. 630].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Paris 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–348: Telegram

[Document 674]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Paris

confidential
us urgent
niact Washington, October 3, 1948—11 p. m.

3893. For Bohlen from Lovett and Kennan.

1. In the summary from Moscow of conclusions Molotov’s 12 page note of Oct 3,1 assume you have spotted big fishhook in paragraph number 3 relating to August 30 directive to military governors. It is obvious they propose Berlin be dealt with under directive of August 30 while retaining for themselves the provisions of the Potsdam Agreement.

2. Furthermore, with respect Article 107 we note particularly that language relates to action “taken or authorized as a result of that war by the governments having responsibility for such action”. The action of which we complain (the illegal blockade) has clearly not been taken or authorized as result of that war.

3. As to Council Foreign Ministers meeting Soviets are well aware and amply forewarned none of us could participate while blockade in existence. Only by withdrawal of surface transport restrictions will one important part of threat to peace be removed, thus permitting consideration by CFM. The threat to peace emanates solely from their acts, therefore they can remove threat by their own actions. Their astonishingly transparent answer leaves us mildly nauseated as result of eleventh hour double talk. They appear to be really worried.2 [Lovett and Kennan.]

Lovett

1  Supra.

2  In an undated memorandum to Jessup, Reinhardt, the Chief of the Division of Eastern European Affairs, had outlined the essence and intent of the Soviet note as follows: “1. To undercut the presentation of our case before the Security Council by representing the Soviet position in the Berlin question as a wholly reasonable one, by denying the existence of any serious obstacles to a settlement other than the bad faith and sinister purposes of the Western Powers, thereby denying the existence of a threat to the peace, and by refusing to acknowledge the competence of the Security Council to deal with the question.

“2. To obtain recognition of the August 30 directive in its Soviet interpretation as an international commitment binding upon the Western Powers and thus to advance the Soviet position with the purpose of creating an improved base from which to conduct any further negotiations.

“3. To force consideration of the Berlin question in the Council of Foreign Ministers and thereby tie any discussion of the Berlin Problem to a consideration of German problems in general.

“Far from indicating any Soviet tendency to withdraw from its past demands, the terms of the note are even less acceptable than those of previous Soviet communications on the subject. To accept them would be to surrender completely what has been since the beginning the basic tenet of our approach to the problem, namely, our refusal under the duress of the Berlin blockade to discuss any German questions other than those immediately concerned with the removal of the blockade itself.” (501.BC/10–2848)

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–448

[Document 675]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen)

top secret [Paris,] October 4, 1948.

Participants: The Secretary

Ambassador Caffery

Mr. Bohlen

Mr. Ernest Bevin

Mr. Frank Roberts

The Secretary and Mr. Bevin briefly discussed the Soviet note1 delivered the night before in Washington [Moscow] on the Berlin situation, the full text of which, however, they had not received. They were both in agreement that the Soviet proposals contained in this note were totally unsatisfactory and that neither Government would accept a meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers until the blockade was lifted nor would they agree to resume direct discussions on the basis of the August 30 directive2 in view of the interpretation which the recent exchanges with the Soviet Government had placed upon that directive. The Secretary emphasized that he felt the point of the August 30 directive was the most dangerous point in the Soviet note because there might be certain members of the Security Council who would be prepared to recommend a resumption of discussions on that basis. He said he thought the Soviet proposal was a smart propaganda move obviously designed to influence the discussions in the Security Council. The Secretary added that he thought we should make it plain at some point in the Security Council discussion that we were prepared to hold a CFM immediately provided the blockade was lifted in advance.

Mr. Bevin wondered whether that did not mean that we would go back to a fruitless discussion on the basis of Potsdam as the Soviets proposed. He felt that we could not retreat back to Potsdam and in any way impair what we had done in Western Germany. He completely agreed, however, with the Secretary that the new Soviet note in so far as they had seen it was little more than a repetition of the previous Soviet position.

Mr. Bevin, in reply to an inquiry from the Secretary, stated that he thought that there was some danger in an unwillingness on our part to discuss the question of Germany once the blockade was lifted on the basis of Potsdam; to take that position would be to offer an opportunity for the Soviets to confirm their propaganda that, in effect, we have determined upon a policy of splitting Germany.

The Secretary briefly referred to the difficulties which might be encountered because of the Argentine desire to step down from the presidency for which there was no precedent but told Mr. Bevin that we were attempting to get the Argentines to change their mind and to take the presidency.

C[harles] E. B[ohlen]

1  Ante, p. 1201 [Pg. 1201 includes portions of Doc. 672 and Doc. 673].

2 The reference here is to the Directive to the Military Governors in Berlin, August 30, p. 1092 [Pg. 1092 includes portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632].

Editorial Note [Document 676]

Editorial Note

On October 4 the Berlin question was placed on the provisional agenda of the Security Council. The United States, as one of the parties directly connected with the question, then relinquished the post of President of the Council to Argentina. The provisional agenda was debated at meetings 361 and 362 (October 4 and 5) of the Security Council, with the Soviet Union objecting to the inclusion of the Berlin question on the grounds that it did not fall within the competence of the Security Council and should be settled by direct negotiations among the Governments responsible. The United States, supported by the United Kingdom and France, maintained on the other hand that the Soviet blockade of Berlin constituted a threat to international peace, and therefore fell within the competence of the Security Council. On October 5, the Security Council by a vote of 9 to 2 decided to place the Berlin question on its agenda. Immediately after this decision the representatives of the Soviet Union and the Ukrainian SSR announced that their countries would take no part in the discussion of the question. For the records of the discussions concerning the inclusion of the Berlin question on the agenda of the Security Council, see United Nations, Official Records of the Security Council, Third Year, Nos. 113 and 114.

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–448: Telegram

[Document 677]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin 1

top secret
us urgent Washington, October 5, 1948—6 p. m.

1691. Personal for Murphy (Eyes Only) from Saltzman. Refer urtel 2436 October 4 and Paris 601 October 2 and urtel 723 October 3 to Paris.2 Assume you have seen War 89446 September 18 Clay from Draper 3 and War 90132 September 304 subject introduction western B mark Berlin as sole legal tender. Technical Committee composed of Treasury, State, Army members set up jointly by Roy all and Lovett under chairmanship Frank Southard, Treasury, to advise on technical financial aspects Berlin and Moscow negotiations. After the breakdown in Moscow negotiations Technical Committee advised that the western B mark should be established as the sole legal tender in the western sectors of Berlin and that the Soviet mark should not be allowed to maintain its de facto legal tender status for any purpose in the western sectors of Berlin. It recommended, however, barring circulation of Soviet mark in western sectors only if Soviets ban commercial intercourse and the movement of persons among the sectors.

The Department accepted these recommendations but recognized the need of timing any change in the status of the Soviet Zone mark in the western sectors of Berlin so as not to prejudice U.S., U.K. and French case before United Nations. With this in mind General Clay was authorized on September 30 to work out arrangements with the British and French in Berlin for protecting currency position in western sectors including the establishment of western currency as sole legal tender. Clay has been instructed to submit proposed program to Washington and has been informed that Department desires to coordinate any action with delegation in Paris.

It is the desire of the Department that Clay’s proposal to British-French colleagues be submitted to Washington as well as British and French reaction.

Although the timing of any new move on our part in Berlin currency field is important it is nevertheless urgent that financial and economic life in Berlin not be permitted to deteriorate further.5

Repeated to Paris. [Saltzman.]

Lovett

1 Repeated to Paris as 3915.

2 None printed.

3 Not printed.

4 Not printed; in it Draper authorized Clay to proceed with the British and French on the measures necessary to protect the western currency position in Berlin, including the introduction of the western mark as sole legal currency in the western sectors of the city. Before initiating any change Clay was to clear his plan with Washington to avoid any chance of embarrassing the Western powers in their presentation of the Berlin case at the Security Council. (Department of Defense Files)

5 In telegram 2455, October 6, from Berlin, not printed, Murphy reported that Clay, after a telecon with the Department of the Army, felt he was not under instruction to proceed on the establishment of the western currency in Berlin and preferred to let the matter ride temporarily (740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–648).

Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen) to the Secretary of State 501.BC/10–848

[Document 678]

Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen) to the Secretary of State 1

top secret Paris, October 8, 1948.

You may care to discuss with Lovett, Smith and Kennan the following brief analysis of the problems we will encounter in the Berlin case before the Security Council which is written not from the point of view of the procedures in the Council or tactics to be followed there but rather from the point of view of the possible dangers to our position in Berlin.

As in all international conferences and bodies there is already visible the tendency among the members of the Security Council to regard as a solution of the problem a formula which can be got through the Security Council—in other words, to divorce the actual discussions and maneuverings in the Security Council from the realities of the problem itself. The danger in this tendency is obvious in that it may produce a so-called solution or formula which would permit an agreement in the Council but would be totally unworkable and even catastrophic on the spot.

As I see it, there is a visible contradiction which may grow to greater proportions in the position of the three Western Powers. We have brought the case to the Security Council on the grounds that the Soviet actions constitute a threat to the peace yet the French and, it is to be expected, the neutral powers on the Council are tending to regard our approach as a request of the Council to use its conciliatory powers to bring the two parties to a dispute together. The French position, as expressed by Parodi, is clearly that; they take the view that the Moscow negotiations broke down at a point when the two parties were not very far apart and that the Security Council therefore might close this slight gap and “solve the question”. Parodi makes a considerable point of the fact that before the Security Council we cannot appear less anxious to achieve a pacific settlement than we were a month ago in Moscow when we were willing to accept a simultaneous lifting of the blockade and the introduction of the Soviet mark under four-power control as the sole currency in Berlin. We have developed with him to the full all the arguments against this approach, pointing out that the three Governments have formally taken the position in their final notes and in the statements before the Council that we would not negotiate as long as the blockade remains. The basis of course of the French position is their fear of facing up to consequences of treating the Soviet position as it deserves.

My concern is that the Russians will immediately detect the evidence of weakness which the approach of conciliation will reveal and will exploit it to the full. The end result might well be that neutral members in the Security Council will come up with some suggestion which will in effect mean the resumption of negotiations on the basis of the August 30 directive2 as the Soviet note of October 33 proposes plus possibly some additional Soviet assurances as to good behavior. The British and possibly even ourselves might be left alone in our position against any such proposition. We will of course do everything we can to prevent the worst from developing along those lines but in view of the French attitude I am not entirely sure that we will be steadily successful.

The one element, and a very important one, is the fact that the Soviets will very probably veto any recommendation of the Security Council. But a weak resolution calling on the parties to compose their seemingly slight differences on the technical aspects of the Berlin matter would be a great propaganda victory for them which they can use to very good effect and as the new basis for any new negotiations on the subject.

Basically the attitude that concerns me is that the French and the neutral members of the Council, instead of, as Chapter VII would imply, taking the attitude that the Russians are violating the Charter in this respect before the bar of the Security Council, are, while in full agreement with the justice of our case, approaching it merely as another party to the dispute with rights and wrongs on both sides. We all desire a solution, and no one is seeking to promote a situation leading to war but one of our difficulties is to convince the French and the neutral members that the way to arrive at a solution that would not be a sellout with the Russians, in circumstances of this character is to start with a very inflexible and nonconciliatory attitude. To begin with conciliation is to invite inflexibility on their part.

I am in entire agreement with the Department’s 39514 in that we should not enter into too much detail concerning the Berlin affair but should adopt a simpler version.

From the point of view of political realism there is a curious paradox in the present position. While we want public opinion of course to support the justice of our position and its corollary, the illegality of the Russian actions, the more we prove our case the stronger the fears of the European powers become and the greater their tendency to shrink from the logic of the very justice of the Western position.

Charles E. Bohlen

1 The source text is initialled by the Secretary of State.

2 See telegram 1776, August 27, from Moscow, p. 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629] and footnote 3 thereto.

3  Ante, p. 1201 [Pg. 1201 includes portions of Doc. 672 and Doc. 673].

4 Same as telegram 1691, October 5, to Berline, p. 1213 [Pg. 1213 includes portions of Doc. 676 and Doc. 677].

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Acting Secretary of State 501.BC/10–1148: Telegram

[Document 679]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Acting Secretary of State

top secret
urgent Paris, October 11, 1948—6 p. m.

Delga 280. For Lovett’s Eyes Only. Bramuglia presented representatives UK, US and France with following seven questions at separate meetings with each of them at which the answers were not discussed.1

At meeting at Quai d’Orsay, October 10, representatives of three powers agreed to answer the questions in memorandum form set forth below. This memorandum was delivered to Bramuglia by Cadogan Sunday afternoon.

List of questions and answering memorandum follow: “1. Could you suggest some idea as to a denomination such as ‘opening of land corridor’ or another of a similar nature, with some complementary specifications?

“2. What suggestions could you make as to the lifting of the so-called ‘blockade’ in order to carry out a meeting of the four ministers?

“3. What do you think about fixing a certain date to carry out simultaneously the lifting of the so-called ‘blockade’ and a meeting of the four ministers?

“4. What suggestions could you offer about a simultaneous lifting of the so-called ‘blockade’ with some other measure or [sic] financial character or of any other nature, morally compensatory, together with fixing a certain unterior [sic] date to carry out a meeting of the four ministers?

“5. Do you agree with the suggestion that the meeting of four ministers spoken of in the three prior questions, should have an ‘agenda’ fixed ‘a priori’?

“6. What do you think about a meeting of representatives of the four parties, appointed ‘ad-hoc’ to solve the exsting difficulties, prior to the one of four ministers?

“7. What other suggestions could you offer?”

Memorandum

“The representatives on the Security Council of the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, and France have considered the questions informally submitted to them by Senor Bramuglia. They think it would be convenient to give their replies the form of the attached memorandum.

“As regards paragraph 4 of the attached memorandum, it is understood that the three governments are ready to hold a meeting of the Council Foreign Ministers as soon as the restrictions on communications, transport and commerce between Berlin and the western zones have been removed. The question of fixing a date for this meeting in itself would present no difficulty. No question regarding Berlin or Germany as a whole will be excluded from the agenda for his [this] meeting which will be decided by the four foreign ministers in the usual manner.

“The representatives on the Security Council of the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom and France believe that in considering any resolution on this question the Security Council would wish to have in mind the following points: “1. The Security Council might recognize that the continuation of restrictions on communications, transport, and commerce between Berlin and the western zones of Germany is an obstacle to any negotiations between the four governments, prevents the settlement of differences between them through the normal channels and is therefore inimical to the maintenance of international peace and security.

“2. The Security Council might take note of the fact that the three western governments have expressed their willingness to enter into negotiations with the Soviet Government on any outstanding questions regarding Berlin and any other outstanding problems affecting Germany as a whole in the Council of Foreign Ministers or other conferences of representatives of the four powers, as soon as these restrictions have been removed.

“3. The Security Council might therefore call upon the Government of the Soviet Union to lift the restrictions which have been imposed since March 30, 1948 on communications, transport and commerce between Berlin and the western zones of Germany, and might also call upon the three western governments simultaneously to lift the restrictions recently imposed on transport and commerce to and from the western zones and the Soviet zone of Germany.

“4. The Security Council might also call upon the four governments to make immediately thereafter every effort by negotiation or other peaceful means to settle outstanding questions regarding Berlin and to arrange for a discussion of any other outstanding problems affecting Germany as a whole.”

Repeated to Berlin as 617 for Eyes Only of Clay and Murphy.

Austin

1 The discussion of the Berlin question at the Security Council had begun October 6 at the 363rd and 364th meetings of the Council. For the records of these discussions, see United Nations, Official Records of the Security Council, Third Year, No. 115. The debate was continued October 15.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–1248: Telegram

[Document 680]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 1

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, October 12, 1948—8 p. m.

4003. For Bohlen. In view of the Sov disregard of Aug 30 directive we do not regard ourselves legally bound to revert to its terms. On the other hand the directive as interpreted by the three Western Powers would represent an acceptable solution of the Berlin problem provided the blockade is lifted.

In the event the above approach is used, it would, of course, be necessary to define the expression “as interpreted by the Western Powers”. It appears to us here the best expression of our interpretation of the directive is contained in our aide-mémoire of September 142 and in particular in para 8 of that aide-mémoire.

For your info while we might be willing to resume negotiations on this basis, experience has shown that the directive is not satisfactory as at present drafted. (Delga 2903 ) The technical committee points out further the difficulties evident from the earlier discussions of specifying the needs of Berlin as envisaged by the Western Powers and the protection for the Soviet zone sought by Russia may make it necessary at some stage in the negotiations to consider other possibilities, including the use of a third currency which would not be subject to these limitations. See ourtel 3973.4

Lovett

1 Repeated to Berlin as 1719.

2 For the text of this aide-mémoire, see telegram 1101, September 12, to Moscow, p. 1152 [Pg. 1152 includes portions of Doc. 654 and Doc. 655], and footnote 3 thereto.

3 Not printed; it asked whether the Department still considered the Directive to be a valid basis for the resumption of negotiation on Berlin (740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–1148).

4 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State 501.BC/10–1348: Telegram

[Document 681]

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact Paris, October 13, 1948—10 p. m.

Delga 312. Eyes Only Lovett from Jessup. Following is summary and analysis of developments in Berlin situation here.

The six members of SC not directly involved have been meeting almost daily under Bramuglia’s chairmanship. McNaughton assures us that they take the line that they are not a committee of the Council but are a group of members seeking information and not attempting mediation. Checks with various members of the six confirm impression Bramgulia has steadfastly acted in concert with the other five after consultation and has not gone off on any tangents of his own. Our Delga 280, October 11,1 informed you concerning Bramuglia’s questions to us and the memorandum reply agreed upon by UK, France and US. After receipt and consideration by the six of our memorandum, Bramuglia saw Vishinsky and put to him two points: first, the simultaneous lifting of Soviet and Western Powers restrictions on transport, communications, etc., and, second, possible meeting of the CFM.

Question of simultaneity between lifting the blockade and CFM meeting was not clearly expressed in the second point and we do not know just how Bramuglia presented it. Personally, so far as CFM meeting is concerned, I believe issue of simultaneity is relatively unimportant since we have declared and are prepared to reaffirm willingness for CFM meeting immediately after lifting of blockade. Appropriate formula to this effect could be drafted. Vishinsky indicated reserved position on first point, said second point was satisfactory and then raised currency question. Vishinsky said as personal opinion he thought this might be settled on basis “Molotov proposal”.

Our information on this point came from Urdaneta who is not sufficiently familiar with the problem to be able to identify which “Molotov proposal” was referred to. Vishinsky stated he would have to consult his government and would reply to Bramuglia not later than today. Understand reply just received and the six will discuss it this evening.

We will know its content by morning.2 Reply will be shown to the Three Western Governments with request for comment and the six will then reconsider the situation. Although not yet settled, possibility is at this stage SC would meet and Bramuglia would report on the activities of the six. Presumably Three Western Governments and possibly other members of six would then comment. Probably no resolution would be introduced at that meeting. Members of the six assure us no resolution will be introduced by any of them without prior consultation with us. Cannot now exclude possibility that nature of Vishinsky and our comments might lead to further “seeking information” by the six. But we have been strongly urging desirability prompt SC session to counter Soviet propaganda that SC members accept Soviet theory SC is incompetent. Earliest possible date of next SC meeting would be Saturday, but deferment until Monday not unlikely.

Conversations with members of the six indicate they fundamentally support the position of US–UK–France and when time comes will vote with us. I anticipate possibility six may attempt to draft some resolution which while inherently supporting us would avoid direct language condemning Soviet but would seek to advance possibility Soviet acceptance or acquiescence and lead to further SC consideration.

I feel strongly we would antagonize some of our supporters if any counter measures against Soviet were taken in Berlin before they are satisfied their informal procedures or SC action has reached the limits of possible utility. Unless Vishinsky reply is far better than anticipated, I would expect discussions on some SC resolution in SC next week with possibility vote might not be taken until week after. Sure you appreciate our problem keeping other SC members in line and laying solid foundation for possible eventual action in GA while avoiding any suggestion to Russians that we are weakening on our position. [Jessup.]

Marshall

1  Ante, p. 1216 [Pg. 1216 includes portions of Doc. 678 and Doc. 679].

2  Telegram Delga 327, October 14, from Paris, not printed, transmitted the unofficial text of Vyshinsky’s reply as follows: “1. The SC should remove the question of Berlin from its agenda. 2. The USSR does not accept Point One of the Bramuglia questionnaire of October 11, on the ground that it is contrary to the agreement of the Four Powers prescribing the simultaneity of the two following measures: (A) The USSR on the one hand, and the US, UK, and France on the other, will lift the restrictions placed by the one on communications, transport and commerce between Berlin and the Western Zones of Germany, by the others on the transport and commerce between their zones and the Soviet Zones; (B) Simultaneous with the lifting of these restrictions the German-Soviet mark will be established as the sole currency in circulation in Berlin and the Western mark will be withdrawn from circulation. 3. The question of Berlin ought to be referred to the CFM and there treated in conformity with the agreed directive of August 30, 1948, to the four military commanders. 4. The CFM ought to resolve the problem of Germany as a whole as well as the situation in Berlin in conformity with the Potsdam agreement.” (501.BC/10–1448)

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.00/10–1448: Telegram

[Document 682]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent Berlin, October 14, 1948—9 p. m.

2507. Still unclear today what end results of Magistrate move yesterday to British Sector will be (mytel 2498 October 13 repeated London 725, Paris 772, Moscow 6291 ).

Yesterday’s events were as follows: Magistrat met in ordinary session at 2 p. m. Waldemar Schmidt (SED) recently dismissed head of Magistrate Labor Department who was still technically on leave, entered meeting hall shortly after meeting opened. Friedensburg, who as acting mayor presides over Magistrat, demanded that Schmidt leave on grounds he had been dismissed by City Assembly and, therefore, no longer held office. Schmidt refused, saying he did not recognize dismissal and had no intention of giving up post. Second Deputy Burgomaster Acker (SED) spoke in Schmidt’s behalf, saying dismissal without legal basis and asking that Schmidt be allowed to make statement. Friedensburg again demanded Schmidt leave, however, and when he refused, Friedensburg declared that he could not exercise his authority in City Hall. Meeting was postponed until 3 p. m. when it would reassemble in Landesgesundheitsamt in British Sector. SED members (Acker and City Councillors Luebbe and Schmidt) followed precedent set by SED members of City Assembly when latter moved out of City Hall and did not attend meeting in British Sector.

Reassembled Magistrat continued with business on agenda. It took note of City Assembly’s dismissal of Schmidt and appointed City Councillor Frau Ehlert (CDU) as provisional head of Labor Department until City Assembly elects successor to Schmidt which Magistrat requested Assembly to do as soon as possible. (Frau Ehlert, reportedly a mild, elderly woman was compromise choice after first proposal that SPD member be appointed was rejected by private agreement as being too provocative.)

At 5 p. m. SED held press conference in City Hall presided over by Karl Maron with Schmidt and Luebbe also present. Various lines followed by all three were (a) Schmidt’s dismissal was unconstitutional and hence invalid since decision was taken by meeting in Taberna Academica attended by only three of Assembly factions; (b) his dismissal land expulsion from Magistrat meeting had been mere pretext for carrying out long-prepared plan to move Magistrat to Western Sectors and thus split Berlin; (c) many attending press conference no doubt expected announcement that East Sector Magistrat would now be established, but no such announcement would be made—it was not SED which wanted to split city and SED would combat every tendency to split. Schmidt, who appeared flushed and highly nervous throughout meeting, stated that although he was on leave, he would return to his Magistrat office in City Hall today.

Last night Magistrat’s Press Department announced that Magistrat’s move to British Sector was only “provisional measure” until Schmidt affair was clarified. Friedensburg said it would resume meetings in City Hall as soon as his authority could be exercised there. Meanwhile, he said that Magistrat’s continued administration of all Berlin “does not in any way whatsoever come into question.” Ernst Reuter (SPD) declared that Schmidt’s refusal to relinquish his post left Magistrat no alternative but to move from Soviet Sector where it was unable to carry out Assembly’s decisions. He reiterated that move was only “temporary arrangement” as had been City Assembly’s move several months ago, but remarked it had been demonstrated that such arrangements, under present political conditions, tend to have lasting character. As result of Schmidt’s attitude, Reuter continued, a new Labor Department must be quickly organized as had been done with Food Department (mytel 1913, August 11, repeated London 455, Paris 461, Moscow 3762 ). Through Communists, and occupying power which stands behind them, concluded Reuter, Magistrat is being forced step by step to move all its offices into Western Sectors.

SPD is said to want Magistrat to remain in Western Sectors. As previously reported, SPD leaders—above all Suhr and Reuter—considered move desirable and Schmidt case suitable pretext. Friedensburg (CDU), on other hand, was reluctant to see Schmidt affair prosecuted and thought in any case Magistrat should continue to [meet at?] City Hall as long as physically possible. SPD–CDU dissension on this and other points (mytel 2450 October 6 repeated London 697, Park 738, Moscow 6052 ) seems despite maintenance of some superficial agreement to be developing into all-out contest for political power, primarily between Suhr and Reuter on one hand and Friedensburg on other. Whether or not Magistrat remains in Western Sectors will probably constitute one round in this contest as Friedensburg apparently still hopes it will return to City Hall.

Meanwhile Soviet SED line seems to be one of watchful waiting. Soviet licensed press today is milder than was to be expected and does not even give story of move usual inflammatory treatment. Tagliche Rundschau does headline it under “Magistrat split … Reuter fulfills American instructions”, but Neues Deutschland gives it only tertiary place on front page. Some observers are of opinion Soviets are uneasy over outcome. Also according to reports SED was split over whether Schmidt should attempt to attend yesterday’s meeting of Magistrat, the radical wing being for it, the moderates against. Soviets allegedly blamed radical elements for tense situation and tended to support moderates. Just before meeting it was reported Schmidt had been ordered not to attend meeting but at last moment radicals won out and Schmidt went to meeting twenty minutes late. It is known that between meeting and SED press conference Schmidt and possibly Maron went to Soviet Central Kommandatura with Soviet Liaison officer which may account for Schmidt’s nervousness at press conference and for fact, observed by member my staff, that conference was milder in tone than last one held by Schmidt September 29. (Mytel 2424 September 30, repeated London 680, Paris 705, Moscow 5893 ).

Sent Department 2507; repeated London 728, Paris 778.

Department pass Moscow as Berlin’s 633.

Murphy

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen) to the Deputy United States Representative on the Security Council (Jessup) 501.BC/10–2848

[Document 683]

Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen) to the Deputy United States Representative on the Security Council (Jessup)

secret Paris, October 16, 1948.

The following points concerning the US position on the Berlin matter might be made at this afternoon’s meeting, particularly to Mr. Parodi.1

I. The United States has not and is not seeking a condemnation of Soviet actions in Berlin for its sake alone. In so far as US public opinion is concerned this is completely unnecessary since our people have been very solid in their own condemnation of the Russian actions as have been the public opinions of the democratic countries in general apart from the Communist minority.

Our objective has been and is the removal of the blockade.

The possibility of Security Council condemnation, however, might be a factor in inducing the Soviet Government to alter its position sufficiently to permit a settlement of the Berlin issue.

II. Our objection to the so-called conciliatory approach which carries the implication of concessions on both sides is that it will tend to stiffen rather than to render more reasonable the Soviet attitude.

III. We are not prepared, however, to accept a settlement which in effect involves surrender to the Soviet thesis that we have no rights in Berlin.

IV. In so far as question no. 22 in the Security Council is concerned, we consider it is of vital importance that the real cause of the breakdown of the negotiations be clearly stated, and that it is the conviction on the part of the three Western Powers that the Soviet Government was indeed using the blockade as an instrument of political pressure in order to force the three Western Powers to abandon their rights, duties and obligations as joint occupying powers in the city of Berlin.

It would be inaccurate and dangerous as well to attribute the cause of the breakdown to some difference of technical interpretation concerning currency, trade, inspection, etc.

We went to Moscow in large part to ascertain what purposes the Soviets had in mind in applying these restrictions. The first statement to Stalin of August 2 asked this question and informed the Soviet Government that if it was technical difficulties, they could be remedied; if it was the currency problem, it could be adjusted; and that if it was to bring about negotiations, the restrictions were unnecessary and in themselves created an obstacle to such negotiations. The statement added however that “if the purpose of these measures is an attempt to compel the three Governments to abandon their rights as occupying powers in Berlin, the Soviet Government will understand from what has been stated previously that such an attempt could not be allowed to succeed.”

As long as there was a possibility that these restrictions related to the problems created by the currencies in Berlin, the Western Powers were willing to negotiate. But when it became apparent as the negotiations progressed that the real Soviet intention was the one that Stalin had been informed was totally unacceptable to the Western Powers, the negotiations were obviously doomed to failure.

Let me briefly summarize the reasons why the Western Powers came to this conclusion: 1. Russian assertions during the discussions that we had no juridical rights in Berlin.

2. The refusal of the Russians, despite the appearance of agreement, to accept genuine four-power supervision over the currency of Berlin.

3. The attempts of the Russians to establish Soviet control over trade (which despite concessions in the October 3 note3 has by no means been settled) and over the commercial cargo and passenger traffic in the air corridors (in connection with the latter point, we know what the Soviet purpose is, as was stated by Marshal Sokolovsky, namely, to reduce air traffic in the corridor to the needs of the occupying forces only).

4. The Soviet inspired attempts, following the classic Communist pattern, to disrupt the existing municipal government of Berlin and to have its functions usurped by a Communist minority. This point, although not directly connected with the negotiations, is so important an indication of real Soviet intentions that it should not be neglected in any reply.

Any agreement concerning currency will have to be carried out by the municipal machinery of Berlin even under four-power supervision. If that municipal machinery has already been transformed into a Soviet-controlled entity four-power supervision is meaningless. The same situation would prevail if the municipal machinery of Berlin continued to be split in two as is the case at present.

Finally, the three Governments in their notes of September 22 and and 26/274 to the Soviet Government expressly made the point that technical difficulties were not the cause of the failure of negotiations as the following quotes indicate: 1. Identic notes of September 22 “It is clear that the difficulties that have arisen in the attempts to arrive at practical arrangements which would restore normal conditions in Berlin derive not from technical matters but from a fundamental difference of views between the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom and France and the Soviet Government as to the rights and obligations of the occupying powers in Berlin, their right to have access by air, rail, water and road to Berlin and to participate in the administration of the affairs of the City of Berlin. The blockade imposed by the Soviet authorities together with other of their acts in Berlin are in violation of the rights of the three Western Occupying Powers.”

2. Identic notes of September 26/27 “The issue between the Soviet Government and the Western Occupying Powers is therefore not that of technical difficulties in communications nor that of reaching agreement upon the conditions for the regulation of the currency for Berlin. The issue is that the Soviet Government has clearly shown by its actions that it is attempting by illegal and coercive measures in disregard of its obligations to secure political objectives to which it is not entitled and which it could not achieve by peaceful means.”

3. Foregoing language also incorporated in identical notification from United States, United Kingdom and French Governments to Secretary-General of United Nations, September 29, 1948.

Charles E. Bohlen

1 The reference here is to one of a series of meetings of representatives of the three western powers to coordinate their actions with respect to the discussion of the Berlin question at the Security Council.

2 The reference here is to the second Bramuglia question to the occupying powers in Germany. See Delga 280, October 11, from Paris, p. 1216 [Pg. 1216 includes portions of Doc. 678 and Doc. 679].

3  Ante, p. 1201 [Pg. 1201 includes portions of Doc. 672 and Doc. 673].

4  Ante, p. 1180 [Pg. 1180 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663] and p. 1187 [Pg. 1187 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667].

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Acting Secretary of State 501.BC/10–1648: Telegram

[Document 684]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Acting Secretary of State

top secret Paris, October 16, 1948—9 p. m.

Delga 361. Eyes Only Lovett from Jessup. French are disturbed by their belief that adoption or vetoing of a resolution in SC would mark the end of the road closing all doors. While we agree SC should not rush into resolution state to meet this attitude, we have drafted following memorandum to show possible developments. Memorandum not yet in final form and we have questions on details of it but in view time element send it for your comments. Time schedule is merely illustrative and each successive step would be subject to reconsideration in light developments. Contemplate discussing some such program British and French Monday or Tuesday.

“1. October 19. Meeting of SC at which the three powers will answer the questions of the six.

[“]Note: Consideration of the nature of the replies.

“2. October 21 and 23. Continuation of debate with possible statements by members of the six.

“3. October 25. Further session of SC at which one or more members of the six might introduce a resolution along the lines of the three power draft1 on which the memorandum of October 10 to Bramuglia 2 was based.

“Note: Consideration of the nature of the statements which the three powers might make in talking to the draft resolution, particularly with reference to reaffirmation at the time of assurances regarding the items which the three powers would be prepared to accept once the blockade is lifted, e.g., meeting of the CFM. Consideration should also be given to a possible statement that once the CFM has been able to meet, there would no longer be any reason for the SC to keep matter on agenda.

“4. October 26 or 27. Further meeting of SC to continue debate on the resolution and possibly a vote.

“Note: After the vote on the resolution and the Soviet veto or abstention, declarations by the three powers that they are prepared to act in accordance with the resolution.

“5. October 29. Joint communiqué of the three powers announcing their readiness to participate in CFM meeting in three weeks time, on the assumption that the blockade would be lifted by that date.

“Note: The advantages of this procedure are as follows: “a. It makes the minor concession of announcing a projected CFM meeting outside of the SC to whose jurisdiction the Russians object.

“b. It avoids the development of a feeling on the part of the members of the UN that the whole matter is closed and that no solution is possible. In this connection, it should be considered whether the proposed communiqué of the three powers should not be issued immediately after SC action on the resolution in order to avoid the development of tension during the interval.

“c. It provides an interval, if the Russians are so inclined, for any possible development which might contribute to a solution, recognizing throughout that the three powers are agreed that they will not sit down around a table to resume discussions with the Soviet Union so long as the duress of the blockade is maintained.

“d. It leaves open the possibility of eventual resort to the GA.

“6. Around November 10 invitations might be issued by the French Government to the UK, US, and USSR to attend a meeting of the CFM on November 16. The invitation should contain a carefully phrased statement to the effect that the meeting is predicated on the assumption that the blockade measures will not be in existence at the time the CFM meets.

“Note: It is desirable that the actual invitation should not be issued too long in advance of the meeting in order that in case of a possible flat refusal of the Soviet Union, further action might be necessary at too early a date. We have doubts whether invitation should actually be issued unless by this time Soviets had given some lead.3

“7. If the Soviet Union refuses the invitation, the three foreign ministers should consider whether it is desirable to refer the question to the GA.

“8. If Molotov comes to the meeting of the CFM the chairman, Schuman, might begin by saying that before proceeding to a consideration of agenda, it was necessary for him to ask Molotov whether the blockade has been lifted. If Molotov said, yes, the Foreign Ministers would proceed with discussion of the agenda and at the same time, the three military governors in Berlin would inform Sokolovsky that certain traffic would begin to move at indicated time. If Molotov replied that the blockade had not been lifted, the president should refer to the indication in the invitation that that was essential to the discussions and should declare the meeting adjourned.

“Note: While such a situation might have caused the three western foreign ministers some inconvenience, it would have caused Molotov more inconvenience and if other considerations point to desirability of the step, the inconvenience of coming to a futile meeting might be disregarded.

“9. If Molotov says that the blockade is lifted and the discussions in the CFM continue, it would be recognized that it always lies in the power of the Soviet Union to reimpose the blockade at any time. This, however, is true under any circumstances and should not prevent the opening of discussions provided the actual lifting takes place and traffic begins to move. Presumably at that stage there would be no let-up of the air lift.

“10. If in accordance with Paragraph 7 the CFM is forced to adjourn, one might assume that the Soviets count on the failure of the air lift during the winter months and are unwilling to lift the blockade until they have felt out the situation during the winter. The western powers would then continue the air lift and would need to consider what further measures it might be possible to take in Berlin for the protection of the economy and the welfare of the people.

“Note: While the resulting situation would be a return to the impasse existing at the end of September when the matter was referred to the SC, we would enter the new phase with the added strength of UN action and with the possibility that after the demonstration of the success of the air lift during the winter, the Soviets might be prepared to change their position.”4

Repeated Eyes Only Berlin for Murphy and Clay as 637; Department repeat Moscow for Smith as 538, repeated London Eyes Only for Douglas as 1072. [Jessup.]

Austin

1 Not printed.

2 Transmitted in Delga 280, October 11, from Paris, p. 1216 [Pg. 1216 includes portions of Doc. 678 and Doc. 679].

3 Telegram 2533, October 21, from Berlin, not printed, asked why the invitation to the CFM should come from a western power, and if it would not be tactically better for the USSR to request such a meeting (740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–1848).

4 In Gadel 229, October 17, to Paris, not printed, the Department expressed its general agreement with paragraphs 1 through 5 of this telegram, and told Jessup that it shared his doubts about issuing an invitation for a CFM before the Soviets indicated that they were prepared to accept. Jessup’s proposal did not deal with the currency question, however, and the Department was studying the idea of a neutral commission which would prepare an agreement based on the August 30 Directive to regulate the use and issue of Soviet currency in Berlin. (501.BC/10–1748)

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State 501.BC/10–2048: Telegram

[Document 685]

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent Paris, October 20, 1948—4 p. m.

Delga 417. For Lovett from Jessup. In connection with suggestion in paragraph 3 your Gadel 229 October 17,1 or with other possible developments here, we may need to define our interpretation August 30 directive, especially as regards extent four-power control in Berlin of German mark of Soviet zone.

After review of record, following seems to us to be situation on this matter:

There were two basic issues involved in this question. First, whether the financial commission had authority over any of the activities in Berlin of the German Bank of Emission. Second, granted such authority, did the functions of the financial commission extend to all matters involved in the introduction, use, and continued circulation in Berlin of the German mark of the Soviet zone, or did they extend only to the functions described in A through D of the directive as those activities relate to the introduction use and continued circulation of the single currency?

With respect to first question, Stalin’s statements at August 23 meeting provide categorical affirmation that financial commission would control German Bank of Emission at least regarding its activities in Berlin.2 Sokolovsky apparently denied financial commission would have any control over bank, or was at least evasive on this question. We took issue back to Moscow on September 14. Molotov replied on September 183 and seemed to affirm what had been agreed to at August 23 meeting with Stalin.

With respect to second question, August 23 meeting with Stalin does not seem definitive and, in fact, attention of conferees seemed directed at question of authority. However, at August 27 meeting and particularly August 30 meeting with Molotov, question seems to have been settled and agreement reached that functions of financial commission would extend only to those activities described in A through D of the directive as they related to the introduction, use and continued circulation in Berlin of the German mark of the Soviet zone. It was not agreed that the financial commission should control all activities in Berlin of the German Bank of Emission. (See statement on this issue made in subject six London to Washington telecon of September 125 ). But at Berlin and at September 18 meeting in Moscow, we seemed to take position that the financial commission should control all activities in Berlin of the German Bank of Emission. On the Other hand, Molotov aide-mémoire of September 186 seems to meet point that financial commission’s functions are those as agreed at August 30 meeting, i.e. A through D.

You will understand, of course, that we believe record on above points most complex and difficult. Directive itself is not clear and requires some kind of interpretation since “arrangements indicated above” in last paragraph clearly refers to “arrangements” mentioned in preamble to lettered paragraphs and lettered paragraphs (A–D) themselves. It is not clear that the phrase “arrangements indicated above” also includes paragraph regarding German Bank of Emission. If it does not, then one could say that the financial commission has no authority over the bank. On the other hand, if it does, then this not only answers affirmatively the question of authority but also broadens the functions of the commission beyond A through D. But while it is clear that question of authority was settled, it is also clear that agreement was reached on August 30 that functions extended only to A through D.

For reasons set forth above, we considered it important to be clear in our own minds on this matter since some interpretation of the directive may be necessary.

Apart from question of what was or was not agreed to with respect to functions of the financial commission, are there specific functions over the introduction, use, and continued circulations of the German mark of the Soviet zone in Berlin which we would insist we must control on a four-power basis and which are not covered in paragraphs A through D of the directive?

It appears true that even if Soviets accept interpretation of directive most favorable to us, they could still make trouble for us by currency manipulation in Berlin. That is a risk we would have to run.

In regard to foregoing we draw a clear distinction between problem of fixing negotiating positions and question of ultimate minimum we would take.

Sent Dept Delga 417, repeated Berlin 645, London as 1082, Dept pass Moscow as 546. [Jessup.]

Marshall

1 Not printed; for a summary, see footnote 4 to Delga 361, supra.

2 See telegram 1728, August 24, from Moscow, p. 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619].

3 See telegram 2034, September 18, from Moscow, p. 1166 [Pg. 1166 is part of Doc. 660].

5 Not printed.

6  Ante, p. 1162 [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659].

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2148: Telegram

[Document 686]

The Acting United States Political Adviser for Germany (Riddleberger) to the Acting Secretary of State

top secret
urgent Berlin, October 21, 1948—7 p. m.

2568. For Lovett. Following is OMGUS and our comment on Jessup’s message to you contained in Paris Delga 417.1

We appreciate the lack of clarity in the Moscow discussions on 30 August with respect to precise functions of the Financial Commission. The Molotov statements as reported would in some part appear contradictory to Molotov’s statements on the 27th of August and to Stalin’s statements on the 23rd August.

This confusion arising from the 30 August meeting appears to have given rise to the Soviet interpretation of the directive which gives to the Financial Commission the power only to intervene to assure “equal treatment as to currency and provisions of fully accessible banking and credit facilities”. It is quite clear from the Soviet discussions in Berlin that the Financial Commission could only intervene upon evidence of a lack of equal treatment and then only upon unanimous conclusion of the Financial Commission. The effect of Financial Commission intervention in the Soviet mind appears to be an appeal to the German Emission Bank, which in their view is the control authority in these matters, to take corrective measures.

Whatever interpretation can or may be placed on the directive, it is clear that to surrender to the Soviet view that the Financial Commission does not actually control the introduction, circulation, and continued use of the ost-mark in Berlin and does not control the credit policies of the credit institutions as well as the budgetary policies of the city administration would leave the Western military governments powerless to protect their position in Berlin and to protect the Germans under their jurisdiction from arbitrary manipulations of the financial structure to the end of the achievement of political objectives. If the Western powers cannot be assured that currency will be made available to the Western sectors inhabitants without political controls and that banking facilities and credit will be made available to Western sectors firms in an adequate amount and manner, they can no longer assume that they have jurisdiction and any participation and sovereignty over the lives of Western sector inhabitants.

It is perfectly apparent from the steps already taken by the Soviet authorities in the Soviet Zone and in the Soviet sector of Berlin that they intend to utilize the currency reform and the control of currency circulation and bank credits as a means of accomplishing purely political objectives. If the Soviet authorities of the German Emission Bank are able to control, without effective Western powers’ intervention, the currency circulation and credit issuance in the Western sectors, there is no means preventing their accomplishing the same objectives in the Western sectors as they are now seeking to accomplish in the Soviet Zone and in the Soviet sector.

It must be remembered that acts of the Financial Commission would presumably be on the basis of unanimous decisions. If, therefore, the Financial Commission is left to a role of taking definitive action to stop discrimination, the Western powers are of course unable to stop discrimination. For summary of Military Governors discussions on Berlin finance question see our supplemental report conveyed in ourtel 228a to Department, repeated London 602, Paris 619, Moscow 512 of September 9.2

Sent Department 2568, repeated Paris 824, London 766. Department pass Moscow 663.

Riddleberger

1  Supra.

2 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 501.BC/10–2248: Telegram

[Document 687]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 1

top secret   us urgent Washington, October 22, 1948—1 p. m.

4124. For Bohlen. We have developed our thinking on the idea of appointing a neutral commission of reps of central banks and we would like to check our views with yours. (See Gadel 229.2 ) The timing and manner of presentation of any such proposal is hypothetical at present but it might possibly be used in some form should the Mil Govs again run up against insuperable obstacles in a renewed discussion of the currency problem which might take place under para (2) (b) of proposed SC resolution.3 If you consider it appropriate, you might wish to discuss the subject most discreetly with Brit. Following are the conditions we envisage in the formulation of proposal. It will be noted that the suggestion was written and approved before the current proposed resolution was received. It therefore may require some amendment to take care of changing conditions.

1. The Terms of Reference of the commission should be sufficiently broad to enable them to consider any appropriate and adequate solution of the problems of Berlin currency and trade. The mandate of the commission should be to devise a plan for the introduction of a uniform currency into Berlin under quadripartite control, which fairly protects both sides, and to determine the extent to which the quadripartite control of trade is necessary.

2. Within such a frame of reference, each of the powers could present a brief in support of its position. In our brief we would emphasize the fundamental difficulties of satisfying both the need for Four-Power control of the currency of Berlin, and the desire of the Russians to safeguard the currency of their zone of Germany. We could further point out that on the disagreed financial issues a solution which would adequately protect the interests of the Western Powers can be found through the use of a special currency for Berlin, under quadripartite control, which could properly be under full quadripartite control and could not be considered a threat to the Soviet zone currency.

3. On the question of the trade of Berlin, we would expect to demonstrate the necessity for preserving the right of each of the occupying powers to import into Berlin food and fuel in fulfillment of its responsibilities for maintaining the economic life of its respective sector, and to retain the proceeds therefrom for appropriate purposes including occupation costs as agreed by Molotov on Sep 18.

4. It is important that the Terms of Reference be made as broad as this, since a plausible case can be made for certain elements of the Sov position on the currency question under the Aug 30 directive if the commission should be required to proceed on the assumption that the currency of the Sov zone must become the sole currency for Berlin as well. To some considerable degree our technical objections to the principle involved in the Sov interpretation of the directive reflect our lack of confidence that they would act in good faith in operations under that interpretation. It is difficult for a neutral body to take this consideration into account. The further objections of the Western Powers reflect the conflicting financial interests of the Western sectors of Berlin with those of the Sov sector and the Sov zone, and it is unlikely that a neutral group confined strictly to the Aug 30 directive could reconcile these interests.

5. It would be most undesirable for this plan to be presented in such manner that prolonged argument could result over choice of experts.

6. We would be prepared to state to the six neutrals our willingness to bind ourselves to accept the decisions of the experts commission provided that the Russians also do so and provided there is a firm prior commitment to lift the blockade upon announcement of the agreement to accept the commission’s recommendations. We should consider, but probably not propose initially whether, as a final position, we would be willing to accept a firm prior commitment that the blockade would be lifted simultaneously with the entry into effect of the decisions of the experts commission.

7. If the experts commission does not arrive at a decision by the specified time limit, the blockade would possibly be reimposed if already lifted or would, if commitment was for simultaneous lifting, not be lifted regardless of any commitment in this regard. Therefore decision in the commission should be by majority vote.

8. The commission should be allowed a maximum of say, two weeks in which to report.5

Lovett

1 Repeated to Moscow as 1244, Berlin as 1750.

2 Not printed; for a summary of this telegram, see footnote 4 to Delga 361, October 16, from Paris, p. 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 683 and Doc. 684].

3 The draft resolution under reference here was transmitted in a telecon between Washington and Paris October 20, not printed. Paragraph 2B set forth the steps which the military governors were to take for the introduction, circulation and use of the Soviet currency in Berlin (800.515/10–2048).

5 Telegram 2405, October 22, from Moscow, not printed, reported that Smith felt the idea of a neutral commission was by far the best line of action if the Security Council would consider it favorably (740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2248). Murphy, after consulting the OMGUS financial adviser, Bennett, agreed that there was much to recommend in such a formula, but thought the Russians would not accept the idea of a commission since it offered them less than the proposed Security Council resolution. Telegram 2603, October 25, from Berlin, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2548).

Editorial Note [Document 688]

Editorial Note

The debate by the United Nations Security Council of the Berlin question, which had begun at the Council’s 363rd and 364th Meetings, October 6, 1948, was continued at the Council’s 366th, 368th, and 370th Meetings, October 15, 19, and 22. At the Security Council’s meeting of October 22, the representatives of Argentina, Belgium, Canada, China, Colombia, and Syria introduced the so-called “neutral powers’ resolution” proposing a number of measures aimed at resolving the Berlin crisis. For the text of the resolution (United Nations Security Council Document S/1048, October 22, 1948), see Germany 1947–1949, pages 224–225, Berlin, Quellen und Dokumente, pages 1535–1536, or Documents on American Foreign Relations, pages 99–100. The debate on the neutral powers’ resolution was concluded at the Security Council’s 372nd Meeting, October 25. At that debate, the representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, and France accepted the resolution; for Deputy United States Representative Jessup’s statement urging acceptance of the resolution, see Germany 1947–1949, pages 225–227. The representative of the Soviet Union was opposed to the resolution. When put to a vote by the Security Council, the resolution received nine affirmative votes, but it failed of adoption because of the veto by the Soviet Union. On October 27 the Secretary of State, the British Foreign Secretary, and the French Foreign Minister issued a joint statement reaffirming their support for the neutral powers’ resolution; for the text of the statement, see Germany 1947–1949, page 228. For the official record of the discussions in the Security Council of the Berlin question, including the concluding debate on the neutral powers’ resolution, see United Nations, Official Records of the Security Council, Third Year, Numbers 115, 117, 118, 119, and 120.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2648: Telegram

[Document 689]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Acting Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact London, October 26, 1948—2 p. m.

4622. 1. Although I fully concur in the thought that a neutral commission might serve a useful purpose should, as indicated in paragraph three below, the military governors again meet and again be unable to reach an agreement, (Deptel 4124, October 22 to Paris, repeated Moscow 1244, Berlin 1750 and relayed from Paris to London1 ), I should like to offer the following comments in respect to its proposed terms of reference and procedure: (a) If it were difficult for the commission to take into consideration the factor of possible Soviet bad faith, might it not also be difficult for it to appreciate this as a reason for the desirability for establishing a special currency for Berlin? If the commission could not reconcile conflicting financial interests between Eastern sector and Western sectors, how could the introduction of a special currency be agreed to by Soviets as a device for reconciling these conflicting interests? It therefore seems to me that the commission might well decide to follow the August 30 directive2 that the Soviet zone currency should be the sole currency for Berlin and make its recommendation on that basis. Moreover, it appears to me that a withdrawal from the directive would give Soviets an opportunity to charge us with repudiation. Notwithstanding its defects, therefore, I think we should abide by it rather than recommend the introduction of a wholly new device in the form of special currency for Berlin.

(b) Without questioning the energy and ability of the members of the commission, they would presumably be ignorant of Berlin’s budgetary position and occupational costs and balance of payments matters. I therefore fail to see how within a period of two weeks it would be possible for the commission to acquaint itself sufficiently with these intricate and complicated questions to enable it to evolve an acceptable and practicable solution to these phases of the currency problem.

(c) I question the desirability of making the commission’s terms of reference so broad as to permit it to determine the extent to which quadripartite control of trade is necessary. There are, as I see it, two vital matters which we must safeguard: Our right to participate on a quadripartite basis in the control of all trade including the issuance of licenses, and the right of each of the four occupying powers to import fuel and foodstuffs into its sector. By granting such extensive terms to the commission envisaged in reftel, might we not run the risk of having these rights impaired?

(d) I would appreciate your views on the manner in which the proposed commission would be formed, whether by appointment by the SC, designation by the Secretary-General of the UN or some other method, and how the Soviets can be persuaded to agree to the decisions of a majority of the commission.

2. The important thing, I believe, is to get the blockade lifted with a good agreement to cover trade and an arrangement with regard to currency which will give some assurance that we can remain in Berlin with a minimum amount of inconvenience no matter what sort of currency offensive the Soviets may launch. I read in the early ’30s much of the Soviet literature on the manipulation of currency and the way in which it was effectively used during the Russian revolution. I am, therefore, not unaware of the ingenuity of the Soviets in this respect. In the case of Berlin, however, if a reasonable currency arrangement is made the Soviets would find it difficult to use currency as an offensive weapon against the Western sectors without using it in the same way to produce much the same results in the Eastern sector and the Soviet zone.

3. The foregoing is based on the assumption that despite Soviet veto of neutral’s resolution, SC may evolve a substitute formula which would be satisfactory to Soviets as well as Western Powers. Such a formula might call for: (a) Lifting of all blockade measures within a 10-day period;

(b) Simultaneous resumption of negotiations by military governors to agree on permanent arrangements in accordance with August 30 directive as interpreted; and

(c) Appointment by one method or another of commission, possibly by SC which would formulate during 10-day period referred to in (a) above, interim measures designed to protect Soviet interests against any adverse results from lifting of blockade during period in which military governors are meeting and to supervise them during same period. This commission might subsequently be empowered to decide the currency and trade questions in the event that the military governors are unable to come to agreement among themselves. This suggestion or some modification of it would on the one hand relieve me of the onus of negotiating under duress, and on the other, give Soviets assurances of protection during period following the lifting of the blockade while the military governors are negotiating.

4. The above suggestion might be construed as a retreat on our part and therefore be taken as a sign of weakness. But if the neutrals were to ask us if we would accept something along these lines, this objection might be met at least in part.

Sent Paris for the Secretary and Jessup 790; repeated Department for Lovett 4622, Berlin for Murphy and Clay 564. Department pass Moscow for Smith 273.

Douglas

1  Ante, p. 1231 [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687].

2 See Moscow telegram 1776, p. 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], and footnote 3 thereto.

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State 507.BC/10–2748: Telegram

[Document 690]

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

top secret
urgent Paris, October 27, 1948—5 p. m.

Delga 503. Eyes Only Lovett from Jessup. At meeting with Secretary yesterday approval was given to memo relating to future courses of action in Berlin case, summary of which is set forth below.1 Memo based on assumption that case remains on SC agenda and any program would be fully coordinated with French and UK.

1. Reference to GA. Although we would probably receive overwhelming supporting vote in GA, recommended that this step not be taken at present stage on ground that it would make actual settlement of case more difficult and mere GA condemnation would not result in lifting blockade; furthermore present flexibility and potential of SYG or other influential delegates would be lost.

2. Wait and see period of ten days to three weeks. This course would involve deliberate non-action in UN and at same time taking steps in Berlin first of which would be introductions Western mark B as sole currency in Western sectors. Recommended that this step not be taken until after other measures have been tried on the ground that it would indicate a conclusion that there is no likelihood of securing Soviet agreement to any solution of problem and that steps taken in Berlin would be interpreted in SC and elsewhere as deliberate aggravation of the situation.

3. Attempt to carry out SC resolution despite Soviet veto. This program could be put into effect by a letter to SC President referring to USSR statement that it wants a settlement and that blockade measures are necessary to protect economy of Soviet Zone. Letter would inform President that Western powers would present rail, road and barge traffic at border Soviet Zone on stated future date, that such traffic would be subject to safeguards against currency abuse, that meeting of Military Governors would be called, that restrictions imposed by Western powers would be lifted and thereafter a CFM meeting held. If traffic were permitted to move through Soviet Zone Military Governors would immediately meet. Recommendation that this procedure not be followed at present stage on ground that no indication that Soviets would acquiesce and that it would exclude the six neutral members of SC from participating in attempt to find a solution.2

4. Implementation of arrangements for currency, etc., through an intermediary. This procedure would make use of intermediary actually to frame the kind of regulation for currency in Berlin which under SC resolution would have been drawn up by Military Governors. Procedure has many variants, one of which was suggested in Department’s 4124 of October 22.3 Another variant would be for SC to ask the SYG to have operational arrangements prepared and authorize him to use such experts as he desired. Another variant would be to have President make similar request to SYG in order to avoid formal SC resolution. Both Soviet and Western Powers might be invited to supply SYG or neutral experts with suggestions as to terms of satisfactory operational arrangements.

Authority of SYG or expert group might be either to prepare operational arrangements which would be submitted to SC for consideration and adoption as recommendation to the parities or for submission to the parities for voluntary agreement. Consideration should be given to time of lifting the blockade in relation to report of SYG or export group.

Recommendation that immediate steps be started along this line. Wide variation and flexibility of possibilities within general framework of this procedure make it desirable to discuss forthwith with British and French so that we may obtain their general reaction and so that we can work on elaboration of details of the plan.

Secretary is meeting Bevin and Schuman this afternoon, but not probable that program set forth in paragraph 4 above will be discussed.

Sent Department Delga 503; repeated London Eyes Only Douglas as 1120, Berlin Eyes Only Murphy and Clay as 659. Department repeat Moscow Eyes Only Smith as 563. [Jessup.]

Marshall

1 The full text of the memorandum was sent as an enclosure to a letter from Bancroft to Reber, October 28, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2848).

2  In a memorandum October 26, not printed, Bohlen had stated the following: “I do not feel that the proposals designed to put the Security Council resolution into effect despite USSR veto are very practicable or desirable. They are based on certain assumptions, such as that the USSR wants a settlement, which are by no means proven. It continues to place us in a position of being something in the nature of begging for a solution. Also there are serious disadvantages to sending a train up to the border in the almost certain knowledge that it would be turned back under humiliating conditions.” Bohlen then expressed his preference for the course of action outlined in paragraph 4. (501.BC/10–2648)

3  Ante, p. 1231 [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687].

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Acting Secretary of State 501.BC/10–2748: Telegram

[Document 691]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Acting Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Paris, October 27, 1948—8 p. m.

Delga 509. For Lovett from Bohlen (Eyes Only). At meeting at 4 o’clock today the three ministers decided that at present their joint policy in regard to Berlin matter would be to leave it on the agenda of the Security Council and to take no initiative on their part in regard to this matter in the UN which might be interpreted in any way as a weakening in our present position.1

There was general agreement that we had gone to the absolute limit in accepting the terms of the resolution vetoed by the Soviets and we should therefore carefully refrain from creating any impression in the minds of the neutrals that we would be prepared to go beyond its terms in any attempt to find a solution acceptable to the Soviets. On the other hand, it was recognized that since the Council still has the question before it, we must be prepared for further suggestions of one kind or another from the six neutrals.

It was agreed that our three representatives on the Security Council would maintain informal but close contact with each other in order to correlate our attitudes towards any such suggestions.

It was generally agreed that it would be a mistake at this stage to attempt to get the matter out of the Security Council and into the General Assembly. Without so stating, the communiqué issued at the close of the meeting,2 which you will have seen, makes it clear that it is not our intention to put it into the General Assembly since it refers to the fact that the question remains on the agenda of the Council.

We shall not take any initiative in proposing any plan of our own at this stage, but will be developing our ideas in relation to possible contingencies, including your suggestion concerning a neutral commission, in order that we may be prepared in case the six neutral members of the Council come forward with any proposals.

Sent Department as Delga 509; repeated London as 1126; Berlin as 663. Department please pass Moscow 567. [Bohlen.]

Caffery

1 Before this meeting Marshall, Bohlen and Jessup had met with Bevin, Cadogan, Roberts and Dean to discuss the next step in the Berlin case. They agreed that the proper procedure was to stand pat, but at the same time indicate that since the matter remained on the Security Council agenda, they still accepted the resolution which the Russians had vetoed. Memorandum of conversation by Bohlen, October 27, not printed (862.00/10–2738).

2 Regarding the communiqué or joint statement under reference here, issued on October 27, see the editorial note, p. 1233 [Pg. 1233 includes portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688].

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–3048: Telegram

[Document 692]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy), at Berlin 1

top secret Washington, October 30, 1948—2 p. m.

1785. Dept has received French Emb Memorandum2 re use western B mark in Berlin. Summary follows. Introduction western B mark sole legal tender and linking of Berlin banking system with central Laender bank could be interpreted as a measure aggravating present situation in Berlin and as contrary to paragraph 1 of SC resolution as well as Paris Communiqué of October 27 stating the three western govts accepted the resolution of the neutrals and were ready to give it effect.3 Furthermore, there are technical objections to proposed Berlin monetary plan. The program has serious inflationary aspects. The financing in B marks of supplies from the eastern zone [sic] and the movement of B marks toward the eastern zone cannot be controlled. Thus a permanent flight of B marks would take place which would oblige the Allies to put new quantities in circulation in the western sectors, thereby jeopardizing the monetary stability of western Germany. Moreover, the sole use of the B mark in the western sectors will raise great difficulties in the daily life of a part of the Berlin population. Workers living in the western sectors and receiving salaries in east zone marks will be unable to pay taxes and rents. French Govt is cognizant of the deficiencies of the present Berlin monetary system. General Koenig has been asked to consider measures which might be taken to remedy this situation, it being understood that the latter would not contradict the provisions of paragraph 1 of the neutrals’ SC resolution.

We are urging French Embassy to request that French representatives in Berlin press forward with planning discussions.

Lovett

1 Repeated to Paris as 4239.

2 Not printed.

3 Regarding the resolution and the communiqué under reference here, see the editorial note, p. 1233 [Pg. 1233 includes portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688].

Report by the Policy Planning Staff Policy Planning Staff Files: Lot 64 D 563: Box 20036

[Document 693]

Report by the Policy Planning Staff

top secret Washington, November 2, 1948.

PPS 42

Position of the United States With Respect to Germany Following the Breakdown of Moscow Discussions 1

problem

To determine the most favorable line of approach to the Berlin problem in the light of the breakdown of the Moscow discussions.

discussion

1. The Berlin problem is so complicated, so apt to be altered by events which cannot now be foreseen, and so much a problem which will have to be handled jointly with other governments whose future reactions we cannot now predict, that it would be useless to attempt to lay down in advance any fixed and detailed line of conduct which we could hope to follow rigidly regardless of the turn which events, may take. For this reason, no set of concepts arrived at at this time could constitute more than an initial line of approach, which would have to be reviewed and modified currently in the light of future developments.

2. The Berlin situation poses for this Government a genuine dilemma. The outlines of this dilemma are simple. On the one hand, every consideration of national interest, aside from the Berlin situation, indicates that we should not become involved in a war at this time. In the development of the European situation in general, time is on our side. There is still a chance that if war can be avoided at this juncture, a continuing deterioration in the communist political position in Europe will eventually make war unnecessary. Our own military position, furthermore, is less favorable today in relation to the Soviet Union than it can be expected to be a year or two hence. Finally, both the military strength and the self-confidence of our western European friends can presumably be considerably enhanced by a further period of progress toward a North Atlantic defense arrangement and of development of military collaboration among the Brussels powers. Thus if we can avoid war at this time, there seems to be a good prospect

(a) that we may possibly be able to avoid it altogether (this is perhaps the vital difference between this situation and that of the French and British at the time of Munich), and

(b) in any case we may be sure that if it has to come we will be in a better position to fight it a year or two hence than we would today.

On the other hand, we must recognize that in the confidence and enthusiasm which our position has inspired in the population of Berlin and in the symbolic meaning which this situation has acquired as a test of strength and determination between east and west, we have factors of enormous importance. These factors militate against any unilateral western withdrawal from that city which would involve surrendering the population of the western sectors to communist oppression and revenge. Since the termination of hostilities, we have thus far successfully prevented the Kremlin from extending its police system over any European peoples beyond the high water mark of the Soviet military advance during the war and the Austrian and German zonal arrangements. To permit such extension now, by the abandonment of our position in Berlin, even though the persons whom we would be sacrificing are Germans for whose fate we would have been very little concerned three years ago, would inevitably undermine confidence in us elsewhere in Europe, and above all in such delicate and exposed spots as Vienna and Trieste. We have here one of the great recurrent imponderables of foreign policy: an emotional factor which may bear little logical relation to the practical considerations involved but which is of major, and unanswerable, importance. And to these objective considerations which argue against a western withdrawal from Berlin, we must add the numerous firm statements which have already been made committing the present administration as well as its political opponents to the proposition that “we will not get out of Berlin”.

It must be noted that if the western powers were to withdraw from Berlin under humiliating circumstances which would constitute a blow to confidence throughout Europe in the western determination to stand up to Russia, this would undoubtedly be vigorously and skillfully exploited by the Russians for their own political purposes. It might well halt or reverse the favorable political trend which we have observed in western Europe in the past year. In that case, the hope that our interests might eventually be protected, and our objectives attained, by political rather than military developments—the hope, in other words, that war might be avoided in the long run—would be frustrated. This means that a unilateral western withdrawal from Berlin might in itself offset one of the two main reasons why we should try to avoid war at this time. Although avoiding war today, it might increase the likelihood of our having to fight it tomorrow. While it would still give us time to improve our military preparations and position, it might go far to forfeit the possibility of an eventual peaceful issue of the conflict between Russia and the western world.

3. We must recognize that Berlin cannot be left indefinitely dependent on the air lift for its source of supply. It is not sufficient to judge the air lift from its technical aspects alone, in estimating the length of time in which we can hope to supply Berlin by this means. We must also take into account psychological and political considerations. We must recognize that the population of a great city, particularly one which is in dire need of reconstruction on a grand scale, cannot get along indefinitely with just the absolute minimum of food and fuel. Sooner or later the sacrifices involved, and above all the uncertainty itself, must breed discouragement and unrest and resentment even against ourselves. The fact that it may be calculated that the air lift would be technically and theoretically adequate to maintain life in the western sectors of the city over the winter must therefore not be over-rated. It merely means that we have a brief respite in which to find a solution of the problem; but it is not itself a solution.

4. It is important to note that the Berlin deadlock has created an extremely awkard situation for the Russians, as well as for ourselves. Our situations are converse. While we are in a weak, and increasingly unfavorable position in the immediate conflict over Berlin, this conflict has steadily improved our position in the remainder of Germany and has created conditions in which we could go much further in risking the immediate establishment of a German authority than would have been the case six months or a year ago. As for the Russians, while their position in the Berlin conflict is strong and increasingly favorable as the air lift becomes more difficult and expensive, the continuation of this conflict is nevertheless causing them a steady loss of their political assets in Germany as a whole. If the continuation of the present deadlock threatens us with the loss of Berlin, it threatens them with the loss of Germany itself. We must bear in mind, therefore, that they, too, are under great strain as a result of this matter, and that if this strain can be increased, there is still a possibility that they may be brought to change their position.

5. It flows from the considerations set forth above that this country must follow a course which: (a) avoids, insofar as it is within the choice of this country, war at this time; but

(b) does not involve a unilateral and humiliating withdrawal of the western powers from Berlin,

(c) promises to assert increasing pressure on the Russians, and

(d) offers at least some hope that we may get away from our dependence on the air lift at some time within the next year.

6. The Russians have made it evident that they are not going to settle in good faith for a solution which permits us both to remain in Berlin in the full enjoyment of our quadripartite rights, and at the same time to proceed with the organization and development of a western German state. This attitude probably stems from their realization that in the long run a communist regime in eastern Germany will not be able to compete successfully with the non-communist German regime in western Germany, particularly if the political development of the eastern zone along communist lines continues to be disrupted by the presence of western forces in Berlin. In pressing outwardly for the withdrawal of western forces from Berlin, the Russians are probably pressing for what is in reality their second choice, and a poor second at that. Such withdrawal would certainly ease for them the further political organization of their own zone; and they doubtless reckon that the blow to western prestige would prove a blow to the pro-western political groupings in western Germany and a boon to the communist party there. If, therefore, they cannot get an abandonment of the western German arrangements, our withdrawal from Berlin would be the next best thing.

It is imperative, however, in Russian eyes, that one or the other of these objectives be achieved: if not the second, then the first. This line of conduct is motivated on their part by defensive considerations of the most serious nature. We may expect them to fight tooth and nail against any solution which does not achieve one or the other of the two objectives.

This being the case, there is little likelihood that we will have any success with a policy which aims to maneuver them, either through direct negotiation or through United Nations pressures, into a continued acceptance of our rightful status in Berlin, without relation to the German problem as a whole. No matter what the Russians might be brought to agree to in the way of written undertakings along these lines, the objective possibilities for sabotage and evasion in practice, combined with the formidable native talents of the Russians in this direction, make it clear that we can never have in practice any solution along these lines which will really work to our satisfaction. It is conceivable that after the most tortuous maneuvers and negotiations, we could bring this horse to water; but it is hardly probable that we could make him drink.

7. All this seems to point to the conclusion that there can hardly be any satisfactory solution of the Berlin problem within the limits of the Berlin situation itself, and that the problem could be soluble only if fitted into a larger framework. In other words, it is unlikely that there could be any satisfactory solution along the lines of a narrowing of the problem through negotiations over currency control, trade, communications, etc. The only conceivably satisfactory line of advance would be by a broadening of the problem: by “losing” the Berlin problem in a broader solution which would change completely the external framework in which it operated, as for example a solution providing for the withdrawal of both western and Russian forces from Berlin. If this view is correct, then the Berlin problem could not be solved without bringing it into relation to the general problem of Germany as a whole and without taking steps which would constitute important moves in the handling of the general German problem.

8. Examples of such steps are the following: (a) A mutual withdrawal from Berlin with guarantees concerning treatment of the Berlin population, possibly providing for UN supervision;

(b) Establishment of a neutral unoccupied area elsewhere in Germany where a German authority would be established by mutual agreement and permitted to assume certain of the sovereign rights of government, together with the evacuation of Berlin by the western forces and the removal of large numbers of Germans from that city to the new capital;

(c) Withdrawal of all occupying forces from a portion of Germany, including areas from both the present western and eastern zones and embracing the province of Brandenburg, with the understanding that this entire area would be placed under some German authority and Berlin would remain the capital of Germany;

(d) A general termination of military government in Germany and withdrawal of all occupying forces to specified garrison areas, with simultaneous establishment of a German authority.

9. Clearly, any solution along these lines, involving the German situation as a whole, would be one which the western powers could not discuss directly with the Soviet Government while duress is maintained. However, there is no reason why they should not discuss such a solution if they are requested by the UN to do so and if the UN can make some provision for the termination of the restrictions on land and water access to Berlin, at least during the period that discussions are in progress.

10. Should the UN make possible the discussion of a solution along these lines, there seems to be every reason why this Government should accept. It is difficult to see that any development of the German situation resulting from such discussions could be more dangerous to this country’s security than the present Berlin situation, provided we resolutely oppose any solution which would put Germany as a whole at the mercy of communist elements. We cannot view the general German problem today as though everything were normal and as though we were under no particular pressure from any quarter. We are in an extremely dangerous and unsatisfactory position in Berlin; and the Russians have only to stand their ground and wait in order to make that position increasingly dangerous and expensive. We can therefore not afford to be perfectionists about the general German problem. We must consider ourselves well out of it if we can find any solution which gets us out of Berlin without serious detriment to western prestige and does not at the same time deliver up Germany as a whole to communist control. At the same time, we must recognize that changes have occurred in Germany since the last CFM meeting which might actually justify a re-examination of the differences among the four powers over that subject.

11. On the other hand, we must recognize that we are not likely to agree with the Russians about the general German problem at this time. The Russian attitude with respect to Germany as a whole is no less dominated by fear of western superiority than is the Russian attitude with respect to Berlin. With respect to Germany as a whole, just as with respect to Berlin, the Russians will probably continue to insist on unreasonable advantages, because without unreasonable advantages they cannot hope to maintain any influence at all. They know that without a considerable handicap in their favor, they cannot compete. They will probably therefore raise demands, in connection with any settlement involving the larger German problem, inconsistent with our concepts of what is required for a peaceful and free Germany.

12. For this reason, the advantages which we could expect to obtain from discussing the general German problem as a means of solving the problem of Berlin would probably be: (a) That we gain time;

(b) That we get the restrictions removed temporarily, permitting some relief to the Berlin population, and possibly some stockpiling; and

(c) That we will have demonstrated to the people of Berlin and the Germans in general our willingness to proceed with a broad and constructive solution of both the Berlin problem and the general German problem.

However, it is not out of the question, although improbable, that some actual agreement might emerge which would permit the general withdrawal of forces from Berlin. As long as there is any such possibility at all, negotiations along this line would be warranted; for it is hard to see how else the Berlin situation can be solved.

13. If we are to set our course toward a solution based on some such move toward a settlement of the German problem in general, then it is desirable that we do this when and if the matter comes before the United Nations Assembly. As pointed out above, we cannot ourselves discuss such matters directly with the Russians while under duress. We would therefore presumably be dependent on the mediation of some outside agency, which could hardly be other than the United Nations. If, therefore, as seems the more probable outcome, the Security Council does not succeed in inducing Moscow to lift the restrictions, the Assembly might be our last chance to obtain a solution of the sort that we must have.

14. Actually, there is a good deal to be said, aside from the Berlin problem, for a statement by this Government at this time of its overall aspirations with respect to Germany and its basic desire for general withdrawal of forces from Germany under proper safeguards. Only by our taking a position along these lines can we offset Soviet propaganda which aims to make it appear that this country wishes to keep its forces in the heart of Europe and keep Europe divided whereas the U.S.S.R. would be prepared for a mutual withdrawal of forces from Germany and Austria. Since the withdrawal of forces and the establishment of a German government is our ultimate aim in any case, we have nothing to lose in stating this vigorously at the present time, as long as we make sure that the conditions we place upon any agreement of this nature are such as to safeguard our position in Germany. If the Russians accept a proposal along these lines, we have solved the Berlin situation, gained at least a further period of time, and lessened the Soviet military intimidation of western Europe. If they refuse it, or refuse to accept it on our minimum conditions (which is likely), we have at least demonstrated to the Germans that we would have been prepared to go in for a mutual evacuation of Berlin in order to put an end to the present situation, and to Europe at large that we were prepared to consider a bold and generous solution which would have served to lessen the tension in Europe. It should be noted that it was the consensus among the group of outside consultants who recently discussed the German question with the Planning Staff that this Government should not hesitate to reiterate its desire to see a solution along these lines under proper safeguards.

15. Since, as pointed out above, we are not likely to get Soviet agreement to such a solution on our minimum terms, we cannot view this course of action as one likely to produce any early solution of the Berlin question. In fact, it may only lead to another deadlock and produce no solution at all. But since it appears to be the only line of conduct which could conceivably produce a solution, and which has not yet been tried, it would seem to be our obligation to explore it to the end. Even though it does not yield agreement with the Russians at once, it should improve our propaganda position considerably if we state our case skillfully and convincingly. If, after we have taken this step, we will still have to settle down to a continuation for a further indefinite period of the ordeal of supplying Berlin by air, there will then at least be greater pressure of public opinion on the Russians, and therefore a greater possibility that they will eventually yield under the strain, than there would otherwise. And if, in the end, there is still no solution other than a violent one, our record will be better, and our moral cause stronger, for the fact that we have been willing to consider a bold and broad step with respect to Germany as a whole, if peace could thereby be preserved.

1 On September 16, 1948, the National Security Council agreed that the Department of State should prepare a paper on the position of the United States with respect to Germany in the event that the negotiations, in progress with the Russians at that time, should be unsuccessful. The Policy Planning Staff completed the paper October 4, and sent one copy to Paris for the comments of Bohlen and Marshall. Bohlen felt there was no chance of acceptance by the Russians and suggested several textual changes; Marshall’s comments have not been found. The receipt of Delga 503, October 27 (ante, p. 1236 [Pg. 1236 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690]) indicated that the line of action proposed in PPS 42 was not approved and that a decision had been taken to try to reach agreement with the Russians along the lines of the August 30 Directive. (Policy Planning Staff Files)

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretan 501.BC/11–348: Telegram

[Document 694]

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretan

top secret
urgent Paris, November 3, 1948—1 p. m.

Delga 580. For Lovett from Jessup. Reply your 4245, November 1,1 SYG has become very active. He has talked twice with Vishinsky and has gotten “green light” for proceeding with technical studies by Sobolev and Feller under SYG’s direction. We have indicated generally we have no objection to SYG making technical study on matter before UN and shall be glad to furnish all information to Feller. Lie desires to proceed at present in greatest secrecy. Lie proposed to Vishinsky that secretariat experts should either proceed to draft general principles on currency or at once draw up detailed regulations. Vishinsky said first alternative was probably more in line now but that second alternative was fundamentally the best.2 Jessup in weekend visit to Berlin had discussed all angles with people there and appreciates their necessities as indicated in your reftel. On the other hand, he gained impression that Berlin fully appreciates general diplomatic situation of relation with other governments in UN discussions at Paris. Contrary to impression indicated your 4215, October 29,3 we have been proceeding with staff work here looking toward course four rather than course two,4 but consistent with decision three Foreign Ministers carefully avoiding giving impression we are anxious for solution. Discounting at 1000 to one probability Soviet desire for real settlement of Berlin situation, we still feel Paris situation requires further acquiescence in any neutral effort productive of some result which we could accept without prejudice our fundamental position, as final test of Soviet willingness to reach agreement. If that move fails, procedure under course two of Delga 503 along lines your reftel should be considered. We understand importance attributed to tenth or twentieth of month but believe November 10 not feasible under all the circumstances. Also believe final decision re twentieth must be postponed to determine trend and effect current efforts of SYG. Lie is seeing Cadogan and Parodi this morning. In brief conversation with Jessup last night Cadogan indicated no objection to the general approach Lie has in mind but since Lie had already arranged to see him I did not discuss details of Lie’s activity. Cadogan had received no instructions yet along lines of new currency measures in Western sectors.

The Secretary and Dulles concur in these general recommendations.5 Repeated London as 1174; Berlin for Murphy and Clay as 678; Department relay Moscow as 576. [Jessup.]

Marshall

1 Not printed: in it the Department of State expressed its view that the “wait and see period” was drawing to a close, and the decision must shortly be taken on the introduction of the western mark in Berlin, because of the deteriorating economic conditions in the city. At the same time the introduction of the currency must be coordinated with the diplomatic initiatives of the western powers at the United Nations. (501.BC/11–148)

2 On October 31, Gross prepared a memorandum for Jessup in which he gave a detailed account of Lie’s activities during the last week of October on the Berlin case. This memorandum is in file 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–3148.

3 Not printed.

4 The references here are to paragraphs 4 and 2 of Delga 503, October 27, from Paris, p. 1236 [Pg. 1236 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690].

5 In telegram 4716, November 4, from London, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–448), Douglas also concurred in the recommendation that the-three western powers should proceed, at the proper moment, along the lines of paragraph 4 of Delga 503, p. 1236 [Pg. 1236 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], and in the desirability of continuing the tactics agreed with Bevin and Schuman at the meeting of the three Foreign Ministers October 27 (Delga 509, October 27, from Paris, p. 1238 [Pg. 1238 is part of Doc. 691]).

Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen) to the United States Deputy Representative on the Security Council (Jessup) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–548

[Document 695]

Memorandum by the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen) to the United States Deputy Representative on the Security Council (Jessup)

top secret [Paris,] November 5, 1948.

While I still feel that there is considerable danger in any attempt by the Secretary General, the six neutrals or other neutral commission to attempt to work out the Berlin currency question, I fully recognize that it would be difficult and probably unwise on your part to attempt to discourage any such further efforts on their part to find a settlement. However, if it becomes necessary for us to acquiesce in any neutral attempt to work out the currency question of Berlin, I feel it very important that we make clear to the Secretary General or members of a neutral body what in our view should be their terms of reference.

In this connection, I believe that every attempt should be made to exclude any specific reference to the August 30th directive1 as a guide. Not only do we all recognize that this document lost its validity as an agreement because of the failure of the Military Governors to work out the implementation but acceptance as a basis would operate as an obstacle or at best a harmful restriction on the ultimate settlement of the currency question. If the August 30th directive is used as a guide there will be inevitably a repetition of the difference of interpretation placed upon that document so that far from dealing with realities of the currency situation in Berlin the dispute will center around the wording of the August 30th directive itself.

Since the problem in regard to the currency has remained unchanged since the introduction of two currencies in Berlin, it would appear preferable and much more fruitful to set forth the elements of the problem as a guide to the efforts of the neutrals to work out a practical solution. The main points are very simply as follows: The Western Powers were prepared to accept the German mark of the Soviet Zone as the sole currency of Berlin provided its introduction and continued use in the city is under adequate four-power supervision.

There could be no legitimate grounds for Soviet objection to such a formulation of the problem to be considered by a neutral expert commission unless it is still the Soviet intention to deny adequate four-power control over the currency of Berlin.

This procedure would leave the Commission free to examine any type of practical implementation which would give effect to those two provisions.

The neutral experts would of course not be debarred in any way from utilizing any material in connection with this matter including the August 30th directive and the discussions of the Military Governors concerning it, but the directive should not specifically form part of their instructions as a controlling document.

1  Ante, p. 1092 [Pg. 1092 includes portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632].

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1248: Telegram

[Document 696]

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

top secret   priority Paris, November 12, 1948—7 p. m.

Delga 716. Developments in Berlin case since Delga 5801 follow: 1. Upon Bramuglia’s return to Paris he talked with Die in respect of the latter’s plan of drawing up arrangements for Berlin currency and indicated to Lie that he thought the idea might be a productive one. Bramuglia then called a meeting of the six neutrals and indicated to them some resentment of Lie’s intervention. The six agreed, however, that there might be some utility in having experts work out operational arrangements but that the “diplomatic” work, i.e. contacts with the four powers should be done on behalf of the six by Bramuglia in his capacity as President of the Council.

2. Accordingly Bramuglia called a meeting of the three on November 12 at which he outlined the attitude of the six and stated his hope that they might be helpful. He said, however, that he did not wish to start acting unless there was some prospect of success. He is going to see Vishinsky today. Cadogan, Parodi and Jessup reiterated our willingness to play our part as members of SC and that if the six decided to use experts we would be prepared to cooperate with them. We stressed that real problem apart from the basic problem of the blockade was not merely currency change-over, but involved the principle and application of quadripartite control.

3. Another development which has been reported in the press is that Evatt is entertaining two ideas for a solution: The first is that as President of the GA he should communicate with the four powers and suggest that they implement the Mexican resolution2 by getting together and settling the Berlin question among themselves. The UK has been making every effort to discourage Evatt, but he is clinging to the idea and may carry it through. Evatt’s second idea is to refer the Berlin question to the GA.

4. Cadogan told me confidentially yesterday that British are working on a plan whereby UK experts would draw up details of operational arrangements for Berlin currency and other financial affairs of the city with a view to obtaining the agreement of France and ourselves and then submitting it to Bramuglia who would in turn submit it to the Soviets. Aside from this, British attitude as expressed by Cadogan is that they would be willing to agree that in light of Lie’s and Evatt’s activities they should encourage any activities looking toward a solution to be handled by the six. Cadogan had no instructions as to British attitude on further stages, but he indicated that if the six did continue their efforts it would, of course, be impossible to forbid them to use UN technical experts to assist them.

5. After clearance with the Secretary, Jessup told Cadogan and Parodi that if the six believed there was merit in their further activity the US would respond affirmatively to it, but would not, of course, take any initiative. The US was prepared to give such assistance to the six and on a technical level to the technical experts as they required. We believe that if experts were to work out operational arrangements they should be under the supervision of the six because of the influence that men like Pearson and Spaak would have.

6. Prior to the meetings yesterday with the British and French and with the six, the Secretary approved a memorandum recommending that we should respond affirmatively to further action under the aegis of the SC in order to influence the course which any further steps may take.3 That we should be willing to accept a program under which the six enlist the services of neutral experts to work out detailed operational arrangements for the introduction and continued circulation of the Soviet mark as the sole currency for Berlin under adequate quadripartite control and such other arrangements as are necessary for like control of budget, credit facilities and trade of Berlin. Such operational arrangements if worked out under the supervision of the six might be recommended to the four powers by the President for adoption and to be put into effect simultaneously with lifting of blockade. It was thought best that no advance commitment should be made to accept operational arrangements inasmuch as this might present a difficulty at the outset which would prevent any program from getting started, but it was recognized that it would be difficult to reject a plan, and that we should be in a frame of mind to accept the recommended arrangements even though they do not meet our optimum position on all points. The Secretary’s approval of course outlined was for purposes of guiding Jessup in his conversations with the British, French, the six and the SYG.

7. It may well be that as result of Bramuglia’s conversation with Vishinsky this afternoon nothing further will come of this renewed activity. On the other hand, the present attitude of Bramuglia and the other neutral members appears sound and they have evidenced an awareness of the political realities of the Berlin situation. Cadogan will doubtless be getting further instructions from his government. French attitude appears to be substantially similar to our own. Canadians are prepared to cooperate fully.4

Sent Department Delga 716, repeated London (Eyes Only Douglas) as 1248, Berlin (Eyes Only Murphy and Clay) as 706. Department please pass Moscow (Eyes Only Smith) as 593.

Marshall

1 November 3, p. 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694].

2 The reference here is to the resolution introduced by Mexico September 30 in the General Assembly and passed unanimously with amendments November 3, calling upon the Great Powers to compose their differences and establish a lasting peace. For the full text of the resolution, see United Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Third Session, Part 1, Resolutions, pp. 15–16.

3 Not found in the files of the Department of State.

4  Gadel 472, November 13, to Paris, not printed, reported that this outline approach to the further United Nations treatment of the Berlin problem seemed completely reasonable (501.BC/11–1348).

Editorial Note [Document 697]

Editorial Note

On November 13 the Secretary-General of the United Nations (Trygve Lie) and the President of the United Nations General Assembly (Herbert Evatt) addressed a joint letter to the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and the Soviet Union appealing to them to compose their differences and establish a lasting peace. For the text of the joint communication, see Department of State Bulletin, November 28, 1948, page 655, Germany 1947–1949, pages 228–229, Documents on Berlin, or Documents on American Foreign Relations, pages 100–101. In his reply, dated November 17, Secretary of State Marshall reviewed the efforts of the United States to find a solution within the United Nations Organization of the Berlin crisis, and he reaffirmed the readiness of the United States to engage in conversations with the Soviet Union as soon as the blockade of Berlin had been lifted; for the text of the Secretary’s letter, see Department of State Bulletin, November 28, 1948, page 656, Germany 1947–1949, pages 229–230, or Documents on American Foreign Relations, pages 102–103. For the text of the Soviet reply, dated November 16, see ibid., pages 101–102.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1648: Telegram

[Document 698]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

top secret Washington, November 16, 1948—6 p. m.

Telmar 166. For the Secretary from Lovett. Following is text of message received by President from Evatt ref my immediately preceding telegram:1

“The Secretary-General and I are handing to the Chairman of your delegation at the third regular session of the UN General Assembly, for transmittal to you, a communication urging implementation of the resolution of the General Assembly unanimously adopted on 3 November, 1948 entitled Appeal to the Great Powers To Renew Their Efforts To Compose Their Differences and Establish a Lasting Peace. I hope for your most earnest and sympathetic consideration of this communication with special and immediate reference to the Berlin crisis, the continuance of which has been and still is an active obstruction to the work of the General Assembly. Indeed the Berlin dispute is seeping into the very structure of this organization. There are, of course, a number of ways in which this dispute may be settled. The recent Security Council proceedings nearly resulted in the settlement which was preceded by negotiation. Therefore the matter might again come before the Security Council. Alternatively you might consider that other and more direct methods of Four-Power negotiation might well be tried with regard to the overwhelming necessity of settling not only the Berlin dispute, but the peace itself. I have always taken the view that a much closer association with the great powers of other nations that during the war contributed men and material unstintingly to the common cause against the common enemy would have assisted the Council of Foreign Ministers and facilitated the making of the peace. Finally there is the important question of personal contact, personal trust and personal confidence and comradeship between the leaders of the great powers. I want to assure you that the Secretary-General and I will be entirely at your service and disposal in any positive steps you may think would be helpful. Our single desire is to forward the purposes and principles of the United Nations, which the peoples of the world intensely desire to see translated into action.”

It is not clear from this message whether a similar one was sent to other Chiefs of Government or whether it was only intended for the President.2

Lovett

1  Telmar 165, not printed; it reported the President’s agreement to a draft reply to the Evatt–Lie letter and his declaration at a press conference that the United States would not resume negotiations on Germany until the blockade of Berlin had been lifted (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1648).

2 There is no record in the Department of State files of any reply to this letter.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 501.BC/11.1748: Telegram

[Document 699]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

top secret
us urgent
niact Washington, November 17, 1948—6 p. m.

Gadel 509. For Jessup. It seems to us indispensable that answer to Bramuglia’s five questions should be coordinated between western nations (Delga 782.1 ). Comprehensive nature of questions may necessitate working out program for submission to Bramuglia. Is it planned there should be a meeting in Paris or Berlin of experts including those from home offices of western nations? Our Technical Committee here has certain useful views but these can best be presented with knowledge discussions in Paris or Berlin and work of other experts, such as those of Brit Treasury, which we understand has been working on problem. Accordingly if Knapp can be spared from urgent work here we will try to send him and/or another member our Technical Committee soon as possible and will let you know tomorrow.

Lovett

1  Not printed; the five questions were: “1. What agencies will exercise the quadripartite control of the financial arrangements on behalf of the four occupying powers? 2. What are to be the functions of the quadripartite control agencies? 3. Upon which financial operation and in what areas will the quadripartite control be exercised? 4. What is the exact wording of the directive which must be issued for the implementation of quadripartite control? 5. How shall trade between Berlin and the Western zones of Germany and third countries be controlled including the issuance of export/import licenses?” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–1648)

The Secretary of State to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin 501.BC/11–1848: Telegram

[Document 700]

The Secretary of State to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay), at Berlin

top secret
urgent Paris, November 18, 1948—5 p. m.

Delga 719. Bramuglia and six neutral members of the SC have stepped up their activities as indicated in Delga 782 (repeated to Berlin as Paris 7171 ). The neutrals have presented a questionnaire to the Western powers the purpose of which is to clarify the issues so that the six could order financial experts of the secretariat to proceed with a study of the currency regulations for Berlin. Bramuglia has also drafted a revision of the SC resolution,2 which we have received on a confidential basis, the text of which follows: “2. (A)

(B)

(C) Sections (A) and (B) will be definitely fulfilled by both parties by the 20th of December.

3. The maximum term in which the measures provided for in Sections (A) and (B) must be implemented by the governments, are the following: (A) The removal of the restrictions imposed upon transport, communications and trade by roads or canals, must be implemented within 48 hours of the date of the notification.

(B) The removal of the restrictions imposed upon transport, communications and trade by railroad must be carried out gradually, but in such a way that within the first blank days blank trains are in operation, the service to be totally normalized by the 20th of December.

(C) The unification and introduction of the currency, under quadripartite control, must be carried out in gradual stages, so as to be totally fulfilled by the 20th of December.

4. The control of the implementation of these measures shall be entrusted to a committee appointed by the Security Council, that will interpose its good offices to overcome any difficulties which may arise in the way of its whole and harmonious realization.”

It is to be understood that this draft has not been refined as to wording, but is a first attempt to set forth a general idea whereby restrictions imposed on transport, communications and trade would be removed in stages during the time the military governors are discussing measures for the unification and introduction of currency into Berlin under quadripartite control, complete removal of restrictions to be coincident with the introduction of the Soviet mark as the sole currency for Berlin. It is not clear whether discussions of military governors would or would not be on the basis of an agreement previously reached by four powers to program developed by experts groups.

We would appreciate your general views on this type of approach together with such refinement of language as you feel would be necessary to provide a workable solution along these lines. We have given no assurance to any of the neutral members or Bramuglia that a formula of this type would be acceptable.

With regard to Paragraph (4) of the above text, it is Canadian view that the committee to be appointed by the SC would be a committee of high level financial men chosen by the Council on the basis of their personal competence. This group would supervise and “vet” the financial studies made by the secretariat experts before submission of the studies to the parties. However, we are not certain that Bramuglia has thought through procedure thoroughly.

Please bear in mind that foregoing does not represent fixed program. Neither Bramuglia nor the six as a group has organized its thinking and many variations are likely to be considered.

Sent Berlin 719 for Clay and Murphy from Jessup, repeated to Department [for Lovett] as Delga 814, London for Douglas as 1287. Department repeat to Moscow for Smith as 602.

Marshall

1 Not printed; the five questions which it transmitted are given in footnote 1 to Gadel 509, supra.

2 Regarding the resolution under reference here, see the editorial note, p. 1233 [Pg. 1233 includes portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 501.BC/11–1948: Telegram

[Document 701]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

top secret
us urgent
niact Washington, November 19, 1948—6 p. m.

Gadel 537. For Jessup. Bramuglia revision of SC resolution contains interesting ideas which might be pursued with benefit (Delga 8141 and Delga 8222 ). We are impressed with proposal under para 4 for SC committee. On the other hand we are concerned about proposal in present form for gradual lifting of blockade since to some extent this might be represented as acquiesence in illegal blockade. Objectionable features might be reduced if proposal were linked with and justified by development of inspection system which western powers would undertake themselves to apply to prevent smuggling operations in Sov zone mark.

We consider it essential that Mil Govs discussions be based on agreement previously reached in Paris on program developed by expert group. Such program should of course be more detailed and explicit than Moscow Aug 30 directive. It does not appear from your messages that composition of expert group has been decided since you state Lie has terminated secretariat work in this field. We are agreeable to leaving resolution of this problem to you and SC neutral members, not leaving out of account possibility of invoking assistance of outside experts from neutral countries.

Language assumes that Soviet mark is to be sole currency in Berlin. Nevertheless we presume neutrals will wish to examine alternatives in view of difficulties of establishing and continuing effective four-power control over Soviet mark in Berlin.

If decision is that Soviet mark be accepted as sole currency in Berlin, then revised resolution may develop to be acceptable basis provided (a) Military Governor agrees that projected time schedule gives adequate time to complete steps in Berlin by December 20 or other agreed date; and (b) resolution is supported by detailed plan of four-power control which might develop from agreed answers to neutrals five questions.3 Knapp fully briefed on preceding points. Related subject: It is noted from London that British may be willing to agree to quadripartite control of proceeds of imports. U.S. has always been opposed to such control.

We feel that if plan is further developed it should be tried out on Sovs at early date in order to obviate loss of time consumed on a program which Sovs might ultimately reject. We would like this to be cleared up as soon as possible in order that a decision may be taken on changeover to western B mark in event Sovs are unwilling to accept formula.

It is in fact questionable whether the financial situation in the western sectors can sustain, without currency changeover, delays imposed by process envisaged in Bramuglia’s proposal, particularly if we launch on procedure and it subsequently breaks down from Soviet intransigence. You will doubtless wish to discuss this point with representatives from Berlin before reaching your determination on course of action.

There is one question which seriously concerns us both generally and in specific relation to any agreement which may be arrived at in Paris, and this is the deteriorating political situation in Berlin where the German authority for the entire city has been destroyed by Sov action. Dec 5 elections may lead to real crisis in Berlin and it is difficult to envisage revival of a uniform German authority which would be able to fulfill functions devolving upon it from any agreed currency arrangement. General Clay may be able to advise you how the problem should be considered in connection with SC action.

Lovett

1  Supra.

2 Not printed.

3 See footnote 1 to Gadel 509, November 17, to Paris, p. 1253 [Pg. 1253 includes portions of Doc. 698 and Doc. 699].

The Acting Head of the United States Delegation to the United Nations (Dulles) to the Secretary of State 501.BC/11–2348: Telegram

[Document 702]

The Acting Head of the United States Delegation to the United Nations (Dulles) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent Paris, November 23, 1948—7 p. m.

Delga 890. Text of joint reply by representatives of France, UK, and US to questions asked by Bramuglia follows. This paper being delivered Bramuglia tonight by Cadogan. Further report on developments follows, in separate message.1

“In the quadripartite discussions on the Berlin currency problem held in August and September, the western powers expressed their willingness to meet the Soviet insistence that the currency which is legal tender in the Soviet zone should also be the sole legal tender currency in Berlin, but only on condition that the military governors could work out satisfactory arrangements to assure the provision of adequate currency and credit in all sectors of Berlin, with effective quadripartite control over the practical implementation of such arrangements. The western powers do not claim any rights of interference in the finances of the Soviet zone and they recognize that if the east mark is introduced as sole currency for the whole of Berlin, financial and currency policy in the city must not be such as to endanger the financial stability of the Soviet zone. On the other hand, the western allies cannot, in any circumstances, agree that the Soviet authorities or the German Bank of Emission of the Soviet zone should exercise sole and unrestricted control over the currency and finances of Berlin.

The technical problems involved are not easy ones. Assuming that the German Bank of Emission is to issue currency for circulation both in Berlin and in the Soviet zone, the arrangements must ensure the provision of adequate currency for Berlin subject to effective four-power control, although in the Soviet zone the bank’s operations would be subject to Soviet control only. The arrangements must also ensure that financial and credit policy in Berlin, which would be under four-power control, could not be such that its repercussions might endanger the stability of the currency in the Soviet zone. Thus, assuming that the problems incident to the initial introduction of the currency are resolved, there would remain at least two basic and continuing problems. First, how should the amount of currency and credit available for all of Berlin from the German Bank of Emission be determined. Second, how should the non-discriminatory provision of currency and credit throughout the city be assured.

It must be pointed out that it will inevitably be difficult in practice to exercise four-power control of currency in a city in which the previous unified municipal administration under four-power supervision is not fully functioning at present and is indeed being rapidly diminished. This difficulty applies as well to the control of trade between Berlin and the western zones in that if the Berlin Magistrat is not functioning in respect of the whole of Berlin there will be no administrative machinery for the issuance of licenses.

The questions and answers below refer specifically to the organization and functions of quadripartite control. The brief description of the basic problems presented above will make it clear that certain technical arrangements and agreements are necessary to provide the specific assurances and safeguards required to protect the interests of the western powers and of the Soviet Union. In their absence, these problems cannot be regarded as solved merely by their assignment to quadripartite agencies. The answers to the questions asked by Dr. Bramuglia are as follows:

Question 1: What organizations will exercise the quadripartite control of the financial arrangements on behalf of the four occupying authorities?

Answer: The quadripartite control of Berlin financial arrangements will be exercised by the financial commission composed of representatives of the four military governors and responsible to them.

Question 2: What will be the functions of these quadripartite control organizations?

Answer: The functions of the quadripartite financial commission would be as follows: 1. To constitute under the military governors the controlling authority in Berlin in respect of money, credit and banking matters.

2. To exercise appropriate control over the Stadtkontor as well as other banking land credit institutions in Berlin in order to assure adequate and uniform banking and credit facilities throughout Berlin, without discrimination among the different sectors.

3. To exercise supervision and control over the activities of the German Bank of Emission of the Soviet zone but only insofar as they relate to the arrangements for the introduction and continued use of the east-mark as the sole currency in the city of Berlin.

4. To supervise and approve the fiscal policies and budgetary arrangements of the government of Berlin.

5. To supervise and control the arrangements for the introduction of the east-mark as the sole currency for Berlin and the withdrawal of the western B-mark from circulation in Berlin.

6. To supervise the issuance by the Berlin Magistrat of licenses for the import and export trade of Berlin.

Question 3: Over what operations and in what area will the quadripartite control be exercised?

Answer: The quadripartite control will he exercised over the various operations in Berlin referred to in the answer to question 2, and also over the operations of the German Bank of Emission but only insofar as they relate to the arrangements for the introduction and continued use of the east mark as the sole currency in the city of Berlin.

Question 4: What is the exact wording of the directive that must be issued to bring the quadripartite control into operation?

Answer: The four military governors will have to issue legislation in Berlin in order to put into effect arrangements for the quadripartite control of the currency there. In the absence of sufficient agreement with the Soviet Government upon the content of this legislation, the western powers have not at this time attempted to draft it in detail.

Question 5: How will trade between Berlin and the western zones and third countries be controlled, including the issuance of import and export licenses?

Answer: On this question the position of the western powers is as follows: (A) The western powers should be able freely to import food and fuel and power into their sectors of Berlin in fulfillment of their responsibilities for the health and welfare of the population, and should control the proceeds of the sale in Berlin of these imports.

(B) Other trade between Berlin and the western zones and third countries would be conducted in accordance with licenses issued by the Berlin Magistrat under the supervision of the financial commission representing the four military governors. The Soviet authorities would automatically grant transit licenses through the Soviet zone in respect of such trade.

Attention may be called to the fact that in their note of September 25, 1948,2 the Soviet Government stated that: ‘The Soviet Government has already expressed its agreement that trade between Berlin, third countries and the western zones of Germany should be placed under the control of the four-power financial commission. The Soviet Government now declares its readiness to agree to the establishment of four-power control likewise over the issuance of import and export licenses, provided agreement is reached on all other questions.’

The representatives of the western powers are anxious to provide all possible assistance in your examination of the Berlin currency problem. They are continuing their study of possible solutions in the light of current developments in Berlin. If you and your colleagues desire to enter into technical discussions on the details to be worked out, our experts will be at your disposal.”3

Sent Department Delga 890, repeated London 1329, Berlin for Murphy 736; Department please pass Moscow as 613.

Dulles

1  Delga 891, November 23, from Paris, not printed, reported the discussions of the various western draft answers to Bramuglia’s five questions eventuating in the joint reply quoted here (501.BC/11–2348).

2  Ante, p. 1181 [Pg. 1181 includes portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664].

3 For the Soviet answers to Dr. Bramuglia’s five questions, see Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, pp. 612–614, Berlin, Quellen und Dokumente, pp. 1539–1540, or Documents on American Foreign Relations, pp. 103–105.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2448: Telegram

[Document 703]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret Berlin, November 24, 1948—10 p. m.

2808. In connection with mytel 2795, November 22,1 it occurs to me that a brief recapitulation of the continuing and recently intensified Soviet aggressive moves to split Berlin might be of value. Although these developments have been reported from day to day, both through official channels and through press services, their significance does not appear to have been fully grasped in some quarters. Consequently, any refusal or reluctance to accept a solution for the currency and blockade situation which might be worked out at Paris would easily become a useful tool for Soviet propaganda, as well as a cause for misinterpretation on the part of the neutral nations and world opinion in general, unless there is full knowledge and understanding both of the realities of recent Soviet actions in Berlin and of the motives which clearly lie behind these actions.

Conditions which make it impossible today to speak of a unified city administration in Berlin are direct result of Soviet efforts to undermine authority, jurisdiction, functioning, and existence of City Assembly (and Magistrat) elected in free democratic election October 20, 1946. As Department is aware, Soviet pressure against duly elected non-Communist Berlin authorities commenced soon after their election but was intensified in recent months. Even during period when SC was discussing Berlin question and when temporary lull might have been expected, relentless and ruthless Soviet pressure continued and increased. Following are some of more flagrant Communist moves in recent weeks against legitimate Berlin authorities: 1. Arbitrary “dismissal” by Soviet military administration of city councillors Reuter and Klingelhoefer (mytel 2753, November 16, repeated London 855, Moscow 740, Paris 9322 ) from their Magistrat posts and their replacement by stooges, thereby splitting Berlin traffic and public utilities and economic departments (in addition to departments already split—Food, Labor, Post and Telegraph, Police).

2. Threatening official Soviet letters to Dr. Haas, city treasurer, and acting Mayor Friedensburg (Mytel 2796, November 22, repeated London 873, Paris 955, Moscow 7513 ).

3. Refusal by Soviet military administration to recognize City Assembly’s decision to remove Waldemar Schmidt, SED head of Magistrat Labor Department (mytel 2547, October 19, repeated London 751, Paris 808, Moscow 6493 ) thus causing split city labor department.

4. Creation in Soviet sector of “independent” Social Democratic Party (USPD) and promotion so-called “democratic bloc” (representing Soviet-dominated political parties, trade unions and other satellite organizations) in obvious endeavor split and counteract legal quadripartitely-recognized SPD, CDU, and LDP.

5. Threatening personal safety of Berlin officials by allowing SMA military tribunal to charge six of them with responsibility for inciting September 9 disturbances (mytel 2596, October 24, repeated London 783, Paris 841, Moscow 6763 ).

Following their original delaying tactics with respect to holding of elections this year in Berlin Soviets and SED have made clear fact that they will neither permit elections to be held in Soviet sector nor sanction SED participation in Western sector elections scheduled for December 5. Moreover, Soviet-licensed press, CDU and LDP splinter groups, and “democratic bloc” have publicly denounced elections and urged Berliners not to vote (see mytel 2729, November 12, repeated London 842, Paris 913, Moscow 7323 ), although harping on necessity for “orderly, democratic elections.” Soviet-oriented elements have resorted to thinly-disguised threats to induce Berliners to abstain from voting. Violence of Soviet press campaign against December 5 elections indicates they are deeply disturbed over likelihood of overwhelming Western success.

Soviet measures to draw net even tighter around Western sectors began with checking of vehicles at sectoral boundaries on October 18 and establishment numerous checkpoints to prevent flow of food, coal and other commodities into Western sectors from Soviet zone and sector. This was followed by announcement permits would be required for all goods crossing sectoral boundaries (mytel 2715, November 10, repeated Paris 903, pouched London, Moscow3 ). Intersectoral distribution of newspapers largely stopped since mid-September boycott of Soviet-licensed papers by Western sector newsdealers following establishment Soviet-sponsored newspaper distribution monopoly which prevented circulation of Western sector papers in Soviet zone and sector. In past few weeks Soviets have been making feverish plans to fit pattern of electric power distribution to sectoral boundaries rather than present overlapping system of grids, in obvious preparation for future use to meet their needs. Campaign of threats through official announcements of Reichsbahn Direktion and Soviet controlled press to cut off S-bahn (rapid transit) service for Western sector and break off intersector U-bahn (subway) service, coupled with reports of material seized from railway yards and warehouses in Western sectors, presages probable further action in immediate future against city transportation system (see also mytel 2766, November 18, repeated London 861, Paris 937, pouched Moscow4 ).

Present unilateral Soviet decision introduce new identification cards for Soviet zone and “city of Berlin” (mytel 2770, November 18, pouched London, Moscow, Paris4 ) if implemented in usual Communist fashion could bring about effective separation Soviet and Western sectors Berlin. No definite pronouncement has yet been made on whether Soviets will “require” all Berliners possess new identification, but Western observers regard this as ominous move with possible far-reaching political consequences.

Foregoing summarizes situation as of today. These facts show how far problem has gone beyond blockade and currency impasse of last July.

Sent Department 2808, repeated Paris for Bohlen and Jessup 963, London 879; Department pass Moscow as 755.

Murphy

1 Not printed; in it Murphy reported the text of a Clay cable to the Department of the Army in which he said, inter alia, that agreement on a single currency for Berlin would be valueless without the reestablishment of quadripartite supervision and a single government for the entire city (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2248).

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

4 Not printed.

4 Not printed.

The Acting Head of the United States Delegation to the United Nations (Dulles) to the Secretary of State 501.BC/11–2448: Telegram

[Document 704]

The Acting Head of the United States Delegation to the United Nations (Dulles) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Paris, November 24, 1948—5 p. m.

Delga 912. Eyes Only for Secretary from Jessup. Developments here on the Berlin case make it necessary in my opinion to secure clarification of our general policy concerning the attempts to settle the Berlin issue. The principal developments to which I refer are:

First: Stephen White’s article in the Herald-Tribune, datelined Berlin, November 22, containing in direct quotes statement attributed to “an authoritative official of the American Military Government”.1 While this may be a product of irresponsible journalism, you know the effect which such stories may have. The impression conveyed by the quotations in the article is that either the United States has repudiated the policy which we have been following and which was clearly indicated in your reply to the Evatt–Lie letter,2 or else that there is a wide split between our authorities in Berlin and Washington.

The publication of this article has caused me major embarrassment in my negotiations with the French and British, and inevitably has increased the suspicion which you know has frequently pervaded French circles relative to our policy on Germany and on the Berlin question in particular. Following the difficulties fused [caused] by the Ruhr announcement3 and preceding by a few hours Ambassador Caffery’s and my call on Schuman to present our request concerning plans for the introduction of the Western mark as the sole currency of Berlin, this article seemed to give greater significance to the second development.

Second: The second development is that on the arrival of Knapp and Abramson from Washington to render expert assistance on details of a currency plan for Berlin, I became fully aware for the first time of the fact that there is not and never has been an overall United States position concerning a technical plan for introducing the Soviet mark as the sole currency of Berlin under quadripartite control. The Washington point of view which they presented made it necessary for me to notify the French and British that on the basis of instructions from Washington I could no longer agree to the reply to Bramuglia’s questions to which I had given personal approval subject to instructions. While we found a way to get over this hurdle and to reconcile our difficulties, the cumulative impression upon the French and perhaps on the British is most harmful.

Following your talk with Pearson of Canada,4 I spent an hour with him, alone, Monday night and repeated your assurances that we desired to secure a settlement of the Berlin question and were prepared to cooperate fully and loyally with him and the other members of the six in working out a plan. He is bringing Norman Robertson to Paris to concentrate on the technical aspects in conjunction with the Belgian expert and the experts of the three Western governments.

As I understand our policy as developed in various conversations with you in Paris, it is based on the following proposals which are to guide my activities: 1. We stand on our position which you and President have frequently stated that we will not be forced out of Berlin.

2. We do wish to settle the Berlin question in the sense of securing the lifting of the blockade.

3. We will not buy such a settlement by any appeasement or by a repudiation of our fundamental thesis that we will not resume negotiations under duress.

4. We are still willing to have the Soviet mark introduced as the sole currency of Berlin under Four-Power control provided that the blockade is lifted.

5. We recognize that recent Soviet actions in Berlin leading to the splitting of the city greatly increase the difficulties of finding a formula on the currency which will give reasonable protection to our interests.

6. We recognize that following the elections of December 5, the split of the city will probably be complete and that this factor must be borne in mind in working out any currency plan.

7. While these developments increase the difficulties, they do not introduce a wholly novel element in the sense that we have from the first recognized that no matter how good a technical plan is agreed upon, there would remain serious risk that the Soviets could manipulate the situation to hamper and even perhaps to destroy our position in Berlin through economic and financial manipulation.

8. In the negotiations for elaborating a currency plan for Berlin, we are still ready to operate on the basis of the principles contained in the August 30 directive although we do not admit that the August 30 directive constitutes a binding international obligation.

9. We have for a long time, in accordance with a suggestion from the Department, had in mind the possibility that neutral financial experts might themselves evolve a currency plan which the Council would ask us to accept and which we would accept whether or not it met all of our views.

10. When we took the decision to submit the Berlin case to the Security Council, we accepted the risk that the Security Council might ask us to accept some solution which we did not consider 100 percent perfect. We have recognized from the outset that our principal safeguard against such risks lay in our friendly relations, particularly with the Canadians, who, through Pearson, are now intensifying their efforts to guide developments.

11. This means that our experts while endeavoring to secure what seems to us the best possible solution, cannot flatly refuse to go along with alternatives proposed by the experts of the six. In view of our conclusion that, failing successful progress in the Security Council activities, we must proceed to the introduction of the Western mark as the sole currency of Berlin on December 10 or at the latest on December 20, we are under a special obligation to bend every effort to enable the Security Council to develop its plans and to refrain from interposing political or technical obstacles.

12. In regard to the combination of work on the currency plan with Bramuglia’s idea of a staggered lifting of the blockade, Pearson has, and is justified in having as a result of his talk with you, the understanding that we do not exclude the possibility of accepting some arrangement along these lines. Pearson has very much in mind the necessity of presenting any such proposal in a way which you would emphasize that the blockade is actually being lifted and that any reimposition of the blockade in case of a breakdown of the currency plan would constitute a Soviet disregard of the view of the Security Council.

Have just received Carter’s No. 1 to Bohlen for me relative to Clay’s message to Draper.5 In our conversation with Clay, I specifically asked when he said that the introduction of the Soviet mark as the sole currency would be utterly impossible with the completely split city after December 5, if he meant that it really would be “impossible”. He corrected his absolute statement and admitted that it would not be impossible but that it would involve new considerations requiring new arrangements. The situation may boil down to this: The best plan which the neutrals may produce after consultation with our experts may in the opinion of the latter afford us insufficient protection in terms of the necessary Four-Power control; in other words that it will enable the Russians to make our position in Berlin untenable. While we shall make every effort to persuade neutrals not to propose such a plan, and I believe we shall be successful in this, we would of course need to secure instructions as to whether we should accept or reject it if it is proposed.

Unless I receive instructions to the contrary, I shall proceed here to make every effort to assist the six in working out currency plan at the earliest possible date and shall instruct staff here, while pressing for most favorable plan possible, to avoid anything which might be considered as obstructionist tactics. If you wish to change your instructions to me I should appreciate word soonest in order that I can prepare our retreat with as little damage to our reputation as possible. Paragraph eight of London’s 917, November 23,6 presents fair balance of alternatives, but I believe decision should not at this stage be based merely on these factors without taking into account our commitments to French, British, and the six. If you wish to confirm your instructions along the lines indicated above, or otherwise, I believe it of utmost importance that these should be telegraphed to me and repeated to Berlin for their information.

Bohlen generally concurs in foregoing but will comment in separate message on his understanding of the immediate issues confronting us here in Paris.7 [Jessup.]

Dulles

1 In his telegram 2832, November 28, from Berlin, not printed, Ambassador Murphy reported that General Clay had been interviewed by correspondent White. Clay’s remarks formed the basis for White’s article. Clay had, however, not departed from established policy in his statements to the correspondent. (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2848)

2 Regarding the letter under reference, addressed to the United States, the united Kingdom, France, and the Soviet Union on November 13, see the editorial note, p. 1251 [Pg. 1251 includes portions of Doc. 696 and Doc. 697].

3 The reference here is presumably to United States and British Military Government Law No. 75, November 10; regarding the issuance of these laws, see the editorial note, p. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309].

4 No record of this talk found in the Department of State files.

5  Not printed; it quoted a message from General Clay to Secretary Draper which read in part as follows: “… election in Berlin of 5th December will almost certainly result in split city which will necessitate immediate issue of western currency and will, in fact, make acceptance of single currency after that date virtually impossible. Soviet rejection of election necessitates Soviet rejection of elected government. To bring city back under single government would then require new election which would repudiate 5th December election and which would not likely be accepted by Democratic German parties holding 5th December elections.

“Political events have overtaken the currency question which is in my opinion no longer the main issue which when resolved would lift blockade. Unfortunately, neutrals do not understand this and could effect a currency solution which seems sound but which we could not accept because of existing political situation. This would, in effect, make us appear to be the unyielding power.” (501.BC/11–2348)

6  Not printed; the paragraph under reference here read as follows: “8. The question, it seems to me, is whether in the absence of four-power control of the municipal affairs of Berlin, any four-power control over currency, however extensive or limited which is consistent with our rights in Berlin, plus a satisfactory trade agreement accompanied by the lifting of the blockade, will make it easier or more difficult to stay in Berlin than would be the case under a conclusively divided city with the Western mark ‘B’ circulating as the exclusive currency in the western sectors and with the blockade continuing indefinitely in force.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2348)

7  Bohlen felt the immediate issue was the nature of the approach of the neutral experts. If they tried to mediate at the technical level, they might easily produce a plan that would be totally unrealistic due to the split in Berlin. If they set out to study the problem of quadripartite control of the Soviet mark, then Bohlen believed that the experts would arrive at the same conclusions as the western experts (Delga 935, November 25, from Paris, not printed (501.BC/11–2548)). In telegram 2832, November 28, from Berlin, not printed, Murphy reported Clay’s agreement with these comments by Bohlen (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2848).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 501.BC/11–2548: Telegram

[Document 705]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

top secret
us urgent Washington, November 25, 1948—4 p. m.

Gadel 586. For Jessup and Bohlen Eyes Only. Your understanding of our policy with respect to settlement of Berlin question before UN (re Delga 9121 ) is confirmed along following lines: 1. US stands on position which Pres and Secretary have frequently stated, in particular in our notes of Sept 22 and 26,2 that we will not be forced out of Berlin. This policy has full bi-partisan support.

2. US wishes settle Berlin question by securing lifting of blockade.

3. We will not buy such settlement through appeasement or through repudiation of our basic thesis that we will not resume negotiations under duress.

4. We are still prepared to have Soviet mark introduced as sole currency of Berlin under four-power control of its introduction and continued supply provided blockade is lifted.

5. We recognize that recent Soviet actions in Berlin leading to splitting of city greatly increase difficulties of finding formula on currency which will give reasonable protection to our interests.

6. It must be recognized that following elections of Dec 5 division of city will probably be complete and that this factor should be borne in mind in working out SC recommendations including any currency plan under four-power control. We note that three power answer to Bramuglia 3 raises this issue.

7. While these developments increase the difficulties they do not introduce a wholly new element in the sense that we have long recognized that no matter how good a technical plan is agreed there remains a certain risk that Sovs could manipulate situation to hamper our position in Berlin. We must however take all reasonable precautions to reduce this risk through good offices of neutrals, through safeguards in agreement designed to prevent its becoming in Sov hands an instrument of economic strangulation, and through reserving our right to regain free hand if Sovs breach agreement. We will not be traded out of Berlin.

8. US is still prepared in negotiations for a currency solution to operate on basis of agreed three power interpretation of principles contained in Aug 30 directive. We do not however admit that this directive constitutes a binding international agreement.

9. We continue to have in mind possibility that neutral financial experts might themselves evolve currency plan which SC would ask us to accept and which we would be prepared to do whether or not it met all of our views in their entirety provided foregoing principles are maintained. We would be justified in insisting that SC supervise for specified period operation of any such currency scheme in order to insure its faithful observance, along lines suggested in Delga 917.4 Any SC proposal should make provision that currency plan should not be utilized to interfere with trade and that Western Powers should control proceeds of imports.

10. In submitting Berlin case to SC we accepted risk that SC might ask us to accept some solution which we did not consider 100% perfect. Our principal safeguards against such risk lie in understanding of our position and realities of Berlin problem by neutrals, provisions designed to prevent perversion of agreement, and reservation of our rights if Sovs break agreement (see para 7).

11. Our experts while endeavoring to secure the best possible solution cannot refuse to go along with any alternatives proposed by experts of the Six which safeguard basic principles of our position and with understanding that SC assumed responsibility for fulfillment. Since failing successful progress in SC activities we must proceed to introduction of Western Mark as sole currency of Berlin, by Dec 20 at latest, we are under special obligation to lend every assistance to SC and to urge upon it importance of proceeding with all maximum speed.

12. In regard to combination of work on currency plan with idea of staggered lifting of blockade, some arrangement along these lines is not to be excluded provided proposal is prepared in such a way as to emphasize that blockade is actually being lifted and that any resumption thereof in case of breakdown of currency plan would constitute Sov disregard of views of SC and would free our hand (e.g. introduction of Western currency).

We emphasize again and suggest you discuss with neutrals fact that process of obtaining our assent in principle to a proposal before acceptance in principle by Sovs tends to put us at disadvantage of having accepted proposal which is then rejected by Sovs but is thereafter used as starting point for new round of negotiations.

While, of course, we should wish to review any scheme proposed by neutrals before authorizing you formally to accept, we are confident that these instructions, which are tentative pending receipt of Bohlen’s cable5 which we understand you are discussing today, will enable you to assist in formulation of an acceptable solution if any is at all possible.6

Marshall

1  Supra.

2  Ante, p. 1180 [Pg. 1180 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663] and p. 1187 [Pg. 1187 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667].

3 Transmitted in Delga 890, November 23, from Paris, p. 1257 [Pg. 1257 is part of Doc. 702].

4  the Security Council and would observe the implementation of any trade and financial committee to advise on Berlin. The committee would be responsible to the Security Council and would observe the implementation of any trade and financial agreements on Berlin. (501.BC/11–2248)

5 Not printed; but see footnote 7 to telegram Belga 912, supra.

6 Telegram Gadel 593, November 26, to Paris, not printed, advised Bohlen and Jessup that the President and the Cabinet had seen and agreed with the contents of this telegram (501.BC/11–2648).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2648: Telegram

[Document 706]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret
us urgent Berlin, November 26, 1948—2 p. m.

2816. While I appreciate the anxiety stated by you in your 1865 November 241 I must confess to bewilderment over the notion that at eleventh hour the three western commandants should cancel Berlin election scheduled for December 5. The tone of present message is so different from Department’s excellent telegrams on Berlin currency. Over past weeks and months this mission has supplied you with a rather complete picture of Berlin situation and described in detail implications inherent in the election. Evidently our reporting plus Army reporting has failed to convey adequate picture. Quite apart from Clay’s cable to Army CC–6814, November 21,2 whole series of Berlin cables on this question during past months had, I thought, built up clear view of road which was taken at end of CFM meeting December 1947. Then I recall pointing out that we could look for trouble in Berlin and that bridge across Elbe would undoubtedly go out. I thought Department was prepared to meet the issue as it followed through into London negotiations of last spring. In absence of major concession on either side the die was then cast. Split city is an inevitable result of Soviet determination to force west out of Berlin. De facto, city of Berlin is split now. That is why it has seemed to us that events in Berlin have overtaken Paris discussions where main emphasis is on currency. There is not much more Soviet authorities can do apart from physical intervention in western sectors to interfere with the life of western sectors and it is evident that Soviet authorities have been working toward total internal blockade to best their ability. As the perimeter of western sector is extensive, doubtless they will be unable make blockade absolute. I do not agree that election will increase friction between democratic parties in Berlin. Contrary is true. It has brought about solidarity of SPD, CDU and LDP to a point where campaign as it related to rivalry among these three is dull and colorless. These parties dropped their internal controversies during campaign and have formed solid front against Communists. Cancellation of elections at this late date could only be interpreted one way by Berlin population and by many segments of German and European population, that is a weak-kneed if not cowardly surrender and retreat before the aggressive tactics of SED backed by Soviet military administration. It would earn for west richly deserved contempt not only of German population but of Russians themselves who would see in it confession of weakness which they would exploit to the full. For us to surrender opportunity to hold democratic elections in an important area well back of mud curtain where they can have benefit of guarantee of fairness would be disastrous. It would be political defeat equivalent in effect to battle of Leipzig. It would violate provisions of Berlin constitution and cut from under feet of western occupying powers the legal and moral ground on which we base our hope future support of Berlin population. In my opinion, if we are to go to that extent to appease Soviet authorities it would be far better to immediately announce our withdrawal from city of Berlin. As far as I know neither British nor French have suggested for a moment that election be cancelled and I am convinced that British particularly would not concur. Should appeal which you mention from SC or mediating six members on basis point one original SC resolution calling upon parties to prevent incidents of nature to aggravate present Berlin situation occur, it surely should be possible to deny that democratic elections under the Berlin constitution approved by four powers, harmonizing as it does with our general allied policy re Germany, could be described as an incident aggravating the situation. I know of no responsible western sector German authorities who could be induced voluntarily to postpone elections on such ground.

While, obedient to your instruction I will talk this over General Clay, I will not show him telegram under reference or tell him Dept is entertaining such a notion unless you instruct me specifically do so because I think it will elicit some explosive reaction and there would be justified criticism of last minute vacillation and lack of courage.3

Sent Department 2816, repeated Paris Eyes Only for Bohlen 966.

Murphy

1 Not printed; it reported grave anxieties by several officers of the Departments of State and Army about the December 5 election, feeling that its effect as a demonstration would be reduced by SED non-participation, that it would increase the friction between democratic elements in the city, and that it would risk splitting the city definitely (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2448).

2 Not printed; in it General Clay stated that the December 5 Berlin election would almost certainly result in a split city which would necessitate the immediate issuance of western currency (Department of Defense Files).

3  In his telegram 2, November 26, from Paris, not printed, Bohlen made the following observations: “My only comment is that since the Soviets, in violation of a constitution which they themselves approved, declined to permit the holding of elections in their sector, they are entirely and alone responsible for the situation; and if we were to postpone the elections, which may be desirable for other reasons, we would in effect be confirming the right of the Soviets to act illegally. If feasible, a postponement of a few weeks to tide over the current Security Council activities on the question might afford a way out but I have no means of judging whether this would be practicable in Berlin.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2648)

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2748: Telegram

[Document 707]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

top secret Berlin, November 27, 1948—8 p. m.

2826. Deptel 1865 and mytel 2816.1 Following summarizes situation regarding December 5 election Berlin:

Article 4 of provisional Berlin constitution which was written by Allied Kommandatura and approved by it and by Coordinating Committee of ACC, states that City Assemblymen will be elected for two years. Article 15 (1) specifies that boro assemblymen are also elected for two years. Article 35 (1) provides that City Assembly will submit to allied powers by May 1, 1948, draft of new constitution and that, as soon as constitution approved, elections must be held under its provisions. New constitution was submitted April 29, 1948, and discussed as long as Kommandatura existed, with our agreement. Hence provisional constitution remains in effect, and new elections must be held under its provisions. All four allies have committed themselves on this point, and the fact that Soviets have violated commitments does not release other allies from it.

Initiative for December 5 elections came exclusively from Germans however on September 6, 1948 City Assembly meeting in British sector (after unsuccessful attempt hold regular meeting in Soviet sector), without SED members, who refused to attend, passed electoral ordinance prepared by Magistrat, set November 14 as election date, and specified that electoral ordinance be submitted to allied commandants for approval. Magistrat September 9 confirmed ordinance and date, but decided not to submit ordinance to allies. At insistence of City Assembly, Acting Mayor Friedensburg on September 29 sent electoral ordinance to all four allies who received it October 2. On October 7 US, British and French commandants approved ordinance and holding of elections on or about 14 November, thereby committing themselves once again to permit elections. Soviets meanwhile prevented printing of election proclamation, in Official Gazette, which according to electoral ordinance must occur at least six weeks before election itself.

On October 8 City Assembly after rather acrimonious debate as to who was to blame for delays, postponed election date until December 5 and instructed Magistrat to make all necessary preparations. General Kotikov October 20 sent long letter to Friedensburg listing impossible conditions for holding elections in his sector. Magistrat and City Assembly thereupon decided to go ahead with elections in three west sectors. Further declarations and counter declarations passed between Soviets and Magistrat without altering decision on either side. Re mytel 2656, November 1, repeated London, Paris 872 and Moscow 7062 for example. In view of Soviet attitude, SED has naturally taken no part in election preparations.

All formal preparations have now been made by Germans for elections. SPD, CDU and LDP have submitted candidates lists and ballots have been printed. Voters lists were prepared and displayed for public inspection as required by law. Polling places prepared. City election manager Dr. Mueller Wieland November 26 announced that polls would be open from 8 a. m. to 8 p. m. to permit those workers to vote who have to work special Soviet-ordered Sunday shift December 5, and that if such workers got authorization beforehand they could vote in any polling place selected by them. Tripartite MG inspection teams have been organized and received their first briefing. German police have been placed on class one alert basis for December 5.

Electoral preparations and campaigning have had tremendous publicity in Berlin and worldwide press coverage. Although democratic parties have of course campaigned against each other, the weight of their campaigning has been placed on getting out vote as demonstration against Soviet blockade and oppression and for Berlin’s freedom. Even such original opponents of split city elections as Friedensburg are now wholly supporting them, and Friedensburg predicts at least 85 to 90 percent participation. Top leaders of West German SPD Erich Ollenhauer and Hertha Gotthelf have come to make election speeches. Others due in next few days are: Carlo Schmid of Tuebingen, Karl Mettmann of Hamburg, Lisa Albrecht of Munich, Jacobe of Iserlohn and Koos Vorrink, Chairman of Netherlands Labor Party. West CDU leader Konrad Adenauer of Cologne, man who has hated and feared Berlin and Prussia for over 30 years came to Berlin for first time since war, to speak for his party (my airgram A–892, November 242 ), as did Helene Weber, CDU delegate to Bonn Parliamentary Council. Minister President Karl Arnold of North Rhine Westphalia is due. West German LDP sending Prof. Theodor Heuse, Martin Euler, Dr. Heopker Aschoff and Franz Bluecher.

Soviet and SED are waging equally strong propaganda warfare against elections, throwing top SED men into daily anti-election meetings. Effort on that side is to frighten Berliners and West allies into calling off December 5 splitter elections and accepting Soviet conditions for truly democratic elections. Failing this, their aim is to induce Berliners by thinly disguised threats of reprisals to abstain from actually voting.

In summary it might be said that December 5 elections, which originated out of legal necessity, have become for Berliners and Germans in general, more and more with every Soviet effort to stop them, an eagerly awaited opportunity to show the world by the volume [of] their vote which side they stand on, and have become for much of West World, in spite of all anti-German feelings, a demonstration of free men’s determination to defend their freedom.

Sent Department 2826, repeated Paris for Bohlen 971. Pouch copies to London and Moscow.

Murphy

1 Telegram 1865, not printed; for a summary, see footnote 1 to telegram 2816, supra.

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2648: Telegram

[Document 708]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

top secret
us urgent
niact Washington, November 28, 1948—8 p. m.

Gadel 602.1 For Jessup and Bohlen, Eyes Only.

Para. 1. It was not our intent December 5 elections be cancelled or western powers take initiative in proposing postponement. We are fully aware of disastrous consequences this would produce in German reaction and Sov evaluation our determination to stay Berlin (Berlin’s 28162 and Deptel 18653 ). What has been disturbing us is that basis upon which SC neutrals have been proceeding re currency might be different from that which would meet our requirements in event definitively split city administration resulted from December 5 elections. In other words we might be called upon to accept a currency arrangement premised on a uniform city administration which could damage our interests under different set of circumstances. Sov responsibility for splitting city and chain events justifying holding of elections western sectors clear. If you agree we feel that SC neutrals’ attention be flagged re implications present and pending events which are outrunning purely technical considerations.

Para. 2. It could be put this way. In accordance with Berlin constitution agreed four powers 1946 Germans are proceeding with elections called for after two year term. Sovs have repudiated agreement by refusing permit elections Sov Sector and so frustrating elections for whole city but Germans Western Sectors are going ahead in fulfillment their obligations. SC neutrals should take note that split city may result from Sov actions, and that if city split into two city administrations, the currency and trade plans which have been under consideration for implementation by a single city administration would become very difficult and without substantial modifications perhaps impossible. (See Clay’s CC 6896 repeated to you through MA today.4 ) Neutrals must be made aware of these new factors.

Para. 3. Element of possible definitive split city should impel urgent pressing forward of mediation efforts so that results become known earliest. With reference French approach urtel 6049,5 efforts should be made Paris by US and UK keep French in accord with election program emphasizing points raised above, particularly Western Govts must honor obligation assumed under Four Power agreement whereas Sovs are in default.6

Marshall

1 Repeated to Berlin as 1874.

2 November 26, p. 1268 [Pg. 1268 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706].

3 Not printed; for a summary of this telegram, see footnote 1 to telegram 2816, November 26, from Berlin, p. 1268 [Pg. 1268 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706].

4 Not printed; in it Clay stressed that it might be possible to use a single currency in a split city, but he was “… most doubtful if this could be accomplished under the terms of the Moscow agreement. In any event, it would require entirely different arrangements for customs inspections, trade licensing, etc., which under our proposals in Berlin meetings would be done by German officials, and many details which were agreed in our discussions with Sokolovsky would no longer be applicable. Thus, if in fact we are confronted with a split city then we must re-examine the kind of agreement which would make a single currency effective and, as necessary, modify the Moscow directive to permit such an agreement being reached.” (Department of Defense Files)

5 Not printed; it reported a communication from Schuman in which the French Government asked whether the Berlin City elections should be postponed pending a decision by the Security Council of the Berlin question (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2648).

6  In its next telegram (Gadel 603, November 28, to Paris, not printed) the Department of State transmitted the following instructions to Jessup and Bohlen: “If neutrals should suggest postponement elections until outcome present mediation effort becomes clear, we should indicate that we are in no position follow Soviet action repudiating past quadripartite agreement providing for this election, and should point out possibly disastrous effects on German population in Berlin of permitting Soviet unilateral action in their sector delay elections throughout city.… If neutrals should still insist in requesting delay, we consider their appeal should be to German City Administration rather than to Western Powers for specific delay of, say one week, with statement that unless Soviet has accepted neutrals’ proposed currency solution and also accepted a request by neutrals that elections be permitted throughout the city, neutrals consider that elections should proceed in Western Sectors on specific date, say December 12. Reason addressing City Administration aside from our reluctance to have any part in delaying election is tacit recognition this would give City Administration and Security Council approval of elections when held. However preceding two sentences purely for your background information and not for communication even to British and French. No commitment concerning delay even to this extent should be given without further consultation here.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/11–2848)

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 862.101/11–3048: Telegram

[Document 709]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, November 30, 1948.

plain

2852. Re mytel 2843, November 29.1 Following is text of reply of Clay and Robertson to Sokolovsky letter November 29 regarding Berlin elections. Koenig will send identic reply but in French. This reply will be released to press simultaneously in Frankfurt and Berlin at 2000 hours German time.

“I have received your communication of November 29, 1948 inviting my attention to certain actions taking place in Berlin preparatory to the election on December 5 of the Berlin City Assembly.

“It is my understanding that the competent authorities of the city of Berlin, acting in accordance with the Berlin provisional constitution which was approved by the four occupying powers in 1946, are proceeding with elections on December 5 which are called for after the expiration of the two-year terms of the members of the City Assembly. The Berlin authorities in due course had addressed to each of the four commandants advice regarding their purpose to hold elections obedient to the constitution. The commandants of the United Kingdom, France and United States had of course no objection.

“I notice that in the fourth paragraph of your letter you suggest that separatist elements in the Berlin Magistrat with the support of certain occupation authorities have been striving to disorganize its operation as a single municipal organization. This suggestion is one which neither I nor any unbiased observer of the events of recent months can accept. The action of the Soviet authorities in permitting the disruption of the City Assembly by hooligan elements, their arbitrary dismissal of a number of duly elected city officials without the consent of the commandants of the three western sectors, and their abandonment of the Allied Kommandatura, together with innumerable other unilateral breaches of the quadripartite arrangements for Berlin, have demonstrated the intentions of the Soviet authorities to divide the city and to prevent the exercise of democratic rights and liberties in their own sector.

“Moreover, a report has reached me according to which dissident City Assembly, acting apparently with the connivance of the Soviet authorities have today proceeded to the illegal election of certain officers to the Magistrat, in direct contravention of the city constitution. If this report is confirmed, I should be grateful to be informed whether in fact the illegal action of these persons was taken with your approval.

“For my own part I should add that I continue to desire to see reestablished at Berlin a situation corresponding to the accords which were concluded among us and which would permit under quadripartite control the unrestricted application of the Berlin constitution which was approved by the four occupying powers.”

Sent Department as 2852, Department pass Moscow as 764, London 894, Paris 983.

Murphy

1 Not printed; it transmitted a letter of November 29 from Marshal Sokolovsky to Generals Clay, Robertson and Koenig regarding the situation in Berlin; for the text of Sokolovsky’s letter, see Ruhm von Oppen. Documents on Germany, pp. 346–347, Berlin Senate, Berlin, Quellen und Dokumente, pp. 1678–1679, or Germany 1947–1949, p. 168.

Editorial Note [Document 710]

Editorial Note

On November 30, 1948 the President of the Security Council invited the Governments of Belgium, Canada, Chile, Colombia and Syria and the Secretary-General to nominate a financial or economic expert to consult with a similar expert from the Government of Argentina concerning the currency and trade aspects of the Berlin situation. The committee of these experts was to complete its study within thirty days, during which time it was empowered to consult with representatives of the four occupying powers in Berlin.

On November 30, the three western powers accepted the establishment of the committee, subject to certain reservations, and on December 4, the Soviet Union indicated that it might cooperate with the committee. For an outline of the committee’s proceedings and related documents, see Department of State, Documents and State Papers, May 1949, pages 749–782. Documentation on the committee’s proceedings is also in Department of State files 740.00119 Control (Germany) and 501.BC.

On December 5 elections for the City Assembly were held in the United States, British and French sectors of Berlin. Inasmuch as the Socialist Unity Party and its satellite organizations had carried on a campaign against participation in the elections, they became a test of strength between Communist and non-Communist forces. The election participation of over eighty-six percent was a clear victory of the non-Communist forces. For a description of the circumstances of the December 5 elections, see Elmer Plischke (with the assistance of Elisabeth Erdmann), Berlin: Development of Its Government and Administration (Historical Division, Office of the U.S. High Commissioner for Germany, 1952), pages 164–167. For documentation on the elections, including a detailed account of the results, see Berlin, Quellen und Dokumente, Chapter XIII. For a tabular description of the election results, see Germany 1947–1949, page 169.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–648: Telegram

[Document 711]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 1

top secret
us urgent Washington, December 7, 1948—7 p. m.

4673. Dept and Army regret delay and apparently some confusion have arisen in preparation plans for introduction B mark in Berlin. We note Brit propose postpone consideration until late this week (urniact 61682 ). What we desire is urgent speeding up of studies and designation some place where we can come to grips with problem soon as possible with Brit and Fr. In view presence our experts and opportunities for liaison with our del, Paris appears appropriate place if effective contact can be maintained with Brit through their Emb or del3

Re substance proposal, we have seen Clay’s comments Berlin’s 9994 to you and also experts opinion Delga 1057.5 On advice our technical committee and view importance local political factors in Berlin, we incline agree with Clay and hope some solution can be achieved with Brit and Fr preserving essentials plan he recommends. We request you explore with Brit and Fr following views Wash technical committee with which we agree: “The technical question is whether the B mark should retain its legal tender status in western Ger when it is made the sole legal tender in western Berlin. The technical arguments in favor of depriving the B mark of legal tender status in western Germany are strong, primarily from the viewpoint of protecting the currency in western Ger. But, at the same time, the risks of retaining such legal tender status do not seem so great as to make them a conclusive argument against Clay’s position. Controls against smuggling to the West could not be watertight but they would probably be reasonably effective and would cut down the currency drain to tolerable proportions. There might well be currency hoarding in Berlin but it would be preferable to goods hoarding, and in any event could be dealt with at any time if it should become imperative to cut the currency link with the West.

Under present conditions in Berlin, an independent 3-power currency might be so weak as to involve serious danger of sharp depreciation in terms of black market prices for goods and might even move to a discount in terms of Sov marks. Accordingly, it is probably preferable to return the legal tender status of the B mark in western Ger even at the risk of an undesirable drain of currency to the West.

It might be possible to work out some compromise. One such compromise might be to have the bank for the Western Sectors of Berlin be a non-voting member of the Bank Deutsche Laender. This would create the legal basis for provision of zonal currency and central bank credit to Berlin by the BDL and would at the same time overcome French objections to giving the Berlin bank a voice in zonal affairs. The French have at one time made this suggestion in Berlin.

Two points which particularly impress us are: a. The creation of a separate currency for Berlin would progressively impair the feeling Berliners have of support from the Western Zones and would have a consequently incurring severe psychological effect on their morale and resolution.

b. There are clear indications that the acceptability in the Soviet Zone and Soviet Sector of Berlin of the currency and circulation in the Western Sectors results in a very considerable quantity of supplies passing into the blockaded sectors. If separate currency introduced and its value shrinks obviously this trade would be reduced to disadvantage of western sectors.”

Re possible interest UN committee experts in reports concerning use B mark in Berlin, we consider Jessup, as reported last para Delga 1061,6 furnished appropriate answer.

Lovett

1 Repeated to London as 4563 and Berlin as 1919.

2 Not printed.

3 It was subsequently decided that the military governors in Berlin should formulate the plans for the introduction of the B mark in the city.

4 Not printed; in it Clay stated that the introduction of a third currency in Berlin was technically sound, but would probably drive West Berliners into the Soviet orbit by cutting them off from West Germany (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–548).

5 Not printed; it stated that capital flight and inflationary pressure would result from the introduction of the B mark in Berlin and stressed that the Soviets would continue to finance their illicit activities in the western zones through B marks acquired in Berlin (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–448).

6 Not printed; Jessup had stated, in the paragraph under reference here, that the western powers had been considering the possibility of the introduction of the B mark, but had fixed no date (501.BC/12–448).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1348: Telegram

[Document 712]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret
us urgent London, December 13, 1948—7 p. m.

5224. ReDeptel 4605, December 10.1

1. In company with Secretary Royall, I had today the first opportunity of discussing with Bevin the question of the introduction of the Western mark “B” in the Western sectors of Berlin and the designation of member bank of the Bank Deutsche Laender in Western Berlin.

2. Bevin said that instructions had been sent to Robertson to commence discussions on this subject with Koenig and Clay, and to arrive at an agreed currency and settle all technical matters in connection with its introduction into the Western sectors of Berlin.2 He understood why we did not favor a third currency and why we felt that the currency for the Western sectors of Berlin should be identified with the currency for the Western zones of Germany.

3. Discussions referred to in paragraph 2 above will, according to Bevin, commence this week, and the agreement reached in Berlin will be submitted by Robertson for consideration by Bevin here in London.

4. British Cabinet will not now agree to a specific date on which the currency arrangements are to be put into effect in the Western sectors. Bevin feels the introduction of such a currency should not be undertaken until after the examination and review of the report of the six neutrals has been made and His Majesty’s Government is in a position to determine what, if any, effect it may have upon the Berlin situation.

5. Bevin told me that the substance of the above had been communicated to Bohlen through McNeil in Paris.

6. Secretary Royall was present during this meeting.

Sent Department as 5224; repeated Paris as 1029, Berlin as 650.

1 Not printed.

2 In telegram 6347, December 17, from Paris, not printed, Caffery reported that Schuman had authorized Koenig to proceed with the discussions with Clay and Robertson on the introduction of the western mark in Berlin (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1748).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1648: Telegram

[Document 713]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 1

top secret
us urgent Washington, December 16, 1948—6 p. m.

4820. For Jessup and Caffery. Present State–Army views re work of SC Experts Com follow. We are repeating this message Douglas with request he discuss these views with Bevin. If British agree with us, we would expect joint approach be made French either through Caffery or yourself, followed by informal discussions by you and ur Brit and Fr colleagues with such neutral members of SC as you feel most useful.

We believe work done by Experts Com on hypothesis of split city is most unlikely be fruitful. A single currency for two Berlins seems quite impracticable. Altho from strictly technical point view currency and trade arrangements might be designed which were adaptable to this situation, continued hostility and tension inherent in split city would almost certainly frustrate effective working of such arrangements. Furthermore, it seems most unlikely Soviets would lift blockade in exchange for currency and trade arrangements which left city split unless these arrangements were so completely one-sided as to expose Western half of split city to early strangulation.

Moreover, we feel work done on hypothesis of a united Berlin becoming more and more unrealistic since every indication past few weeks points to intent of Soviets to effect complete schism of Berlin. Any currency plan on thesis of united Berlin is therefore based on major assumption political action will reunite Berlin plus large number of minor but essential assumptions as to political and economic structure of union.

If Experts Committee in face of realities of split Berlin insists on proceeding to technical report they should concentrate upon preparation of recommendations as to most equitable arrangements for currency and trade in city in which unified municipal administration has been restored. Even in this approach Experts Corn’s report should recognize plan could receive proper consideration only after essential pre-condition of political unification had been achieved.

We suggest foregoing be called immediate attention of individual neutrals and be further impressed on Robertson as opportunity offers. They should also be warned again that Western powers may soon be forced go forward with currency changeover to protect their interests in Berlin.

Question remains of extent to which Western experts should participate between now and Dec 30 in formulation Experts Committee’s recommendations. We understand Committee now envisages period active negotiations commencing early next week during which it would bargain with Western experts and with Soviet expert, and perhaps with both together, to work out an agreed compromise plan for submission by Dec 30. This procedure is based upon second (question and answer) portion of Bramuglia statement Nov 30.2 As you know, this portion of statement was never approved or even seen in advance by Western representatives, whose endorsement was confined to first portion of statement. Western experts, upon instructions, made statement at opening of Neutral Committee meetings emphasizing they were appearing on basis four numbered points in first part Bramuglia statement.

We see serious risks and disadvantages in accepting Committee’s contemplated procedure. Western experts can scarcely negotiate terms of plan with committee without committing their Govts, and we do not believe it feasible undertake definitive negotiations in this forum and in time available. Complexity of issues and need for coordination of views between Washington and Berlin and among Western Powers make such a course seem unrealistic. In view these considerations and necessity for a political settlement in Berlin as prerequisite to agreement upon technical arrangements, we believe only reasonable course action for Experts Com is to proceed through own deliberations to preparation of report for President of SC.

Committee has had from Western experts full presentation of problem and of Western views and interests, and is presumably receiving corresponding presentation from the Soviet expert. It is understandably anxious achieve compromise plan acceptable to both parties in dispute rather than some ideal technical solution. If our experts now embark upon definite negotiations with Committee they will find themselves under constant pressure make piecemeal concessions to Soviet viewpoint without knowledge of or regard for possible Soviet counter concessions. If they remain aloof, our bargaining position will be preserved and we may await with some confidence a report from the Committee (if one can be agreed upon there) which would steer some middle course between opposed views of parties to dispute. Only after report is submitted and after adequate analysis and coordination of views among Western powers, could we determine in light of then political circumstances whether report constitutes useful starting point for negotiations to be conducted through intermediation of the neutral group.

Lovett

1 Repeated to London as 4674 and Berlin as 1970.

2 Not printed; for the text of this statement, see Department of State, Documents and State Papers, May 1949, pp. 754–755.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1848: Telegram

[Document 714]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, December 18, 1948—4 p. m.

4705. For Douglas from Lovett. At National Security Council Meeting Thurs I stressed to meeting great importance to our foreign policy of airlift Berlin. NSC concurred completely in this view and asked Pres send Xmas Greetings those engaged in airlift as indication of nations’ appreciation.

Pres yesterday approved procurement of 23 transport planes to replace C–54’s worn out on airlift which indicates this country’s determination support airlift over long period.

There is great concern here arising from reports Paris on currency negotiations and of Bevin’s view concerning changeover of currency that we may have great effort and cost to US of airlift, and all western democracies’ position dependent thereon, partially or wholly neutralized by piecemeal and procrastinating economic and financial action or inaction. I am furnishing you this info on NSC action in relation to this concern in hope it may be helpful in UR [your] conversation with Bevin re our 4845 to Paris, repeated to you as 4692 and Jessup’s Delga 1199 rptd London as 1480.1 I think time has come to make decision to introduce western zone currency on 10 January and for Brit and US to urge on French in strongest terms.

Lovett

1 Neither printed; they reported on activities of the neutral committee which the Department felt might undermine the position of the western powers in Berlin through piecemeal concessions (501.BC/12–1748 and 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1748).

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–2148: Telegram

[Document 715]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

restricted Berlin, December 21, 1948—8 p. m.

2950. Three Western commandants met today in Allied Kommandatura building for first time since Soviet walkout June 16. Ganeval presided and at session’s close read to assembled press a formal declaration announcing resumption of work of “Allied Kommandatura” whose work has “been in suspense owing to the refusal of the Soviet authorities to attend its meetings” which “cannot any longer be allowed to obstruct the proper administration of Berlin, according to the law”.

Declaration holds door open to resumption of quadripartite administration at any time Soviet authorities decide to abide by quadripartite agreements. Announcement concludes that Western Allies will exercise powers of Allied Kommandatura, although Soviet obstruction will make it possible for them to carry out decisions in Western sectors only for present.

In opening meeting (20th meeting of the year) Ganeval said he did so “without particular emotion” and noted continuing presence of photographs of all four commandants on walls. No business of importance was transacted. Supplementary allotment of coal and kerosene was granted for Christmas holiday to make possible additional household lighting.

Sent Department, pouched London, Paris, Moscow.

Murphy

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–2948: Telegram

[Document 716]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret
us urgent
niact Washington, December 29, 1948—8 p. m.

4814. Further material concerning compelling need for introducing B mark as sole legal tender in Western sectors is contained in Delga 1205 of Dec 17 from Paris (rptd London 1486 and Berlin 7991 ) and in memorandum prepared in Paris for Jessup entitled “Necessity for Introducing Westmark as Sole Legal Tender in Western Sectors of Berlin”2 (copies understood available Embassies London and Paris). In presentation to British and French urging that decision be taken for currency changeover Jan 10 believe following points deserve emphasis: 1. Our freedom of action fully preserved by reservations made by Western Powers when submitting Berlin problem to UN Security Council and when accepting Bramuglia proposal for Neutral Committee.

2. Present dual currency system in Western sectors was makeshift expedient intended for operation only for brief period in order facilitate conduct negotiations with Soviets on single currency for Berlin. Abandonment this makeshift device should not be regarded as provocative, since only equalizes position created by Soviets on June 22 by their unilateral action in introducing currency of their zone as sole legal tender their sector of Berlin.

3. New Western sector government can scarcely conduct its budget operations effectively as long as entire revenue accrues in Eastmarks. Furthermore it is understandably anxious, in midst of many other difficulties, at least to have a coherent and rational currency system on which to base its efforts to support Berlin economy.

4. Split in city and anticipated suspension of Neutral Committee activities may drive Soviets to more flagrant exploitation of opportunities created for them by continued acceptance of Eastmarks as legal tender for essential payments in Western sectors.

5. Not only does continued legal tender status of Eastmark present Soviets with ready instrument for economic warfare; on other hand by introducing Westmark as sole medium of circulation we would facilitate acquisition by West Berliners of goods and services from Soviet zone and sector since Westmarks in demand for hoarding purposes in latter areas. In absence effective Soviet counter-measures (see below), net effect of currency changeover upon Soviet capacity to acquire supplies in Western sectors and Western sectors capacity to acquire supplies in Soviet territory may appreciably reduce demands on airlift.

Since British and French may possibly argue that introduction B mark will lead to Soviet reprisals in Berlin of unmanageable nature, following is furnished in rebuttal:

Although Soviets can take further reprisals against us in city, the Importance of these possible measures should not be exaggerated. If Soviets believed measures would be effective or to their net advantage, which is probably not case, they would have moved before now or will move anyway. Soviets could isolate West sectors by interdicting transportation and personnel movements across sector boundaries and attempting interfere with technical services. Interference with movement of black market commodities implicit in tight physical blockade of western Berlin would be partly counteracted by increased buying power of West Berlin population, and stronger incentive to circumvent controls. Interference with technical services could at worst become inconvenience, as each half of city either has own utilities or, as in case sewage disposal system, can improvise adequate facilities.

Soviet reprisal action against our communications from city to Western zones could take form of cutting our long line telephone telegraph connections but OMGUS reports that this contingency foreseen, and that adequate emergency radio equipment for all essential and some German civilian traffic is on spot. Furthermore, air traffic between Berlin and west is quick and plentiful, providing another means of communication. This threat to our telecommunications has existed many months, and questionable if our action re currency will affect this situation.

Even if effective blockade of Berlin does materialize in spite many factors operating against this contingency, essential requirements of West Berlin population can be met through airlift. Commodity leakage from Soviet zone into Western sectors is not essential factor and OMGUS states ability successfully to meet winter period requirements will not be affected by any retaliatory measures Soviets may take.

We should therefore not be deterred by the potential threat from denying to Western sectors of Berlin positive economic benefits to be derived from currency changeover.

Lovett

1 Not printed; in it Jessup had stressed that the western powers had refrained from introducing the B mark in Berlin in order not to obstruct the work of the Security Council, but the complete split of the city and the needs of the newly elected Magistrat demonstrated that further delay would only help the Russians (501.BC/12–1748).

2 Not found in the Department of State files.

V. Policies and problems in the United States zone of occupation of GermanyV. Policies and problems in the United States zone of occupation of Germany

[717] Editorial Note

Editorial Note [Document 717]

Editorial Note

No documentation concerned specifically and solely with the administration of the United States zone of occupation in Germany is included in this volume. The basic principles and objectives of occupation policy were set forth in the Directive to the Commander in Chief: of United States Forces of Occupation of Germany (J.C.S. 1779) which had been sent to General Clay on July 11, 1947, by the Joint Chiefs of Staff after approval by the State, War, and Navy Departments. For the text of the Directive and the statement made to the press on the occasion of its publication, see Germany 1947–1949, pages 33–41, Department of State Bulletin, July 27, 1947, pages 186–193, or A Decade of American Foreign Policy: Basic Documents, 1941—49, prepared at the request of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations by the Staff of the Committee and the Department of State, Senate Document No. 123, 81st Cong., 1st sess., pages 552–562. Documents relating to political structure, law, administration, economic policies, and educational, informational, cultural, and religious developments in the United States zone of occupation in Germany in 1948 are included in Germany 1947–1949 and in James K. Pollock, James H. Meisel, and Henry L. Bretton (eds.), Germany Under Occupation: Illustrative Materials and Documents (Ann Arbor, Michigan: George Wahr Publishing Company, 1949). Authoritative accounts of United States occupational policies and activities are contained in Clay, Decision in Germany and in Litchfield, Governing Postwar Germany. Guy A. Lee, Guide to Studies of the Historical Division, Office of the U.S. High Commissioner for Germany (Management and Budget Division, Office of the Executive Director, Office of the U.S. High Commissioner for Germany, December 1953), lists more than thirty historical monographs covering most aspects of occupation policy in the United States zone. Of particular note in connection with activities in 1948 are J. F. J. Gillen, Deconcentration and Decartelization in West Germany 1945–1953, John G. Kormann, U.S. Denazification Policy in Germany 1944–1950, and J. F. J. Gillen, State and Local Government in West Germany, 1945–1953. The planning in 1948 for the transfer of responsibility for the occupation in Germany from the Department of the Army to the Department of State is described in some detail in Chapters I and II of Guy A. Lee, The Establishment of the Office of the U.S. High Commissioner in this same series. Events in the U.S. Sector of Berlin are described in the official volume A Four Year Report: Office of Military Government U.S. Sector, Berlin: July 1, 1945–September 1, 1949 (Berlin: Public Relations, Statistical and Historical Branch, Office of Military Government, Berlin Sector, n.d.).

VI. Basic statements of policy regarding GermanyVI. Basic statements of policy regarding Germany

[718] Editorial Note

[719] Memorandum by the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Secretary of State and the Under Secretary of State

Washington, August 12, 1948.

Policy Planning Staff Files: Lot 64 D 563: Box 20029: Germany

[720] Department of State Policy Statement

[Washington,] August 26, 1948.

711.00/8–2648

[721] Report by the Policy Planning Staff

Washington, November 15, 1948.

Policy Planning Staff Files: Lot 64 D 563: Box 20029: Germany

[722] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

Berlin, December 13, 1948.

711.00/12–1348

Editorial Note [Document 718]

Editorial Note

This chapter presents a selection of the most important general policy papers on Germany. These papers cover the full range of major German policy issues. The most important of these issues have been documented in detail in the preceding chapters of this volume. An elaborate cross-reference apparatus has not been included with these papers. Readers should consult the earlier chapters for topics and negotiations referred to in the following pages.

Memorandum by the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Secretary of State and the Under Secretary of State Policy Planning Staff Files: Lot 64 D 563: Box 20029: Germany

[Document 719]

Memorandum by the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Secretary of State and the Under Secretary of State 1

secret Washington, August 12, 1948.

Policy Questions Concerning a Possible German Settlement

As arranged with Mr. Lovett and Mr. Bohlen, the Policy Planning Staff, assisted by other officers of this Department and by officers detailed from the War Department, has been studying the over-all problems involved in a possible four-power meeting in the near future.

On the basis of this preliminary examination, certain considerations have presented themselves which. I wish to bring to your attention at this time. The members of the Policy Planning Staff concur in this paper; but I have made no attempt to clear it in a wider circle, since I think that it should come to your attention before this is done.

If the present talks2 were to lead to a four-power meeting, it appears to us that we would not be able to plan adequately for such a meeting until we had made a broad political decision on the following question: Is it in our national interest to press at this time for a sweeping settlement of the German problem which would involve the withdrawal of Allied forces from at least the major portion of Germany, the termination of military government and the establishment of a German Government with real power and independence? Or should we, and could we, be content to carry on for the time being, as we have been doing, with a divided Germany, holding the line with our own forces and our own prestige while we endeavor to strengthen western Europe?

Before discussing the merits of this question, I would like to make certain comments about it.

First, it is basically a question of timing. Some day our forces must leave central Europe. Some day Soviet forces must leave. Some day Germany must again become a sovereign and independent entity. The question is “when”? Is this the best time for these things to happen? Or can we hope that there will be a future time which will be more favorable?

Secondly, it seems to us, on the basis of our preliminary study, that there is no acceptable middle ground between these two solutions. We doubt the possibility of unifying Germany under four-power control. We feel that Germany can be unified only by the departure of the major Allies from the German scene and not by further efforts on their part to collaborate in the military government of Germany; that there will be no unification as long as the zonal boundaries remain; and that the zonal boundaries will remain, in one form or another, as long as Russian forces remain. Therefore, if Allied forces remain at all in the heart of Germany, there will be zones and there will be a divided Germany. In these circumstances, we shall have no choice but to proceed with the vigorous implementation of the London Conference program;3 the Russians will set up a rival Government in their zone; and the fight will be on for fair.

Now it may be asked: why do we have to take this decision at all? Can we not simply state our minimum terms for a German settlement and let the decision flow from the course of the negotiations, as we have done in the past? The chances for agreement, after all, are very slim. It is not likely that we will find ourselves actually bound to any settlement we may propose.

We do not feel that this is a sound argumentation. We should not consent to let the important decisions depend entirely on the action of others. The conditions on which we could accept a German settlement cannot be abstractly defined. They would depend in certain respects on our judgment as to the real desirability of reaching such a settlement at this time. However poor the chances for agreement, we should not enter into negotiations unless we would be really prepared to accept that agreement if we got it.

I would also like, before going into the argumentation pro and con, to spell out in a little greater detail what we have in mind by the first of these alternatives. It differs in certain important respects from the position with which we have approached previous CFM conferences. The main points of difference are these: a. We are no longer thinking in terms of the establishment of German unity by quadripartite agreement, to be administered under quadripartite control, as a prerequisite for the later establishment of a provisional German Government and for a gradual reduction of the powers of military government. We have in mind, for reasons indicated above, the early abandonment of military government, establishment of a German government with real powers, and withdrawal of the occupying forces entirely from the major portion of Germany. Allied forces, under this concept, might still be kept on the periphery of Germany, as for example in the Rhineland and in Silesia, but only on a garrison status, without civil affairs responsibility. Their function would be to serve as a sanction for the observance by a German Government of the necessary demilitarization controls. Some form of quadripartite controls of this nature would of course be provided for.

b. We think it would be well if we could get away from the idea that there must be a peace treaty. We see no theoretical justification for any “treaty of peace” between the Allies and the Germans, and feel that it complicates unnecessarily the real issues of the German settlement. The four Allies are the custodians of German sovereignty, as a result of the conquest and subjugation of Germany. They can turn over, whenever they want and to whom they want, the total of, or any part of, that sovereignty. There is no need for any compact with the Germans. For this reason, we think that it might be better if the next four-power meeting were not called a “CFM” meeting. The CFM is bound by its terms of reference to the principle that there shall be a treaty of peace.

c. We feel that this solution would be acceptable only if linked to a similar agreement on Austria providing for complete evacuation of that country, and, if possible, with final agreement on Trieste.

Now for the relative advantages and disadvantages of a broad settlement such as that outlined above. The advantages are the following:

1. It would avoid congealment of Europe along the present lines.

We can no longer retain the present line of division in Europe and yet hope to keep things flexible for an eventual retraction of Soviet power and for the gradual emergence from Soviet control, and entrance into a free European community, of the present satellite countries. The recent London Conference and Western Union developments have demonstrated that if Europe continues divided, both we and the Russians will have to take measures which will tend to fix and perpetuate, rather than to overcome, that division. We have been able to avoid this congealment thus far only because the reconstruction of Europe had not progressed far enough to give this effect to the measures taken on both sides. Today, we have come to a point where our measures are bound to have more lasting effect. If we carry on along present lines, Germany must divide into eastern and western governments and western Europe must move toward a tight military alliance with this country which can only complicate the eventual integration of the satellites into a European community. From such a trend of developments, it would be hard—harder than it is now—to find “the road back” to a united and free Europe.

2. It would solve the Berlin situation without detriment to ourselves or to the Berlin population.

We could then withdraw from Berlin without loss of prestige, and the people of the western sectors would not be subjected to Soviet rule, because the Russians would also be leaving the city.

3. It would permit us to take advantage of a peculiarly favorable political situation in Germany.

All reports indicate that the Berlin conflict has radically improved political sentiment throughout Germany, from the western standpoint. This is particularly true among the people of Berlin itself, whose feelings would have special importance if a German Government were to be set up in that city. It is the initial period which will probably be decisive in future German political development. Communist chances for success depend largely on their ability to seize power at the start. The present would therefore be a favorable moment to effect the transition from military government to German political responsibility. There may not be another such moment.

4. It would bring about a certain withdrawal of Soviet forces toward the east.

Getting the Soviet forces out of the major portion of the present Soviet zone should go some distance toward assuaging the fears of the members of the Brussels Union, providing U.S. forces remain somewhere in or near Germany. It might actually be possible to arrange for the stationing of U.S. and Soviet garrison forces at points where they could be supplied by sea, thus obviating the necessity for supply linces through Poland. But even though this were not possible, the Russians would still, under the arrangement contemplated, not be able to deploy their forces in strength or hold large scale maneuvers outside their own frontiers except on the territory of their ally, Poland, which would be less satisfactory to them and less menacing to the western European countries than the present situation.

5. It would greatly reduce the size and cost of our military establishment in Germany,* and the scope of its responsibilities.

To these advantages, of a positive nature, should be added the following disadvantages of the alternative course: namely, of carrying on with a divided Europe. If we carry on as we have been doing:

1. The Berlin situation would still be with us, in one form or another.

We may get an agreement at this time which would bring about a removal of the restrictions on our access to Berlin in the prospect of four-power negotiations; but if the negotiations are not successful and if we revert to the London program, it must be regarded as almost certain that the Russians will continue to do everything in their power to make it difficult for us in Berlin. In other words, there is no satisfactory solution of the Berlin situation under the divided set-up.

2. It would mean the establishment of a rival German government in the Soviet zone, with corresponding complications for the political progress of our western zones.

3. We would face a growing problem in our relations with the western zone Germans.

Available information indicates that there is developing among the Germans a strong current of political restiveness and a determination to regain responsibility for the conduct of their own affairs. At the moment, this current is not directed against us; but it could easily become so. The real German leaders will continue to shun governmental responsibility in terms of a divided Germany. With Germany divided, and with the continued responsibility for occupation in the west, we will find it more difficult than we now anticipate to turn over to German authorities enough power to attract these German leaders to open assumption of responsibility. If they cannot be brought to this point, we will have to continue to work through discredited persons, regarded by the Germans as puppets; and real German political developments will go underground and take on more and more the character of an opposition to the occupational authority. Something, in other words, is going to have to be done to meet the insistent German demand for greater responsibility. It would be much easier to meet this demand in a unified Germany than through the London program.

4. The ERP action for Germany must lead to unsatisfactory results.

Without the loosening up of the situation in Europe and without a considerable development of east–west trade, there is no prospect of German viability. ERP will certainly not eliminate the dependence upon ourselves of the western zones of a divided Germany. If we are not to be faced with an ugly problem upon the termination of the ERP program we must find some way to broaden the background of German recovery and to relieve ourselves of the excessive responsibility we now bear for German economy. The unification of Germany under a German government would not simplify the recovery program for the short term, or reduce its cost—quite the contrary. But it would seem—in the absence of any real European federation—to be the only road through which German recovery and economic viability might be achieved in the long run, and the direct responsibility of this Government for German economic affairs diminished. In carrying on with an effort to bring recovery to the western portions alone of a divided Germany, we are really working for the unattainable. It has been politically worthwhile to do this, up to the present; but we must remember that at some time we have got to get ourselves out of this box.

5. Continuance of the present situation raises questions with regard to future appropriations.

At the present time, the most vital elements of our German policy are absolutely dependent on the willingness of Congress to make recurring appropriations for the occupation and military government of Germany. This involves an element of uncertainty which is bound to increase with time. Somewhere there must be a time-limit to Congress’s willingness to support this operation. A sudden shift of congressional sentiment could now place use in an extremely embarrassing position, which would be detrimental to our whole situation in Europe. Any step which would reduce this financial burden would therefore have a positive value.

So much for the disadvantages of carrying on with present arrangements and for the advantages of seeking a broad settlement over Germany.

How about the other side of the picture. What are the disadvantages of trying to get a general German settlement at this time and the advantages of carrying on with a policy based on the development of western Germany and western Europe?

First: the disadvantages of a general German settlement at this time, along the lines discussed above:

1. To turn political responsibility over to a German Government at this time would be to assume a new and great risk.

The Germans, from all accounts, are confused, embittered, self-pitying and unregenerate. Western concepts of democracy have only a slender foundation among them. There is a very good prospect that they will move toward a strongly nationalistic and authoritarian form of government. We cannot be sure that a new German regime would not enter into political deals with Moscow at the expense of the west, or that it will not be captured by the German communists.

2. To set up a German Government at this time would complicate the ERP program.

It would be much simpler, for the short term, if the ERP relationship could be restricted to the western zones, as already established. The addition of the Soviet Zone to the present ERP area would only create a need for increased appropriations and complicate the whole political-administrative framework of the recovery program.

3. To set up a German Government at this time would complicate the Western Union discussions.

As long as western Germany is occupied by western forces, the role of Germany in the concept of “western union” can be conveniently ignored. If a united Germany were again to become a political entity, the relationship of that entity to the other western European countries would have to be clarified. For this the French are poorly prepared. They would scarcely welcome German participation. Yet a repudiation of the Germans by the west might automatically impel them into the Soviet camp.

4. This sort of a settlement would mean the reestablishment of Germany as the only great state in central Europe.

In other words, in the absence of some real union of the European nations, this would reestablish, in essence, the status quo of 1920, and invite the same ensuing disasters. The mere proposal of it would be bound to alarm and dismay the French. It would create the framework from which Germany could some day renew the attempt to dominate the continent. In this sense, it would raise the question as to what we had gained, in the long term, by our recent war effort.

5. Since half-way measures will be difficult here, it means turning over to the Germans more power than most of us have really contemplated at this time.

A gradual transfer of power would be difficult even if we were doing this all ourselves and did not have Russians to bother about. Given the impossibility of real four-power collaboration in these matters, it becomes almost impossible. We will thus find ourselves compelled to turn over to the Germans powers on a scale for which neither we nor the western Europeans are psychologically prepared.

To these considerations should be added the positive advantages of carrying on as we are. They are the following:

1. We have the London program ready for implementation.

A lot of careful effort and considerable anguish has gone into the preparation and adoption of this program. It would be easier not to have to abandon it. The same applies to all the other inter-zonal arrangements we have made with the British and French.

2. We would be able to carry on normally with the ERP and Western Union programs.

3. The western Europeans, particularly the French, would continue to have the reassurance of knowing that our forces were stationed in the heart of Europe.

4. There could be no question of the extension of Russian police power into the heart of Germany.

It is quite apparent from the above that we are faced here with a painfully difficult decision, with respect to which the pertinent considerations are so closely balanced as to present a real dilemma. To this dilemma there can be no wholly satisfactory solution. What I am about to say I therefore say with great reservation and with the realization that there is a great deal to be said against it.

It is my own view that, balancing all the considerations set forth above, it would be better for us to seek and accept at this time, if we can get it, the broad general settlement of the German question described above. Of course, if we cannot get it, we should proceed vigorously with the London program.

The reasons by which I arrive at this view are reflected, for the most part, in the above discussion. But I wish to mention specifically those considerations which seem to me to be the prevailing ones.

The solution I favor is unquestionably, for the immediate future, the harder of the two. So often, the course of action and change is harder than the course of inaction. But I doubt that there is any easy way out of our involvement in Germany, now or at any time. And I doubt that there will be a future time when this disengagement will be any easier for us than it is today. This is a case where we must try hard not to think statically, in terms of the situation we now have before us, but dynamically, in terms of the trends of development in Germany and elsewhere which will determine the background of our action in future. It is my feeling that if the division of Europe cannot be overcome peacefully at this juncture, when the lines of cleavage have not yet hardened completely across the continent, when the Soviet Union (as I believe) is not yet ready for another war, when the anticommunist sentiment in Germany is momentarily stronger than usual, and when the Soviet satellite area is troubled with serious dissension, uncertainty and disaffection, then it is not likely that prospects for a peaceful resolution of Europe’s problems will be better after a further period of waiting. Even if we can wait (which is possible), even if the other Europeans can wait (which is more doubtful). I do not think that the Germans can. I believe that something is happening, and cannot help but happen, in the political evolution of the Germans which we will either have to recognize and give scope to or make it our business to suppress. And I would not like to see us do the latter.

The strongest arguments against the course which I favor are those which relate to the danger of the reestablishment of a unified Germany and the risk which surrounds the behavior of such a Germany in the future as a powerful member of the European community. These are serious arguments, the force of which cannot be denied. I myself have never felt that the reestablishment of Germany in this way was the desirable answer to the German problem.

But beggars can’t be choosers. The fact of the matter is that there is no solution of this German problem except in terms of a federated Europe into which the several parts of Germany could be absorbed. Without such a Europe, the partition of Germany would be a futile attempt at retrogression. Such a Europe can be created only by the Europeans, not by us. But they have not yet created it; and it looks as though it would be a long time before they did.

Plainly, no such constructive solution of the German problem will, or could, be found in the face of the tragic east–west differences which now divide Europe. This is the real reason why Germany must be given back to the Germans. The inability of the recent Allies to agree on the treatment or the future of Germany obliges them, by a sort of iron logic, to restore the power of decision to the Germans themselves. For the development of life in Europe cannot await the composure of east–west differences. Something must be done; and something will be done, whether we like it or not.

Frustrated as we are in our efforts to agree with Moscow about the future of Germany,—faced with the weariness and timidity and lack of leadership among the western European allies which prevents them from making real progress towards a federation of at least the western European peoples,—saddled ourselves with responsibility for the early restoration of hope and progress among the western Germans,—I do not see that we have any choice but to strive for a general relinquishment of Allied responsibilities in Germany and for the assumption of the risk of granting to the Germans the ability to manage their own affairs. If we cannot get agreement to this, we shall at least have made the gesture, which is important.

In considering such a course, we can of course envisage continued allied controls designed to enforce complete demilitarization. These should serve in some measure to obviate, or at least to postpone, the danger of a resurgence of German aggression. Beyond that, there is a good chance that the two great military defeats of the last World Wars will have left their mark on the Germans, and that the peak of the German will and ability to subjugate Europe may prove to have passed with the Hitler era. In any case, such automatic controls as we devise could be reinforced by a really vigorous and serious effort on our part to understand the background of German political thought and to influence it in directions compatible with our interests. It is my impression that this is something we have not yet seriously attempted to do.

The above is my personal view in the light of such information as the Staff now has before it. I would certainly not recommend that any decision be taken on so momentous a question before a considerably broader foundation of advice has been obtained. If the present Moscow talks lead to an agreement envisaging four-power negotiations, then measures should be taken at once to bring to bear on this subject the best opinion of our appropriate representatives in Europe. And the matter should certainly be thoroughly explored with Republican leaders; for whoever wins the election is going to have to live with the results of whatever decision we take today.

Pending the completion of the present Moscow discussions, no further steps need be taken. But I feel that we should all have these problems actively in mind.

George F. Kennan

1  This memorandum was circulated as PPS 37 within the Department of State for comments by EUR, O, and E. Hickerson summarized the views of EUR in a memorandum to Kennan of August 31, not printed, stating that “… the dangers of the proposed approach outweigh its advantages and that it would not be in the interests of the United States to make this proposal.” He then added the following: “An agreement with the U.S.S.R. as we all know, is respected by that country only so long as it suits Soviet interests to do so. The other side must possess sufficient strength to make it unprofitable to the U.S.S.R. to do violence to the agreement. It seems to me that it would be highly dangerous to agree to unite Germany along the lines you propose until Western Europe is stronger, both economically and militarily. This is the basis of my fundamental objection to the bold and imaginative proposal in your paper.” (Policy Planning Staff Files: Lot 64 D 563: Box 20029)

Reinstein developed the views of E in a memorandum to Thorp, September 6, not printed. He felt the establishment of a German Government “… would involve a risk of uncertain but considerable magnitude to the ultimate success of the European Recovery Program and might bring about economic conditions in Germany which, in the short run, would provide a favorable economic climate for the spread of Communism and other authoritarian ideologies.” Reinstein’s own view was “… that, unless an agreement regarding Germany is thought likely to alter fundamentally the objectives of Soviet foreign policy, it would be wiser to develop Western Germany politically and economically as part of a Western European system under the supervision and protection of the Western Allies, until a firmer basis for a democratic Germany emerges there, than at this time to cast Germany loose in the hope that things will work out for the best.” (CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 2177)

Saltzman advanced O’s arguments, after studying the comments of EUR and E, in a memorandum to Kennan, September 20, not printed. He believed the United States could not risk the removal of its occupation forces at that time, since there was no way to guarantee that the Russians would not exert pressure on a free German Government. Once the troops were removed there would be no way to enforce agreements. (Policy Planning Staff Files: Lot 54 D 563: Box 20029)

On the cover of the copy of this paper in the Policy Planning Staff files Lovett had written: “This needs much more discussion with the Secretary.”

2 The reference here is to the discussions in Moscow during August of the four occupying powers in Germany. For documentation on these discussions see pp. 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592] ff.

3 For documentation relating to the implementation of the recommendations of the London Conference on Germany, see pp. 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 252] ff.

* Including its present military government appendages. [Footnote in the source text.]

Department of State Policy Statement 711.00/8–2648

[Document 720]

Department of State Policy Statement 1

secret [Washington,] August 26, 1948.

Germany

Note: This statement was prepared early in the summer of 1948, at a time when European developments had forced a reconsideration of earlier policies to meet the exigencies of the existing situation. The failure of the CFM conferences on Germany, the inauguration of the European Recovery Program, the virtual suspension of quadripartite machinery for the control of Germany, the initiation of measures for implementing the London agreements of the western powers relative to the three western zones, and the Berlin crisis have been factors in this situation. The present statement attempts to present US German policy in the light of these developments and to clarify the present status of policies that may be the subject of re-examination and negotiation. Because of the fluid nature of the German situation this statement cannot be entirely up-to-date at the time of issue.

a. objectives

The fundamental objective of the United States with respect to Germany is to insure that Germany does not again menace the peace of the world and makes a vital contribution to the economic rehabilitation and political security of Europe. It is desirous, in the words of Secretary Marshall, that “a peaceful Germany, with strong democratic roots, take its place in the European and world community of nations.” To achieve this objective, policies have had a twofold aspect, restrictive and constructive, at once designed to prevent the revival of a war potential and the will to war and to promote the rebuilding of Germany as an essential constituent of a peaceful and prosperous Europe. These policies are conceived not as contradictory but as complementary and vitally related.

It has been the purpose of the United States to achieve this major objective in close collaboration with the other Allied powers, in particular with the UK, France, and the USSR. But because of the obstructiveness and recalcitrance of the USSR, the Allied Control Authority has now reached a stage of virtual paralysis. Our present objective is, together with the UK and France, to reconstitute western Germany as a political entity capable of participating in and contributing to the reconstruction of Europe in respect to economic life and the general security, pending the time when a comprehensive settlement of the German problem becomes a possibility. Current emphasis is being placed upon the immediate problem of integrating western Germany into the European Recovery Program and the western European system and, to this end, obtaining inter-Allied agreement and greater uniformity in the treatment of western Germany.

b. policy issues

[Here follows a brief review of the principal initial international agreements constituting the basis of U.S. German policy from 1945.]

Major US policies with respect to Germany, in conformity with existing international agreements, official statements, and directives, may be summarized as: (1) disarmament, demilitarization and reduction and lasting control over Germany’s capacity to make war, including security against renewed German or other aggression to be sought in closer US association with western Europe; (2) completion of punishment of war criminals and major Nazi offenders as concluding stage in penal and denazification procedure; (3) early completion of programs of reparation and restitution in a manner which will not interfere with ERP; (4) revival of German economic life so that Germany may make maximum contribution to European recovery but without restoration of dangerous German concentration of economic power or control over vital war potential; (5) full support for bizonal participation in ERP and closer coordination of the French zone with the bizonal area; (6) early establishment of a constitutional government for Germany, with effective jurisdiction over the three western zones, but open to accession of eastern Germany. Such government should be based upon a constitution of German origin but in conformity with Allied requirements insuring its federal and democratic character; (7) the democratization of German political and public life, resting upon regional and local self-government, and a uniform guarantee of democratic procedures and fundamental freedoms; (8) such assistance to German education, cultural, and informational activity as may be essential to the elimination of National Socialist and militarist doctrines and to the development of democratic ideas and the peaceful orientation of German thinking; (9) continued occupation of Berlin and participation in the ACA for such coordination of quadripartite policies as still can be obtained; (10) an ultimate settlement of German frontiers which will do justice to victims of German aggression, yet not create lasting sources of enmity and irredentism, nor discredit the democratic forces of Germany, nor constitute a continuing political problem and barrier to trade and human intercourse; and (11) ultimate preparation of a peace treaty for Germany with adequate participation of all Allied governments in its consideration and ratification, such treaty to be binding upon a future German government and its nationals.

The implementation of policy has necessarily, in the absence of a German government, involved the military occupation and control of all of Germany by the major Allied powers. For the US, the Army has been assigned the task of occupation and military government in conformity with policies determined by the Department of State together with other interested governmental agencies.

The Allied Control Authority (ACA) for Germany, originally designed to coordinate policy in matters affecting Germany as a whole, has reached a state of almost complete stagnation. The Control Council, even prior to recent developments, had failed to become an effective governing body for Germany or even an adequate coordinating agency, despite the adoption of more than a hundred laws and directives relating to German affairs. The action of the Soviet representative in withdrawing from the Council session on March 20, 1948, without agreeing to a date for subsequent meeting has virtually suspended this organ. Certain subordinate bodies of the ACA, and the Berlin Kommandatura continued to function but with little effect. On June 16 the Soviet representative withdrew from the Kommandatura, and on July 1 all Soviet participation in that body was terminated. The US is ready to continue participation in the ACA for such coordination of quadripartite policies as can still be obtained.2

The Council of Foreign Ministers has devoted two meetings mainly to a consideration of the German problem (March 10 to April 26 and November 25 to December 16, 19473 ). In neither meeting was substantial progress made toward a resolution of problems involved in quadripartite administration nor toward agreement on a procedure for preparation of a peace treaty for Germany. Negotiations were finally suspended (London, December 16, 1947) because it was made clear that the price to be exacted of the western powers for an agreed solution of the German problem was Soviet-Communist control over the economic and political life of all Germany.

The US has attempted persistently to implement the Potsdam Agreement relative to the economic unity of Germany and the effective coordination of policy in matters affecting the whole of Germany. It has opposed the drift toward unilateral control of the respective zones which has resulted from Allied disagreement. When French and Soviet opposition thwarted all efforts to create central economic agencies, the US proposed on July 20, 1946 that such agencies be set up for the US zone and any other zones willing to join in such an arrangement. Only the British accepted and accordingly an economic merger of the US and UK zones was effected in the fall of 1946 and regulated by inter-governmental agreement on December 2, 1946.4 A Bizonal Economic Administration was created, and subsequently reorganized by arrangements made effective in June 1947 and February 1948.5 With the increasing paralysis of quadripartite agencies the US has come to rely heavily upon the bizonal organization for the application of economic policy, particularly with respect to economic rehabilitation and the participation of western Germany in the European Recovery Program.

Since the breakdown of the CFM and the virtual suspension of the ACA, we have endeavored to collaborate more closely with the UK and France in working out common policies for western Germany. Such action has been made more urgent by the passage of the ECA and inauguration of the recovery program, in which Germany is vitally involved. Tripartite conversations were held in London, in association with the Benelux governments, February 23 to March 6, 1948 and April 20 to June 1, 1948.6 These talks resulted in agreements which establish a basis for coordinated action with respect to setting up a German constitutional government, control of the Ruhr, integration of western Germany into ERP, and security matters. For the foreseeable future the application of US policy toward Germany will of necessity be mainly within a tripartite framework, but there is no intent to depart from the principle of quadripartite control or to act inconsistently with existing international agreements governing Germany. The US stands ready to engage once again in four-power negotiations looking to a final settlement whenever Soviet obstructionism and recalcitrance are replaced by a genuine readiness to seek joint agreement by a rational adjustment of differences.

1. Political

(a) Demilitarization and Security.—The broad demilitarization policy of the US is to enforce complete disarmament of Germany, to achieve the elimination of or effective control over any remaining capacity to make war, and to eradicate militaristic ideas from German cultural life. Disarmament and demilitarization are virtually complete with respect to dissolution of the armed forces and paramilitary organizations, disposal of war material, and dismantling of first priority military installations. Work was complete on liquidation of Category I war plants (especially constructed for production of war materials) by June 30, 1948. There has been no agreement on quadripartite inspection of the progress of demilitarization in the various zones, due to Soviet unwillingness to allow a free hand to inspection teams.

The US insists that there be adequate safeguards that the economic resources of a revived Germany shall not be used by a future German government to further exclusively German policies. This principle is embodied in the six power agreement concluded on June 1, 1948, on an international authority for the Ruhr.7

The US has proposed a 40-year four-power treaty for the disarmament and demilitarization of Germany;8 this was accepted in principle by the UK and France but rejected in substance by the USSR. The US does not consider a treaty of this type applicable to western Germany only but, in the absence of four-power agreement, has approved proposals formulated jointly by US, UK, French, and Benelux representatives which envisage demilitarization controls to be applied by the three western powers so long as may be necessary. These controls would provide for the continuation of existing prohibitions, consultation in the event of a danger of German military resurgence, restrictions upon war potential industries, a system of inspection and enforcement of demilitarization regulation, and continued occupation of Germany, or key areas thereof, until the peace is secured in Europe.

The US is favorably disposed toward arrangements, such as the Brussels five-power pact of March 17, 1948,9 which are directed toward regional and collective security. It is ready to associate itself by constitutional process with such arrangements as are based on mutual aid and which affect the national security of the US.

(b) War Crimes and Denazification.—The US has insisted upon the apprehension and punishment by legal process of all persons who have committed war crimes or crimes against peace or humanity. The trial of major Nazi war criminals by the International Military Tribunal at Nürnberg, November 1945 to October 1946, in accordance with quadripartite agreement, resulted not only in the punishment of the chief offenders but also in the establishment of a precedent of great significance for the future codification and enforcement of international criminal law. Further trials have been undertaken in Nürnberg by occupation tribunals. Eight cases had been completed and four were still pending in May 1948. It is expected to bring the Nürnberg trials to completion during the summer of 1948. Other trials of lesser war criminals and other offenders both by military government and German tribunals have been in progress, and it is our policy to expedite their early completion.

The US seeks to eliminate Nazi influence completely in Germany. Denazification procedures, undertaken initially by military government and later by the respective Land governments have been in operation since the beginning of the occupation. Since mid-1946 the process has been expedited by amnesties for youth and certain categories of lesser Nazis. A CFM directive to the Control Council (April 1947) called for appropriate measures to hasten denazification of principal Nazis and Nazi supporters and the trial of war criminals without requiring the indiscriminate trial of the mass of nominal or lesser Nazis and removal of Nazis and militarists from posts of responsibility. Amendments to the law authorized in March 1948 have greatly expedited procedures by allowing German prosecutors to reclassify or exonerate most of the Nazis awaiting trial except persons in the category of major offenders land others heavily incriminated. An expedited form of denazification without formal trial has also been authorized for minor categories.

The net result of denazification in the US zone will be that, of some 3 million persons found chargeable under the law, about 15 percent will have been subjected to penalties or placed on probationary status, and the remainder restored to normal German life. While experience has reaffirmed both the necessity and soundness of the US denazification policy, it cannot be claimed that there has been entire success in debarring Nazi activists from important posts in public and economic life, especially the latter where technical competence has been a factor to be considered. Only some two percent of all persons tried drew the more serious sanctions, and the procedure now accelerated with a view to early termination, will undoubtedly mean that some active Nazis will escape serious penalties. Such elements may for a time constitute a threat to the development of democratic processes in Germany. But it has become apparent, not only in the US zone but elsewhere in Germany, that indefinite prolongation of formal denazification procedures would be incompatible with the US aim to create an environment favorable to democratic political revival. Emphasis is now being placed upon the summary trial and punishment of “hard core” Nazis with criminal records, and the rehabilitation of the great body of former Nazis and their integration into a democratic German society.

(c) Movement of Persons.—There are some 500,000 United Nations displaced persons in the US zone. We delegated to the Preparatory Commission of the International Refugee Organization (PCIRO) operational responsibility for their repatriation or resettlement, and/or the care and maintenance of those in displaced persons camps (approximately 350,000). While the US seeks to facilitate the voluntary repatriation of displaced persons, it is recognized that the great majority are unwilling to return to their country of origin, and it is our policy to oppose their involuntary repatriation. Therefore, major emphasis is being devoted to the PCIRO resettlement program through which it is hoped to find new homes in other countries for a majority of the displaced persons. A substantial beginning has been made in this program.

A new problem has arisen recently in connection with the influx of Czech refugees who fled to our zone as a result of the Communist coup in Czechoslovakia in February 1948.

In addition to United Nations displaced persons, there are in the US zone approximately 3,000,000 displaced or uprooted persons of German origin. This group consists chiefly of Volksdeutsche transferred to Germany from Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, and Austria through inter-Allied agreements, but also includes sizable numbers of German refugees from the Soviet zone and from east of the Oder-Neisse line. A total of some 10,000,000 persons of German extraction have been expelled or have fled from eastern European and former German areas. There remain about 500,000 Germans in (the above-mentioned countries and some 60,000 Germans in Denmark whose repatriation to Germany has not yet been arranged.

US policy favors the complete assimilation of all German expellees and refugees into the German community and their ultimate enjoyment of equal civil and political rights with other Germans. The addition of so great a number of persons to the indigenous population to the US zone (the UK zone has received an even greater number) has given rise to grave economic difficulties and adds to the urgency of the ERP in its relation to Germany. Their political assimilation presents a challenge to a democratic German society.

It has been US policy to repatriate to Germany those Germans whose presence abroad it deemed contrary to the national interest. Voluntary repatriation of other Germans is permitted but with priority for those persons able and willing to contribute to the peaceful construction of Germany. The movement of Germans out of Germany, formerly restricted, in general, to compassionate cases or to movements calculated to further the economic and cultural reconstruction of Germany, has lately been liberalized in accordance with the Displaced Persons Act of 1948.

The US favors the early repatriation of all German prisoners of war. It has discharged all prisoners in its own custody and desires the return of all those held by other Allied powers in the interest of civil tranquillity and economic recovery. It was agreed by the CFM at Moscow in 1947 that repatriation of all prisoners of war should be completed by December 31, 1948. At present it seems unlikely that the repatriaron of prisoners still held by the USSR and France will be completed by that date.

(d) Administrative Organization and Government.—The US has favored the earliest possible reorganization of German administration on a decentralized basis. Since the inception of the occupation German administrative units have been progressively reactivated, beginning with local communities (Gemeinden), rural and city counties (Landkreise, Stadtkreise), and ultimately the four states (Laender) of Bavaria, Württemberg–Baden, Hesse, and Bremen. The Land governments have been given a permanent basis through the adoption of Land constitutions, drafted by popularly elected assemblies in the summer of 1946 and ratified by the electorates later in the year. These constitutions provide for the traditional type of German parliamentary regime and conform to military government requirements that each government be genuinely democratic and guarantee fundamental civil rights to all persons.

A basic principle has been that administrative authority and responsibility be transferred to the Germans at all levels, with military government retaining only the right of general surveillance to insure the achievement of occupation objectives. It is at present our policy to refrain from direct interference in governmental affairs except in case of palpable violations of directives by German authorities. Responsibility for direct implementation of military government policy has increasingly been delegated to German state and local authorities, a conspicuous instance being in the field of denazification.

A zonal coordinating body, the Council of Ministers President (Laenderrat) was set up in November 1945, and has been an important factor in harmonizing policy and legislation throughout the zone. The reorganization of the bizonal administration has made it posible to eliminate this organ, whose functions are now assumed by the bizonal Laenderrat.

The US, since mid-1946, has favored the early establishment of a central German provisional government with adequate power to deal with matters pertaining to Germany as a whole, particularly in the economic field. This has become increasingly urgent since the failure of the four powers to set up central economic agencies as agreed at Potsdam. We made proposals at the last Moscow meeting of the CFM for a provisional government of federal character and the eventual establishment of a permanent constitutional regime. These met with strong opposition by the French and Soviet representatives. At the subsequent London CFM meeting the US was prepared to urge speedy steps toward creation of a German government but held that the indispensable basis of such a government must be German economic unity and the safeguarding of fundamental freedoms throughout Germany, without which such a government would be a mere sham and deception. The USSR was not prepared to meet these conditions and was clearly interested only in setting up a highly centralized mechanism which would serve as an instrument of indirect Soviet control throughout Germany.

The bizonal administration, which is described later, represents a substantial move toward a coordinated German economic administration for most of western Germany. The recent tripartite conversations in London considered the matter of a provisional German government for the three western zones and reached agreement on measures to be undertaken for the creation of such a government on a constitutional basis.

(e) Democratization.—The US favors the reconstruction of German political life on a democratic basis. Accordingly it has sought to develop democratic responsibility and practices from local to state levels. It has authorized the organization and activities of political parties which conform to established democratic criteria, and nonpreferential treatment of such parties. The US also encourages the activity of other free organizations and associations, such as religious societies, trade unions and youth groups, calculated to assist in fostering the development of a democratic political and social life in Germany.

Formal democratization in the US zone has been achieved through popular elections at local and Land levels and the establishment of popularly-based constitutional regimes. Basic human rights are constitutionally guaranteed. The courts have been reorganized on the basis of an independent judiciary and the reign of law applicable without favor to all persons regardless of race, creed, or political conviction. The civil service has been reconstituted with a view to eradication of the caste system which has traditionally characterized the German bureaucracy.

At the 1947 Moscow meeting of the CFM, Secretary of State Marshall set forth the basic principles for the democratization of Germany as: (1) a uniformly effective guarantee of basic human rights in all parts of Germany; (2) freedom of political action for recognized political parties, whose leaders shall be elected by and responsible to their members, to operate in all parts of Germany without discrimination; (3) freedom of action in all parts of Germany for free democratic trade unions subject to the basic authority of their membership; (4) free circulation throughout Germany of information and ideas by all media of information, subject only to the needs of military security and prevention of Nazi or militarist resurgence; (5) freedom of movement for persons and goods throughout Germany, subject only to the requirements of military security.

At present the democratization of Germany is proceeding slowly against formidable obstacles. There exists an inherent dilemma in any attempt to foster democracy under military government. The failure of the occupying powers to agree upon workable methods has prevented democratic political activity on a nation-wide scale. Soviet “democracy” has little in common with the liberal concepts of the western powers, inasmuch as it obviously seeks to impose a specific economic and social system and a predetermined political structure upon the Germans by totalitarian methods. The continuing economic crisis and the political apathy of the majority of the population make progress difficult. There has been, especially within the last year, a substantial increase in nationalistic thinking (as recently evidenced in the unexpected strength of the National Democratic Party in local elections in Hesse) and in vocal opposition to military government policies. Anti-democratic tendencies have become manifest in the restored bureaucracy, which has by tradition been habituated to authoritarian practices. The major political parties reflect traditional attitudes and social cleavages, and have not become vigorous exponents of the democratic idea.

Significant progress toward the realization of democratic principles in Germany can only accompany stabilization of the present extremely precarious economic and political situation, the establishment of a German government of indigenous and responsible character, and the success of a long-term program of German cultural reorientation.

(f) Reorientation.—US policies issued in furtherance of the political and cultural reorientation of the German people have stressed from the very beginning that we wish democratization to be understood in its broadest possible sense. They have pointed out that political reform and economic recovery can be effective only if they are accompanied by a systematic effort to regenerate public opinion and to reorient the German population toward democracy and peace. In order to achieve these broad objectives the reorientation program of military government has never been confined to reform of formal education but has encompassed the whole field of public information and such media and institutions as are essential for the democratic development of a free people. Policies and programs developed by the US Government in an attempt to effect these changes emphasize the elimination of Nazism and militarism and the permanent exclusion of objectionable personnel from posts of influence and particularly from schools, information media, and cultural institutions; the reestablishment of universally valid principles of justice; the protection, through constitutions, of basic individual rights such as free speech, freedom of religion, freedom of assembly and association; the responsibility of the states for all matters pertaining to information, education, religion, and cultural affairs, without prejudice, however, to the cultural unity of Germany; exchange of information and educational interchange of persons and materials throughout Germany and between Germany and the outside world; increasing use of native resources which offer promise of peaceful development of new ideas and institutions; German initiative and responsibility in participating in the work of cultural reconstruction, and establishment of international cultural relations to overcome the spiritual isolation imposed by National Socialism on Germany and to further assimilation of the German people into the world community of nations.

In the course of the three years of occupation, emphasis in policies has shifted increasingly away from measures implying control of indigenous institutions and operations to others favoring restoration of German responsibility in the fields of information and education. At the same time new problems have arisen which require continued attention and treatment by military government. There is increasing reluctance on the part of the German population to accept the policies and general principles of the occupation powers. Such antagonism as is evident ranges, in its manifestations, from political apathy to outright rejection of occupation policies and hostility toward the occupation powers. Public opinion surveys have indicated no substantial progress in the political thinking of large segments of the population and the existence of strong residues of National Socialist influence. Friction among the occupation powers, economic shortages, and the slow progress of general recovery are major contributing factors in this development. Conflict between the western powers and Soviet Russia, in particular, has split the German population, for all practical purposes, in two camps, the eastern part of which is, at this point hardly accessible for reorientation purposes by the western powers. Furthermore, Soviet propaganda which is carried on by Soviet or Soviet-controlled media has created a new problem for the US which is compelled to use its own instruments of information in and to Germany to counter, systematically, the influence of Soviet propaganda on German audiences.

2. Economic

(a) Participation in Western European Recovery.10 —Failure of the Council of Foreign Ministers and the Allied Control Council to implement the treatment of Germany as an economic unit resulted from the refusal of the Soviet Union to agree to the implementation of common policies with respect to foreign trade and reparation removals. With the enactment of the economic recovery program for western Europe, emphasis in US policy with regard to Germany has necessarily shifted from active concentration upon the achievement of economic unity of the four zones to participation in and contribution to the recovery of western Europe.

It is therefore US policy that the bizonal economy make a considerable contribution to European recovery by increasing its present low production to approximately the levels of 1936. This will require that production in most industries be more than doubled. If adequate supplies of food and raw materials are available and a sounder financial system is instituted, it is believed that this goal can be substantially achieved in 1952. It is estimated that under a recovery program coal production can be increased from the present level of 133,000,000 tons per year to about 198,000,000 tons; crude-steel production can rise from less than 3,000,000 tons to 10,000,000 tons; nitrogen production from 300,000 tons to 450,000 tons. Similar or greater increases are possible throughout the economy, particularly in industries producing machinery, industrial equipment and consumer goods which are now at extremely depressed levels.

It will be essential for the German administration to function with maximum efficiency if the recovery program is to be successful. More specifically the economy will have to be directed so as to bring about the required magnitude of exports, provide for an efficient and economic use of available resources, and improve present collection of farm produce. In all three fields continuing efforts by the occupying powers to bring about a substantial improvement have been something less than successful but it is hoped that new conditions resulting from the currency reform will be a great aid in that respect.

With a recovery program, the principal contribution of the bizonal area to general European recovery will, in the first year or so, take the form of exports of coal and coke, timber and scrap, while exports of manufactured goods will be relatively small and confined principally to spare parts and replacements urgently needed in other European countries. As bizonal production of manufactured goods rises and the replacement needs of the bizonal economy are more adequately met, there will be sharp increases in exports of manufactured goods until they resume their prewar place in bizonal exports. At the same time, exports of coal should continue to rise and retain an important, but not their present dominating, place in German exports.

As production revives and the standard of living increases, the bizonal economy will contribute to the solution of important European marketing problems and to the more economic use of European resources. For example, it will become possible to use the Low Country ports for trade to and from Germany which will result in more efficient and economic use of the Rhine River as well as a direct benefit in Belgium and the Netherlands. Likewise, it will become possible to import European surpluses of fresh fruits and vegetables which at present Germany is unable to afford in quantity.

While careful study of the economic potential of the bizonal area has led to the conclusion that a recovery program such as that outlined above is feasible, it can only be achieved if large quantities of imports are available. Accordingly, US policy requires that the bizonal economy import foodstuffs and industrial raw materials with which to initiate a recovery program. The largest single import requirement is food. In addition, there must be substantial imports of fertilizer, cotton, wool, and other textile fibers and industrial raw materials ranging from rubber to nonferrous metals, including copper, zinc, lead, and tin. Until the bizonal industry is once more capable of producing its own requirements, there must be imports of special types of industrial equipment in order to maintain the increased production in such key industries as coal mining and electrical power and to improve the dangerously weak situation of the transportation system. Due to the lack of available supplies in other areas, a large part of these imports will have to come from the Western Hemisphere. US technicians, after studying bizonal requirements in the light of estimated availabilities, have estimated that the bizonal area will in the period July 1, 1948 to June 30, 1949 have to import $756,700,000 more from the Western Hemisphere than it will be able to export to that area; freight and other invisible payments will result in a net deficit with that area of $898,700,000 for the same period. The net deficit with other non-participating areas will be approximately $233,800,000. If imports at this rate are available and general European recovery progresses, requirements should taper off in later years and it is believed that by 1952, the bizonal area should be in a position of virtual self-support, or at least the deficit would be of a size that could be managed without special outside aid.

(b) German Trade Policy.—US policy in connection with German trade is (1) to achieve a proper balance between its occupation interest in Germany and its interest in Germany’s relation to the European recovery program and (2) to resolve any real conflicts in the light of broad US interests. As an occupying power, we are anxious to minimize the financial burdens of the occupation which, already large, were greatly increased last December when a large share of British financial responsibility in Germany was assumed by the US. These burdens arise in the first instance from the necessity of providing foodstuffs and other supplies essential for preventing disease and unrest in Germany. Such necessity will continue to exist until Germany is able to export enough to pay for her essential imports. In order to export sufficiently, however, Germany requires large amounts of other imports such as raw materials and plant equipment, most of which must be paid for in dollars. Presently these imports are financed mainly from the proceeds of exports, primarily coal and timber, which provide dollar proceeds to the extent that they are exported to ERP countries. An additional means of financing will now be provided by ECA funds. The addition of these funds, however, does not make any less compelling the emphasis which US policy must place on the maximization of export proceeds.

Our interest in Germany’s relation to ERP arises from the importance of Germany’s economic position in Europe. Germany is potentially one of the most important European suppliers of such acutely needed commodities as coal, mining machinery, and industrial equipment. At the same time she is potentially an important market for European goods. German economic recovery is therefore vital to general European economic recovery. On the other hand, German economic recovery is largely dependent on the economic recovery of other European countries since they are the chief markets for her goods. It is US policy that the fullest possible recognition be given this interdependence in order to achieve the greatest over-all benefits for the European Recovery Program.

The problem is complicated, however, by many factors. Foremost is the fact that Germany is a competitor with European countries for both scarce goods and scarce foreign exchange with which to procure essential goods. Thus these countries, while conscious of the importance of German recovery to themselves, are nevertheless subject to the natural tendency to view problems of their economic relations with Germany in the light of their immediate self-interest. There also exists the difficulty that goods available for export to Germany by her neighbors are unacceptable to military government authorities as not yielding maximum values (e.g., caloric value in case of foodstuffs) in return for Germany’s limited sources of payment. It is difficult for the occupying authorities to avoid approaching these problems from a “German” as opposed to a “European” point of view, since they are daily concerned with the great difficulties of rehabilitating German economic life and since they are likely to be judged by Congress and the public on the basis of the short-term results in alleviating the financial burden of occupation. These opposing tendencies should be offset by developing the closest possible cooperation between the occupying authorities and the governments of other European countries with a view to finding the best possible solutions to outstanding problems. Such cooperation should, whenever possible, be carried out within the framework of existing economic cooperation organizations such as OEEC and ECE.

In this connection the problem is further complicated by the joint responsibilities of the Departments of State and Army as well as the Economic Cooperation Administration. In the past the issues which have arisen, as mentioned above, involved the rather narrow view of German interests taken by the Army Department, restricted as it is by the specific purposes for which its funds are appropriated, as against the Department of State’s interest in over-all western European recovery. It remains to be seen what influence the ECA may have and what steps it will take to insure the coordinated effort which is necessary if recovery is to take place. Although it is not to be expected that conflicts of interest will disappear, the mission assigned to ECA and its control over ECA funds available to OEEC countries, including western Germany, should help to diminish the unfavorable effects on the US position in European countries resulting from the overly aggressive manner in which German interests are stated by the Bizonal authorities and the identification of US and German interests to the exclusion of our interests in Germany’s neighbors.

In addition to the policy objectives connected with German and European recovery, there are certain other considerations involved with respect to US policy toward German trade. These arise mainly from general US commercial policy and from occupation programs dealing with decartelization and reparations. One problem which must continuously be dealt with is the dual role we undertake in endeavoring to facilitate German exports while at the same time facilitating US exports. This role prompts criticism from two directions—from US exporters who are concerned that German exports are being “subsidized” by American funds and from foreign governments which believe the US is using the occupation for its own commercial interests. US policy is to avoid using the occupation for commercial advantage, to foster German exports in fair competition with US and other exports, and to give the greatest possible recognition to the importance other countries attach to Germany as a market for their goods.

US policy is to bring Germany into the ITO and GATT or, as a minimum, to obtain most-favored-nation treatment for Germany. Efforts to achieve these objectives at the Geneva and Habana conferences failed but most-favored-nation treatment for Germany has been obtained in connection with bilateral agreements with OEEC participants for ECA assistance. In the meantime, it is our policy to conduct German trade along lines as fully in accord with ITO policies as possible.

[Here follow Sections 2(c) Financial Policy, 2(d) Economic Institutions, 2(e) Reparations, 2(f) Restitution, and 3. The London Agreements. Documentation on financial policy and the currency reform in Western Germany is included in Chapter VI, while detailed documentation on the reparations problem and restitution is presented in Chapter III, Part A. Documentation on the London Conference on Germany appears in Chapter I.]

c. relations with other states

The policy of the US with respect to Germany is vitally affected by the policies and behavior of the other occupying powers, both individually and collectively, and by broad considerations of general international policy, to which purely German questions are necessarily subordinated. The present orientation of US policy with respect to Germany is largely due to long-continued and persistent Soviet obstruction and unilateralism. The original intent of the US to implement faithfully the cardinal features of an agreed quadripartite policy has been thwarted by the clear Soviet purpose to incorporate Germany within the Soviet economic and political sphere. Soviet opposition both in the CFM and the ACA to virtually every proposition put forward by the US, UK and France on basic German problems has, for the time, blocked further progress toward a general settlement. The US by necessity and not by choice is for the present seeking to achieve its objectives in close collaboration with the UK, France and other western states which have a peculiar interest in German affairs, rather than through the established quadripartite agencies.

(a) Soviet Policy. —Soviet policy with respect to Germany is directed toward a maximum objective, namely the complete inclusion of Germany within the Soviet sphere of influence. The minimum objective is the retention of firm control over the eastern zone, including Berlin if possible, and extension of political influence in western Germany. To these purposes may be added the short-term but pressing need to exploit German resources so as to relieve the urgent requirements of the Soviet economy. The constant element in a policy which has had to consider Soviet needs, a strong if latent German hostility, and Anglo-American opposition, is the fear of a revived German state which would combine formidable economic strength with a hostile political orientation.

Politically the USSR has sought to insure that the Soviet military administration should operate through a carefully selected German bureaucracy strongly oriented toward Soviet policy and Communist ideology. The (Communist-dominated) Socialist Unity Party (SED) is the chief agent of political control, assisted by the so-called mass organizations (peasants, women, trade unions, youth), also Communist-controlled. Denazification, now virtually completed in the Soviet zone, has been conceived not as a formal device for eliminating the influence of former Nazis but as a means for the liquidation of social elements hostile to Soviet-Communist policy. Land constitutions have been adopted which provide uniformly for highly centralized governments easily controlled by the SED and its affiliates. The SMA maintains an effective stranglehold on all political activity by its constant threat of coercion and infringement upon civil rights. More recently the Soviet authorities have sponsored the People’s Congress movement, ostensibly representing all Germans and devoted to the exploitation of the popular issue of German unity. It has recently circulated petitions preparatory to a plebiscite on this question. OMGUS has forbidden the Congress or its organ, the People’s Council, to operate in US-controlled areas on the ground that it is entirely unrepresentative of the German people and, in fact, merely a vehicle for popular agitation by a highly vocal minority. OMGUS has also refused the request of the Communist Party in the US zone to change its name to the Socialist People’s Party, a request having the obvious intent of obscuring the true character of the organization.

The USSR claims to be the sole protagonist of German unity, decrying western “federal” proposals as attempts to split the German nation and thwart the national will. The US desires a politically unified Germany based upon democratic assent and avoidance of a dangerous and anti-democratic degree of centralization. But it has become clear that as long as the USSR remains in occupation of eastern Germany and continues its present tactics of Communist penetration, the western nations cannot obtain a unified Germany on any terms which would not facilitate an extension of Communist control.

Soviet authorities set up an Economic Commission in June, 1947 for the Soviet zone, which was reorganized and expanded in February, 1948. This may be viewed as a necessary device for economic coordination, but may also be considered as a counter-move to the establishment of the bizonal Economic Council. Together with the People’s Council, created in March, 1948, it may point to a Soviet intent to create a German government in the eastern zone in the near future, perhaps as a reply to the establishment of a provisional German government in western Germany. Such a government would doubtless claim rightful jurisdiction over all Germany, and would constitute a highly centralized mechanism of authoritarian control. It would be utilized to expand Soviet influence so far as possible in western Germany, where the USSR is deeply concerned with extending its political and economic control. Soviet-Communist propaganda incessantly stresses the theme that western projects such as the bizonal organization, ERP and plans for interzonal coordination are based upon intention to divide and exploit Germany while German salvation depends solely upon cooperation with the USSR.

In regard to the German economy as a whole, the Soviet Union has consistently obstructed all measures for economic unity, while posing as the champion of German political unity. While permitting a limited amount of essential trade with the Western zones, it has fallen far short of the provision of the Potsdam Agreement “to ensure … the equitable distribution of commodities between the several zones so as to produce a balanced economy throughout Germany and reduce the need for imports.” Loss of the Eastern agricultural regions of Germany has made it impossible for the German population of the Western zones to obtain even a fraction of their normal food supply from the normal sources and has made the ration level in those areas heavily dependent on imports financed by the United States. The Soviet Union furthermore has refused to allow access to the area either to Germans or to representatives of the other occupying powers. Over the past two years, it has treated its zone to all intents and purposes as an annexed territory, separated from the rest of Germany, and has gradually integrated its economy into the economy of the Soviet orbit.

The German question has, within the past year, become deeply involved in the “cold war” between the east and the west; Soviet behavior in quadripartite negotiations has become more intransigent. The Allied Control Council, virtually moribund since early in 1947, has resolved no major disagreements since that date. The Council of Foreign Ministers has likewise been brought to an impasse by the behavior of the Soviet representatives. Since March 20, 1948 the USSR seems to have embarked upon a course of action designed to drive the western powers from Berlin and to abrogate by unilateral action the basic agreements for four-power control of Germany. Beginning on March 30, the USSR began to impose a series of crippling restrictions upon the western zone communications with Berlin in complete disregard of quadripartite agreements for the joint occupation of the city and arrangements entered into by the military commanders for access to Berlin from the western zones. The US has expressed its firm intention to remain in Berlin in accordance with existing quadripartite agreements and to maintain the ACA. Berlin has become an important symbol of the determination of the US and the other western powers to contest the Soviet claim to mastery of Germany and of Europe; withdrawal would be a great blow to western prestige in Europe and to the strategic position of the US and its associates vis-à-vis the USSR. In the present tense situation the continued occupation of western Germany and of Berlin by military forces of the western powers is a matter of vital importance and may entail serious political and military decisions in the near future.

Soviet intentions as to the future are not entirely clear, but it seems probable that the USSR has decided that: (1) there is no hope of interfering seriously with the operation of the ERP in western Germany, or political measures for the consolidation of western Germany, through quadripartite means; (2) the Soviet zone must be placed under permanent control of a well organized German group, loyal to the USSR, and supported by police state measures; (3) the People’s Congress and People’s Council should be the main instruments in the formation, at an appropriate moment, of a provisional German government with pretensions to authority over all of Germany; and (4) in order to prevent Allied interference with this process of political consolidation, the ACA should be abolished or nullified by boycott and pressure should be exerted upon the western powers either to force them out of Berlin or to cause them to relinquish their plans for a German government in the west.

At the present time the USSR seems definitely to have embarked upon a struggle with the western powers for the control of Germany and the shaping of its future. A Soviet-dominated Germany is considered of crucial importance in the broad Soviet scheme for a Communist-controlled Europe subject to Soviet influence. Soviet unilateralism and intransigence have thus confirmed the de facto partition of Germany and made this area a major theatre in the “cold war” with the western powers. To attain its ends the USSR has not hesitated, of late, to appeal to the reviving forces of German nationalism. The Soviet authorities have authorized a new National Democratic Party, embracing many former Nazis, and may be building up the cadres of a new German army on Soviet territory. Soviet-Communist propaganda depicts the USSR as the sole friend of the German people in anticipation that a Soviet-sponsored government at Berlin will exercise a powerful attraction upon western Germany and reduce the status of a western regime to that of a rump or secessionist government.

[Here follow sub-sections (b) The United Kingdom, (c) France, and (d) Relations With International Organizations.]

d. policy evaluation

The US has endeavored since 1946 to inaugurate procedures leading to negotiation of a general peace settlement for Germany. Proposals which had, in all essentials, been agreed upon by the three western powers were rejected in both the 1947 Moscow and London meetings of the CFM by the USSR. The main issue between the USSR and the western powers, particularly the US, was the role to be assigned the other Allied governments in the preparation of a German peace treaty. The US held that all of the Allied countries, large and small, were entitled to participate at appropriate stages in the preparation of the treaty, a view in which the other western powers concurred. The USSR wished to confine the drafting and final formulation of the treaty to the four CFM powers concerned, while closely restricting the rights of consultation and participation to a limited number of the other Allied governments. Prolonged attempts to arrive at an agreed procedure, both at Moscow and London, met with failure.

Another major difficulty was the definitive settlement of German frontiers. The US has always held and still maintains that decisions on frontiers must await the peace settlement. It has proposed the creation of international boundary commissions to examine all boundary claims and problems and make recommendations to the CFM. The USSR has repeatedly insisted that the present administrative boundary between Germany and Poland, as fixed at Potsdam, must be considered as final and is not open to review. The US, while recognizing Poland’s right to territorial compensation from Germany, stands upon the Potsdam provision that “the final delimitation of the western frontier of Poland should await the peace settlement.” It is concerned that the frontiers of Germany should not become “impenetrable barriers” to trade, nor dangerously exacerbate irredentist sentiment. In particular the US believes that a revision of the present Oder–Neisse line to Germany’s advantage is essential in view of the present economic-demographic situation of Germany. We have agreed to support the claim of the USSR to northern East Prussia in the peace settlement. In the west the US believes that, with the exception of the Saar, only minor border rectifications to eliminate existing anomalies with respect to trade or communications should be considered; it is opposed to territorial cessions as compensation for war damage or loss. The US has approved the detachment of the Saar district from Germany and its economic integration with France.

There is little likelihood of a definitive German settlement in the immediate future. The London Agreements, if and when implemented, might be considered in the nature of a provisional settlement governing western Germany. The US maintains that responsibility for failure to reach a final German settlement must rest at the door of the USSR, which has consistently obstructed agreement by insisting upon conditions unacceptable to the three western powers. These powers are proceeding with measures which they consider indispensable for the areas of Germany under their control. The US holds that all such measures are of a tentative and provisional character pending the time when a general settlement can be agreed upon by all the powers which at present exercise sovereign rights over Germany.

After three years of occupation the chief premise upon which US policy with respect to Germany was originally based has broken down. This was the assumption that German problems, both immediate and long-term, were susceptible to solution on the basis of four power agreement. It has become clear that such agreement is unlikely in the early or foreseeble future in view of the obstructive and intransigent attitude of the USSR with regard to German and European problems. The US has been confronted with two alternatives. It could accept stalemate without action and thus permit Germany to sink deeper into political and economic chaos, with the attendant threat to the general welfare and security, or it could concert a provisional settlement of German problems together with those governments which were willing to reach agreement in the common interest. The US has chosen this second alternative.

US policy must be judged in the light of present realities. No ideal solution embracing the whole of Germany is at present possible, German policy is of necessity influenced by over-riding policy with respect to western Europe. Such policy dictates that Germany must not be drawn into the Soviet orbit or reconstructed as a political instrument of Soviet policy. It requires that Germany be brought into close association with the democratic states of western Europe and that it be enabled to contribute to and participate in European economic recovery. These objectives clearly cannot be achieved through quadripartite action. Hence it has become necessary to embark on an extensive program of reconstruction in association with the UK, France and the Benelux countries which have a special and immediate concern with western Germany. The London agreements mark the first broad, constructive step toward a resolution of the German problem since Potsdam. They are of necessity provisional and in no way preclude ultimate Allied agreement on a final settlement. But it is believed that the London program, when effectuated, will mean substantial progress toward such a settlement.

Despite all efforts since the end of the war Germany remains a major unresolved problem of US foreign policy. Such objectives as demilitarization, denazification and punishment of war criminals have been in the main achieved. But in matters of basic reconstruction there have been only beginnings, or tentative and provisional measures. Germany still lacks political or economic unity, or any vestige of a national government. The German economy operates at a dangerously low level and the bizonal area survives only through subsidies furnished mainly by the US. Democratization of political and cultural life has proceeded at a painfully slow pace. The determination of frontiers and of long-range controls upon German economic and political life still awaits a peace treaty. The re-integration of the German economy into that of Europe will only be achieved with the working out of the European Recovery Program. The end of the occupation is not in sight, and Germany will continue as a major concern and responsibility of the US for a period as yet unforeseen.

Serious difficulties have arisen in the determination and application of US policies because of the division of major responsibility between the State and Army Departments. The Army, through EUCOM and OMGUS, is entrusted with full control and administrative authority in Germany; the State Department seeks to discharge the duty assigned to it by Presidential directive of shaping US policy with respect both to the internal evolution of Germany and its relations with other countries. OMGUS is inclined to view the occupation as a local operation and is conscious of its immediate responsibilities. It is inclined to resent the intrusion of the State Department or its representatives in military government operations within Germany to the extent that it becomes difficult for the Department to exercise its proper function of policy guidance. The Department is chiefly concerned with the emergence and evolution of a German commonwealth and economy along lines of peaceful achievement and service to a democratic Europe and the fitting of Germany into the broader framework of policy. The two concepts are not incompatible but give rise to different approaches to identical situations. Awareness of this difficulty, necessarily inherent in a prolonged military occupation, was responsible for the earlier decision that the State Department should assume the civil administration of the US area in Germany, but the exigencies of US–USSR relations caused a reversal of this decision. The problem, however, remains and becomes more acute as German revival becomes increasingly a matter of concern to neighboring countries. The situation requires more effective Army–State cooperation both at the Washington policy-making level and at the point of day-to-day implementation of policy in the field.

Failure to achieve a definitive solution of the German problem which is central to a general European settlement has given rise to a critical situation. Germany has become an area of strategic importance in the East-West conflict over the shaping of Europe’s future. The significance of current developments rests primarily in the fact that the US, with its associates, has seized the initiative in Germany. This has resulted in vigorous Soviet counter-measures. The rights and prerogatives of the western powers in Berlin are being challenged and every effort is being made to make their position there untenable. The evolution of the London program for western Germany can be expected to meet with Soviet protest and opposition at every stage. The success of the program will depend upon other uncertain factors—the rapidity of economic recovery, the cooperativeness of the Germans and the support of the French who have not been won over to whole-hearted approval of the agreements and may seek to modify them in further negotiation. There is a definite risk that implementation of the program will widen and confirm the cleavage between the western powers and the USSR and effect a virtual partition of Germany for the time being. The decision of the US to embark upon a program entailing these risks and uncertainties has been reached with full realization of the difficulties involved but with the conviction that even greater risks and dangers would result from failure to act promptly and effectively in dealing with urgent German problems.

Future developments in Germany cannot be predicted with any degree of assurance. There will doubtless be continued tension in US–USSR relations which would reach a critical stage if the USSR should resort to coercive measures to expel the western powers from Berlin. The US is now completely committed to a far-reaching program of political and economic reconstruction for western Germany, with the door always open to Soviet collaboration in such a program if extended to all Germany. The next few years will be of critical importance in the working out of the London agreements and the ERP in Germany, with Soviet antagonism a constant factor, even if a major crisis is avoided. Unless there develops a totally unanticipated change in the Soviet attitude toward the west, and unless Soviet designs in Germany are drastically modified, there seems to be little prospect of a general German settlement in the near future. Germany will probably remain divided. The Soviet zone and the west will then continue to develop, economically and constitutionally, in divergent directions, although the forces of economic interdependence and German national sentiment will operate in some measure to counteract disunion. Germany will remain an important, perhaps the most important area of conflict in the struggle between east and west for the shaping of the new Europe.

1 The Department of State’s Policy Statements were concise summaries of current United States policy toward a country or region, the relations of that country or region with the principal powers, and the issues and trends in that country or region. These Statements were generally prepared by ad hoc working groups in the responsible geographic and functional offices of the Department of State and were referred to appropriate diplomatic posts abroad for comment and criticism. The Statements were periodically revised.

2 For documentation on the breakdown of quadripartite control in Germany during the first six months of 1948, see pp. 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517] ff.

3 Documentation on the Fourth Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers in Moscow, March 10–April 26, 1947 and the Fifth Session of the Council in London, November 25–December 16, 1947 is included in Foreign Relations, 1947, volume ii .

4 Regarding the agreement under reference here and other documentation on the economic unification of the British and American Zones of Occupation in Germany in 1946, see Foreign Relations, 1946, volume v .

5 Documentation on the revision of U.S.–U.K. Bizonal Economic Organizations in February 1948 is included in Chapter I, Part A.

6 Documentation on the London Conference on Germany under reference here is presented in Chapter I.

7 The reference is to document TRI/16 (Final), May 26, p. 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190], subsequently included as Annex C to the Report on the London Conference on Germany, June 1 (p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]).

8 First formally circulated at the Second Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers at Paris in 1946 as document CFM (46) 21, April 30, 1946, Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. ii, p. 190.

9 Documentation on the attitude of the United States toward the Brussels Pact and the interest of the United States in a North Atlantic Treaty Organization is included in volume iii .

10 Documentation on the European Recovery Program, including materials on the role of Western Germany in that Program, is presented in volume iii .

Report by the Policy Planning Staff Policy Planning Staff Files: Lot 64 D 563: Box 20029: Germany

[Document 721]

Report by the Policy Planning Staff 1

[Extract]

secret Washington, November 15, 1948.

PPS 37/1

Position To Be Taken by the U.S. at a CFM Meeting

the problem

To define the course of action to be taken by the United States at a possible meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers in the near future to discuss the problem of Germany.

facts bearing on the problem

1. The problem is: whether, in the event of a CFM meeting, to come forward with a positive program, making clear the terms on which we would be prepared to consider the establishment of a German government for all of Germany and the withdrawal of forces from the major part of German territory, along the lines of Program A (Tab A), or to rest on a basically negative position, leaving it open to the Russians and the others to come forward with proposals which we would answer, and presumably decline, on an ad hoc basis.

2. In the main, the considerations pro and con, concerning the ad vantages and disadvantages to U.S. interests of a broad general settlement of the German question, are those set forth in the first part of PPS 37 (Tab B2 ). That paper, it will be recalled, addressed itself mainly to the question whether it would be acceptable to U.S. interests to have a settlement along the lines of Program A, if one could be achieved at this time, and answered that question, on balance, in the affirmative. It is, however, highly unlikely that agreement could be obtained to anything like Program A in less than a year, at the earliest. The Staff is therefore inclined to feel that the question, whether such a program should now be advanced, should also be carefully weighed from the standpoint of its psychological and tactical effect, as a proposal not likely of immediate acceptance. The present paper is addressed to this point.

3. Of the group of outside consultants called in to examine this program on September 15–16, all but two (Mr. Armstrong and Father Walsh) appeared to favor a course of action along the lines of Program A.3 The consensus among them certainly ran to such a conclusion. Most of them made it plain that they considered the advantage of our proposing such a program to lie primarily in the favorable position in which we would thereby be placed, from the standpoint of keeping negotiations open and the situation flexible from here on out. They emphasized the importance of our continuing to “keep talking”, and seemed to favor something in the nature of a permanent CFM discussion (principally among deputies), in which we would patiently discuss any and all phases of our program for as long as anyone wished to discuss them.

conclusions and discussions

In the event of an early meeting of the CFM, the Staff would favor the proposal by this Government of something along the lines of Program A, provided we can obtain in advance assurance of a wide enough degree of British and French acquiescence to maintain basic three-power unity.

The Staff’s reasons are: 1. To put forward such a program gives us the initiative. If we do not make some such a proposal, our scope of action at a CFM meeting will apparently be limited to reacting to the proposals of others. It is better that we place on the board something to which others will be forced to react.

2. To put forward such a program makes it impossible for others to portray our position as negative. It likewise offsets charges that we do not really want any settlement with Russia or that our policy is lacking in vision and imagination. It makes possible for us to state our objective and to keep it clearly before the public and the other members of the CFM.

3. By putting a proposal of this sort on the table and evincing readiness to negotiate on it at any length, we keep the situation flexible, as between the Russians and ourselves, for an eventual softening of the Russian position. In this way, the mere proposal of such a program and continuance of negotiations about it, however difficult and slow-moving these negotiations may be, helps to mitigate the congealment of the present division of Germany and Europe which will tend to take place as long as this division endures. It is possible, as many believe, that the continuance of a firm policy with regard to Berlin and the western German arrangements might, in the absence of our making any proposals along the lines of Program A, eventually disrupt the Russian position in eastern Germany so seriously as to bring the Russians to a point where they would be prepared to negotiate realistically for a German settlement. However, if no proposals along the lines of those embodied in Program A have been placed before the CFM, and there is only the sort of deadlock that exists today, the Russians might have no means of yielding without excessive loss of prestige, and the possibility of a settlement might have been lost by default. By putting forward these proposals we may help keep open the door for an eventual peaceful withdrawal of the Russians from central Europe. Unless that door is kept open, the Russians may not be able to withdraw even when they have come to the conclusion that it would be to their own interest to do so.

4. There seems to be no alternative other than a completely negative position.

The position which we took at former CFM meetings would no longer be realistic, in the light of the events of the past year. We cannot look to four-power collaboration in the government of Germany as a realistic solution when the four powers cannot even agree, after two months of the most strenuous inter-governmental negotiation, on the problem of currency for Berlin. Similarly, we cannot hope that the economic unification of Germany could be accomplished as long as the Soviet police have full control in the Soviet zone; for it has been amply demonstrated that the Russians do not trust their own powers, and cannot maintain their own position, without the most desperate measures of segregation of the population under their control and its isolation from western influences.

Similarly, we cannot seriously limit ourselves to recommending, at CFM meetings, that the Russians bring their zone in on the present western German arrangements, thus extending the applicability of the London decisions to all Germany. In the first place, the London decisions would not be suitable for application to all Germany. They, too, envisage intimate collaboration of the occupying powers in the control of a German government, particularly in such important matters as foreign trade and foreign affairs, on which Russian views could scarcely ever be expected to be anything but in conflict with those of the three western powers. They also envisage a continuation of military occupation; we have just seen what this would mean. Secondly, any such proposals would necessitate months of detailed and difficult preliminary negotiation with the French and British; for the London decisions represent a compact between the three powers, and any proposal for their extension to the remainder of Germany would have to be in all respects an agreed tripartite one. Finally, it would hardly be realistic to expect the Russians to adhere to a set of arrangements in the negotiation of which they themselves had had no part; for this would amount to a complete capitulation on their part. A proposal along these lines would therefore bear a “take it or leave it” character, and would not appear to U.S. and world opinion to have been a serious bid for an agreed settlement.

In the light of these considerations, it is difficult to see what proposals of a positive nature we could place before the CFM other than ones along the lines of Program A. The alternative to proposing Program A would therefore appear to be the adoption of a negative position, consisting necessarily in the rejection of proposals advanced by others coupled with the necessity of evading demands for a clear statement of our own desiderata.

5. Even though a CFM meeting would presumably not take place unless there had been a lifting of the blockade, it is idle to hope that after a possible unsuccessful outcome of the CFM discussions we would be able to carry on in Berlin as we were carrying on before the outbreak of the recent difficulties. It must be taken for granted that the Russians would continue to bend every effort to force us out of Berlin, whether by a re-imposition of the restrictions or otherwise. Certainly, our position there would never be a comfortable one; and we would be living constantly on the edge of an abyss in the form of the danger of further serious friction.

Constituting as it would at least the offer of the set of arrangements which would resolve the Berlin deadlock by getting all Allied forces out of that city, the proposal of Program A would place us in a more favorable position to continue the struggle both in Berlin and in Germany as a whole. It is true that Program A is unlikely to be accepted at this juncture, and therefore unlikely to constitute in itself a solution of the Berlin difficulty at the present time. It does, however, provide one more channel of possible negoiation through which a solution can be sought and achieved if and when the Russians should wish to have such a solution. For this reason alone, it would seem that we would be remiss if we did not at least make the offer. Having made it, we would also be in a relatively favorable propaganda position vis-à-vis the Germans in Berlin and elsewhere. For if, in the long run, the hardships resulting from the blockade should begin to cause real distress and discontent among the German population of Berlin, we would be able to point out that we had proposed and urged an arrangement under which all Allied forces would have left the city and its entire vicinity, and we would thereby be able to disclaim basic responsibility for the resulting difficulties.

[Annex]

Memorandum by the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Secretary of State

secret [Washington, November 12, 1948.]

Mr. Secretary: 1. There is enclosed a document setting forth a program for Germany labelled for the sake of convenience “Program A”.

2. This program is designed for use in the event that this Government wishes to put forward publicly, either before the Council of Foreign Ministers or in any other way, a program revealing plainly the terms on which we would be prepared to consent to the establishment of a German government for all of Germany and to the withdrawal of forces from most of Germany.

3. The program was evolved by a working group in the Department, operating under my general direction. This working group included representatives of the Office of European Affairs, the Division of Central European Affairs, the Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs, the Assistant Secretary for Occupied Areas, the Legal Adviser on Military Affairs and Occupied Areas, and the Plans and Operations Division of the Department of the Army.

4. The group has not undertaken to answer, in the drafting of the program itself, the question whether this Government ought to come forward now with a positive proposal of this nature. There are, in fact, still some differences of opinion among the members of the group on this subject. Reservations on this point also exist among various people in higher circles of the Government. The final decision, I think, will be yours, unless you should wish to get a decision of the National Security Council.

5. For these reasons, the program may be considered cleared as a program with the interested divisions of this Department and in process of clearance with the Department of the Army; but this clearance is without prejudice to the overall problem of whether or not such a positive program should be submitted to the CFM by us at this time. If it is decided that a positive program should be advanced, there is agreement here that it should be some such comprehensive plan as this.

6. Before making a final decision you will doubtless wish to consult with your advisers in Paris and with other qualified persons, particularly General Clay. Your final decision will also no doubt have to be made in the light of preliminary discussions with the French and British. It has always been the thought of those of us who worked on this paper that it would not be formally proposed at a CFM meeting or otherwise if this would seriously disrupt three-power unity. In this case, however, there would still remain the question whether this Government should not find some means of informing the world at large that it was prepared, had the other European Allies been willing, to consider a solution along these lines.

George F. Kennan

[Sub-Annex]

Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning Staff

secret [Washington,] November 12, 1948.

A Program for Germany (Program A)4

outline of the program

1. This paper sets forth a program for a new interim arrangement with respect to the government of Germany, for possible submission by the Secretary of State to a new meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers, or for promulgation in any other manner as a U.S. position.

2. The arrangement envisages, under proper safeguards: a new control machinery agreement to be worked out by CFM deputies, to govern relationships among the Allies, and between them and the Germans, pending the final peace settlement;

the early election and establishment of a provisional German government;

the simultaneous termination of military government throughout all of Germany; and

the withdrawal of all occupying forces to specified garrison areas.

3. The safeguards would include: free elections under satisfactory supervision;

safeguards against any misuse of German police;

provision for complete disarmament and demilitarization of Germany;

avoidance of any economic arrangements which could give the Russians undue influence over the German government or constitute an undue burden on Germany;

timing or phasing of the successive stages in their proper order, for example, forces would not be withdrawn until a duly elected German government was prepared to function; and

effective elimination of the veto by any individual power.

4. This arrangement would be intended to function until the conclusion of a peace treaty.

5. The program is presented here in five parts: I. The Underlying Considerations

II. The Proposal for a Program for Germany as It Would Be Initially Advanced

III. Notes on the Proposal

IV. The U.S. Position on Other Subjects Apt to Come Up for Discussion

V. Presentation and Tactics

i. underlying considerations

1. The program has been drawn up for use in the event that this Government should decide to make clear at this time the terms on which we would be prepared to agree to an interim settlement envisaging the establishment of a German government with authority over all of Germany and to the withdrawal of forces from the major part of German territory.

2. If it is not our desire to come forward with such a program at this time, this paper would have no validity. If, however, we do desire to make such a proposal, it would apparently have to be essentially along the lines of the one set forth in this paper.

3. On the theory that we should not put forward proposals which we would not ourselves be prepared to accept, this program has been so devised that it could, in the opinion of the working group, be implemented to the overall benefit of U. S. interests.

4. The program has also been devised on the theory that it must constitute a genuine and sincere bid for agreement. Every effort has therefore been made to meet legitimate Russian interests and requirements to a reasonable degree.

5. On the other hand, it must be recognized that there is no serious possibility of its acceptance by the Russians in toto at this time. It is drawn up, therefore, with the thought that it should constitute a starting point for what will probably be long and difficult negotiations. These negotiations would presumably take place for the most part among CFM deputies. These negotiations would not necessarily have to have any specified time limit. Their primary purpose would be to keep things flexible for an eventual agreement on Germany when and if the Russians finally decide that it is to their interests to have one.

6. This program is not designed to constitute or to replace a treaty of peace. It is specifically intended as another interim arrangement for the governing of Germany, to replace that worked out at Potsdam.

7. In drafting this program it has been taken as axiomatic, in the light of the experience of the past few years, that the four Allied powers cannot be expected to collaborate effectively in the actual government of Germany or in the exercise of any control authority in which their failure to agree would hinder the effective administration of the country. The project is therefore so devised as to call for a minimum of four-power collaboration. And an effort has been made to restrict four-power control powers to a negative, rather than a positive basis (i.e., the Germans can do everything which the four powers do not agree unanimously that they should not do.) This means, in contradistinction to the concepts governing our proposals at previous CFM meetings, that the unification of Germany would have to be accomplished by the German government, and that such matters as the establishment of a common currency, the dropping of zonal economic barriers, the drawing up of a common export-import plan, etc., would not have to be discussed among the four powers.

8. A second basic point of departure has been the belief that no unification of Germany is possible as long as zonal boundaries are maintained and that the boundary between the Soviet and other zones probably will not disappear as long as Russian troops are stationed in the Soviet zone.

9. These two considerations (5 and 6) have made it necessary to consider the immediate establishment of a German government (to replace military government), to be followed by an early evacuation of forces from all but specified garrison areas. These two factors are basic, and are logically linked together. If there is to be a four-power arrangement for Germany, some way or other a situation must be created which will eliminate the Russian veto. If troops are not withdrawn to specified garrison areas, zonal barriers will probably remain in effect, and the prospects for any successful economic unification of the country will be accordingly diminished. Again, in this case, the Russians could sabotage the arrangements by making economic unity, and accordingly economic recovery, impossible. If, therefore, either of these major elements should, for any reason, be eliminated, then the whole program should be discarded; for without both of them, it could become a very dangerous thing.

10. The same applies, of course, to the safeguards which are imbedded in the proposals and which are designed to assure against the “capture” and exploitation of Germany by Russia, as well as against a, revival of German aggression. The main ones of these are: (a) the electoral arrangements, providing for free and supervised elections;

(b) the arrangements to guard against misuse of German police units;

(c) the provision for complete disarmament and demilitarization of Germany;

(d) our refusal to accede to economic arrangements which would give the Russians undue influence over a German government or constitute an undue burden on Germany.

(e) the timing of the successive stages of realization, under which, for example, forces would not be withdrawn until a duly elected German government was in office and prepared to function.

If any of these safeguards cannot be basically assured or replaced with others which would have the same effect, then again the whole program should be reexamined.

11. For these reasons the plan should be specifically presented as an integral program, the various component parts of which must be considered in relation to each other.

12. The sections on government and Allied control constitute the essence of the attached program. They are formulated with a view to adaptation to whatever conditions exist at the time of CFM discussions. If a CFM is held late this year or early in 1949, the deliberations of the Bonn Constituent Assembly will be well advanced, or possibly a western German government with an eastern zone counter-part may already be in existence. The proposed Constituent Assembly for all of Germany elected by free vote would be likely to adopt a governmental system not far different from that devised for western Germany at Bonn by the constituent representatives of the majority of the total German population.

13. The proposed governmental arrangements are all drawn up on the theory that anti-communist forces can probably win a working majority in any reasonably free national election at this time and hold it for the foreseeable future, in the absence of actual armed pressure from Soviet or German communist elements. This is a theory which cannot be demonstrated in advance. The danger that it might prove incorrect must therefore be considered as a calculated risk. It is assumed, for purposes of this paper, that this risk is an acceptable one, from our standpoint. This is a vital factor, for only if we are prepared to rely on this probability can we avoid the necessity of strong and continuing controls by the western powers over the working of a German government. And if such controls were to be retained, then it would plainly be preferable to carry on with the existing western German arrangements than to attempt to work out any device whereby we would try to exercise this control function in collaboration with the Russians. The reliance on the ability of the Germans to elect and maintain a government capable of resisting communist pressures is therefore basic to this program. If this is not accepted as a strong likelihood, then again the whole program is unworkable and should be abandoned.

14. The disarmament program plays an important part in the basic concept of this program. In the light of east–west differences and of communist tactics, the disarmament problem becomes one of preventing not only renewed German aggression but also any connivance by either side with the Germans to permit rearmament against the wishes and the interests of the other. For that reason, and to simplify the problem of control, it is recommended that disarmament and demilitarization be sweeping and complete. On the other hand, while it is recognized that there will have to be certain prohibited industries and activities, the identification of which would have to constitute part of any interim settlement along the lines of this program, the idea of any general restrictions on the level of industry is rejected, as well as anything in the nature of a limited functioning of individual branches of activities under four-power control with individual veto. This accords with the principle, mentioned above, that we should avoid everything that would call for continued, day-to-day collaboration with the Russians in control arrangements of a positive nature. In general, to meet this principle, the older drafts of a disarmament and demilitarization treaty5 require extensive revision. (Work is now in progress on this revision.) On the other hand, the idea of our continuing to offer to conclude such a treaty is considered sound, and, in fact, indispensable to the present program.

15. The proposal for the withdrawal of forces to specific garrison areas is a compromise between the desire to get Russian forces out of Germany entirely and the necessity of keeping U.S. forces there to meet the wishes and security requirements of the western European allies. That the Soviet forces must be required to leave the Soviet zone as a whole, and that they must be placed in a position where they cannot exercise any influence on civil affairs, is clear. On the other hand, it is unlikely that the French could be brought to consent either to the departure of U.S. troops from Germany or to any arrangement which would call upon Allied forces to get out of the Rhineland. If western forces remain in their zones, Russian forces will remain in theirs. The withdrawal of forces to garrison areas therefore appears to be the best compromise. At the same time, the provision that these garrison areas shall be, in the case of powers non-contiguous to Germany, in the neighborhood of seaport towns, is designed to make possible the further requirement that the Russian troops, like those of the U.S. and U.K., be supplied by sea and air, and in this way to deprive the U.S.S.R. of the justification for the maintenance of armed forces in Poland.

16. The Russians, who view economic matters almost solely in their political connotations, will seek some means whereby they can gain, through these arrangements, an economic hold over Germany which will permit them later to exert political pressure on a German government. The main one of these devices will of course be the demand for reparations beyond any reasonable capacity of the Germans to pay. While this and similar attempts must be rejected, it is recognized that the Russians probably deserve to have some assurance—particularly if Germany is to be left free to join ERP—that German trade will not be oriented exclusively to the west. Since the initiative in raising this question should come from the Russians, nothing is said on this subject in the initial U.S. proposal itself. However, allowance is made for this requirement in the recommendation that a fair share of German foreign trade would be available for the east.

17. With respect to ERP itself, this is not mentioned in the draft proposal, because it is considered that a provisional German authority, with power to control Germany’s foreign relations and foreign trade, would have no choice but to participate in ERP, and would be at liberty to do so in the absence of any special restrictions. We would therefore leave it to the Russians to raise this subject if they so wished. We would, however, accept no arrangements which would inhibit the Germans from participating in ERP. To do so would place Germany economically at the mercy of Russia and would defeat the purposes of this program.

18. A word of clarification is in order as to the relationship of this program to the present western German arrangements. The program envisages an adaptation by common agreement of the London decisions to which the U.S. is committed. It has heretofore been thought that through the intensified development of the western German arrangements agreed last June we would be able to exert such pressure on the eastern zone of Germany that eventually we would be able to force the Russians to permit the eastern zone to become a part of the western German arrangements. The present program is based on the belief that the Berlin situation, the desirability of combatting Soviet propaganda about withdrawal of forces, and the unlikelihood of any helpful Russian participation in four-power control make desirable a somewhat modified approach.

19. This program embraces the essential principles of the London program. The latter’s objective of returning authority to the Germans would be accelerated with a view to reducing Soviet interference and this purpose would be furthered in the proposed troop withdrawals which would recognize the fact that we cannot expect of four-power collaboration the same things that we can expect of three-power collaboration. On the other hand, the guarantees against German disarmament would gain force by acceptance on a four-power basis. While it can be hoped that we might obtain British and French acquiescence to the plan as a development of the London program and as representing no abandonment of the initiative we have acquired with respect to the major part of Germany under that program, our proposals would be presented in the CFM as a new program standing by itself in order to obviate raising an unnecessary and undesirable prestige factor which will militate strongly against Soviet acceptance.

20. The proposal of this program, based as it is on an effort to get rid of the sharp line of division through central Germany and the resulting dangers connected with the status of Berlin, would not be logical unless it went hand in hand with a parallel effort to bring about the evacuation of Austria.

ii. a program for germany 6

German Government

1. A constitutional government for all of Germany should be established as soon as possible.

2. The four occupying powers shall authorize the Ministers-president of the sixteen German Laender (states) and the Lord Mayor of Berlin to convoke a constituent assembly for the whole of Germany. Members of the assembly shall be chosen by popular election in proportion to the population of the respective Laender. In addition, two representatives from each Land (state) and from Berlin shall at the same time be chosen by popular vote to constitute a Laenderrat (senate) which shall participate in the constituent assembly. The general election shall be held throughout Germany within [90] days of the conclusion of CFM agreement, provided the International Commission hereinafter mentioned approves.

3. All political parties at present authorized in any zone should be permitted to offer candidates throughout Germany. A system of UN supervision and inspection shall be established and maintained uniformly in all electoral districts throughout Germany to ensure that all authorized political parties may operate freely and that elections are held by universal equal and direct suffrage, and by secret ballot. Complete freedom of speech, assembly, and communication, and non-discrimination in the use of all media of information for electoral purposes shall be guaranteed. Zonal boundaries shall be eliminated as political barriers, and freedom of movement for persons and ideas shall be assured throughout Germany. New elections for local and Land authorities throughout Germany shall also be held at or about the same time under the same supervision.

4.(a) To administer the system of supervision and inspection for free elections, an International Commission, with appropriate staff, shall be established under United Nations auspices immediately following the conclusion of CFM agreement, and shall commence to function at least [60] days prior to the date of the general elections. The Commission shall have authority to make recommendations which will be implemented by the Four Military Governors unless disapproved by them unanimously. The Commission shall appoint a Central Police Director for Germany as a whole who (with appropriate staff) shall have direct control over all German police units for the maintenance of law and order and the exercise of police power in an entirely impartial manner completely divorced from political purposes. This Director shall not be a German, nor a national of any one of the occupying powers, and he shall select under the same limitations of nationality a Police Commissioner, responsible to himself, for each Land.

(b) Within [one] week from the date of designation of the Central Police Director, the Military Governors of the four zones shall furnish him complete information regarding all German police forces and other German armed units within their respective zones. They will also comply promptly with any requests he may make for supplemental information on this subject.

(c) After the Central Police Director has assumed charge of police affairs, no person in Germany other than members of the occupying forces shall be permitted to bear arms or conduct any activities of a police nature except with his permission and under his authority, exercised through the Police Commissioners of the Laender.

(d) The authority of the International Commission and the Central Police Director shall be effective during the electoral period and until the German provisional government has assumed governmental responsibilities.

5. The constituent assembly, together with the Laenderrat, shall exercise the dual functions of a provisional government and a constitution-making body.

(a) In its capacity as provisional government, the assembly, together with the Laenderrat, shall be enabled to perform all functions essential to the legal, economic, and political unity of Germany. It shall be authorized to create at once central administrative departments in the necessary fields. Subject to the approval of the Laenderrat, the constituent assembly shall determine the procedures for the provisional exercise of legislative and executive authority, and determine as may be required for temporary purposes the division of powers between the provisional government and the Laender governments. The constituent assembly shall submit these procedures for review to the Four Military Governors; they shall go into effect, if not disapproved within twenty-one days by unanimous vote of the Four Military Governors. The jurisdiction of the provisional government shall be clearly defined by an allied statute reserving specifically only those powers essential to the maintenance and enforcement of demilitarization and of other controls in a few specific fields (as outlined below in paragraphs 7 to 9 inclusive on the “Allied Commission for Germany”).

(b) In its capacity as a constituent organ, the assembly, together with the Laenderrat, shall proceed to draft a constitution for Germany. In order to ensure the utmost freedom to the constituent assembly, no detailed requirements for the constitution shall be imposed on the assembly by the occupying powers, but the draft constitution, before submission to the electorate for ratification, shall be subject to disapproval by unanimous vote of the Allied Commission, as hereinafter provided for (see paragraph 7).

6. If not disapproved by the Allied Commission, the draft constitution shall be submitted to the German electorate, for ratification, and if ratified a constitutional German government shall without delay be formed in accordance with the constitutional procedures.

Allied Commission for Germany

7. At the time the German provisional government assumes governmental responsibilities, the Allied Control Council shall be dissolved and there shall be established an Allied Commission for Germany, consisting of four civilian High Commissioners, one appointed by each of the Four Powers, with appropriate staffs to function until the peace settlement. At the same time, military government shall be terminated, and in particular, occupation troops shall cease to exercise military government functions. Zonal boundaries for these purposes shall thereby be definitively eliminated.

8. The Allied Commission for Germany shall deal directly only with the central German government. Pending a general settlement with Germany the Allied Commission shall exercise reserved powers to be specified in an allied statute. In particular, special powers in the following fields shall be reserved to the Allied Commission which may act directly in these fields as well as through orders to the central German government.

(a) Disarmament and demilitarization, including related fields of scientific research, and civil aviation (subject to the provisions of a disarmament and demilitarization treaty);

(b) Reparations;

(c) Protection and security of Allied forces and representatives, their immunities and satisfaction of their requirements.

Powers to be exercised by the Ruhr Control Authority shall also be reserved in the Allied statute to the extent necessary to carry out the International Control of the Ruhr. The Allied Commission shall transmit orders or requirements to local or Land authorities through the central German government.

9. All legislative and constitutional measures and international agreements which the German government wishes to make, except agreements with one of the Four Powers, shall, before they take effect, be submitted by the German government to the Allied Commission. All such measures and agreements shall come into force automatically if not disapproved within [21] days by unanimous vote of the Allied Commission. The German government shall be obliged to inform the Allied Commission of all international agreements entered into with one or more of the Four Powers. Subject to disapproval by the Allied Commission, the German government may repeal or amend, except in the reserved fields, all existing legislation, including Control Council and Military Government enactments. The Allied Commission may at any time inform the German government of its disapproval of any legislative measures or administrative actions of the government or of local and Land authorities, and may direct that the action in question shall be cancelled or amended.

Withdrawal of Troops

10. (a) Within 150 days from the date on which the provisional German government assumes governmental responsibilities, the total occupation forces in Germany will be reduced so as not to exceed 160,000. The U.S., U.K., USSR and France shall each provide a complement not to exceed 40,000. The garrison forces of the U.S., U.K., and USSR shall be stationed in specifically defined limited areas containing port facilities; suitable locations might be: U.S.–Bremen area; U.K.–Hamburg area; USSR–Stettin area. French military forces shall be stationed in the Rhineland at a location to be determined. The restricted areas shall contain port facilities, training areas, air fields and suitable storage, quartering and recreation facilities. The U.S., U.K., and USSR forces will not utilize land lines of communications to or from their respective limited areas. They will maintain their forces by sea or air lines of communications terminating within the respective restricted areas. The occupation forces will exercise no local governmental functions, but will carry out specific tasks according to the instructions of the Allied Commission.

(b) The extent to which Germany shall be obliged to meet requirements and furnish funds for the maintenance of the forces in garrison areas shall be determined from time to time by the Allied Commission. All unused German currency and all German goods in the possession of the Allied forces, except such as the Allied Commission decides are necessary for the maintenance of the forces in the garrison areas, shall be turned over to the provisional German government by the time that the withdrawal to garrison areas is completed.

11. Reduction of forces shall commence immediately after the conclusion of the Council of Foreign Ministers. In any event, the overall troop strengths, of each of the four occupying powers, must be reduced to 100,000 or less within [90] days of the conclusion of the CFM. Reduction to the agreed 40,000 must be concluded and forces of all four occupying powers concentrated in their respective restricted areas no later than 150 days subsequent to the provisional government’s assumption of responsibility. Withdrawal of the forces shall take place under quadripartite or U.N. supervision. In the case of the U.S., U.K., and France, provision must be made for these nations to retain the right of free transit and the right to guard military supplies necessary to maintain the forces of occupation in Austria, until such time as an Austrian Treaty is concluded and the withdrawal of troops and military stores as a result thereof is completed. This arrangement will be necessary unless an agreement of some other type is obtained that provides for the supply of the forces of occupation in Austria should they remain in Austria subsequent to an agreement for Germany.

Disarmament and Demilitarization

12. The United States shall propose again a Four Power treaty for the disarmament and demilitarization of Germany along the lines of the Byrnes proposal. The prohibitions and restrictions to be imposed upon Germany shall be stated clearly either by reference to existing Control Council legislation and directives, or by including annexes specifically defining the items subject to prohibition or control (war materials, para-military organizations, military installations, research, etc.). Restrictions shall in general be limited to those of a distinctly military character in order to avoid undue interference with essential economic activities and in the interest of simplicity of enforcement. It is envisaged that enforcement action may be taken by three or more of the signatory powers if they agree, but shall not be taken by less than three.

13. Responsibility for the enforcement of the disarmament and demilitarization of Germany shall, pending the conclusion of the peace settlement, be vested in the Allied Commission for Germany. For this purpose a special Demilitarization Board shall be established under the Allied Commission, headed by military representatives of the Four Powers, assisted by the necessary expert technical staffs.

14. The Board will carry on appropriate inspections and will by majority vote recommend to the Allied Commission measures necessary to maintain and enforce the disarmament and demilitarization restrictions. On receipt of such recommendations the Allied Commission will determine by majority vote what action should be taken.

15. Upon termination by a peace settlement of the Allied Commission for Germany, the disarmament control functions shall be exercised by a special Allied Disarmament Commission to be specified in the disarmament treaty and embodied in the final German peace settlement.

Reparations

16. The powers in occupation of the Western Zones of occupation of Germany shall, within 60 days of the termination of the CFM meeting, make a final determination of the industrial plants and equipment to be removed from these Zones as reparation. Deliveries of such plants and equipment shall be made at the earliest possible date, in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4 of Part IV of the Potsdam Agreement. No other deliveries on reparation account shall be made from any part of Germany.

17. The Four Powers agree that industrial plants and equipment previously removed from Germany, uncompensated deliveries from German current production prior to the CFM meeting, German foreign assets made available for reparation, and all other assets received as reparation by claimant nations together with such further deliveries as are made under paragraph 16 shall constitute a final settlement of all Allied reparation claims on Germany. The Four Powers will not support additional reparation claims on the part of any other power.

Foreign Property in Germany

18. The Allied Commanders in Germany shall be immediately instructed to hasten the examination of claims for the restitution of United Nations property looted by Germany, in accordance with existing Allied agreements, with a view to completing the return of such property by the time the German provisional government is established.

19. Pending the conclusion of a German peace settlement, United Nations property in Germany shall be no less favorably treated than German property. The German government shall be required to ensure its protection and non-discriminatory treatment.

20. All property, rights and interests in Germany which have been acquired by the governments of any of the occupying powers since May 8, 1945, except property or facilities acquired for the discharge of diplomatic and consular functions, shall be relinquished. Pending the determination by the German government of the ultimate status of such property, rights and interests, they shall be placed under the provisional administration of the governments of the Laender in which they are located.

The Ruhr

21. An International Authority for the Ruhr shall be created to perform the following functions: (a) To make allocations of coal, coke and steel from the Ruhr as between German consumption and export, in order to ensure adequate access to supplies of these products, taking into account the essential needs of Germany.

(b) To ensure that the German authorities do not institute, carry out, or permit artificial measures which would distort the movements of Ruhr coal, coke and steel in international trade except for measures of self-protection approved by the International Authority.

22. The International Authority for the Ruhr shall be composed of representatives of the governments of the United Kingdom, France, and Germany, which shall have three votes each, and the governments of the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg, which shall have one vote each. Decisions of the Authority shall be taken by majority vote, except that Germany shall have no vote on questions involving Germany’s compliance with its obligations under the agreement. The organization and functions of the Authority, and the obligations of Germany in its regard, shall be specified in detail in an instrument approved by the occupying powers after consultation with the governments of the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg.

The Peace Settlement

23. The four Allied Powers, in collaboration with the other nations which have been at war with Germany, shall formulate a peace settlement which will establish finally Allied requirements on Germany, thus opening the way for the eventual admission of Germany into the UN.

[This paper concludes with the following sections:

iii. notes on the program for germany

This section explained the Program for Germany in greater detail elaborating the measures and policies that would be necessary to implement the basic concepts of the program. It included subsections of notes corresponding to the various parts of the program for Germany, dealing with those parts paragraph by paragraph.

iv. the u.s. position on other subjects apt to come up for discussion

In this section of PPS 37/1 the Policy Planning Staff outlined U.S. policy on the Saar, residual controls, war damages to U.N. property in Germany, and boundaries, since these topics had not been considered in the Program for Germany but might arise during a meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers.

v. presentation and tactics

In the final section the Policy Planning Staff sketched various methods of presenting the Program for Germany, stressing that the paper was not a final document, but was subject to further consideration. The program was meant for a meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers, since it was the only body which could translate the proposal into a four power agreement, but it could be used outside the Council. Finally, its presentation would undoubtedly evoke French objections and special steps would have to be taken to impress the safeguards of the program on the French.]

1  PPS 37/1 was circulated within the Department of State to EUR and O and a copy was sent to Berlin for comments by Clay and Murphy. The responses of EUR and O were similar to those for Kennan’s August 12 memorandum (footnote 1, p. 1287 [Pg. 1287 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719]).

Lovett pencilled his opinion of PPS 37/1 on a memorandum of December 1, not printed, which transmitted the comments of EUR and O to the Under Secretary. He wrote: “Mr. Kennan—I think this should be reconsidered in light of non-concurrences.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–148)

Murphy reported his own and Clay’s views on the paper in a letter to Beam of December 7, not printed. Murphy found the program for Germany “… a very worthwhile document and as blueprints go it should be valuable. The trouble with our good blueprints often seems to be that they get bloody noses bumping into Russian, French, and at times, British stone walls.” Murphy quoted Clay as follows: “An interesting study. I believe, though, our French friends, if they saw it, would immediately re-classify you and me as ‘les meilleurs amis’. I won’t put this in the hopper for study until we are asked for comment for fear of leakage.” (740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–748)

2 Tab B not printed here; for the text of PPS 37, see p. 1287 [Pg. 1287 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719].

3 The reference here is to the Special Consultative Group on German Policy Questions. A full transcript of the Group’s discussions of the German question September 15–16 with members of the Department is in the Policy Planning Staff Files: Lot 64 D 563: Box 20029.

4 This paper was circulated separately within the Department of State as FMP D–6/21a.

5 The reference here is to a draft treaty presented by Secretary of State Byrnes, at the Paris Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers, April 30, 1946. The text is printed in Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. ii, p. 190.

6 The bracketed interpolations in this section appear in the source text.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) 711.00/12–1348

[Document 722]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

[Extracts]

secret Berlin, December 13, 1948.

Dear Bob : I take pleasure in acknowledging the receipt of your letter of November 231 enclosing a copy of the Department’s August 26, 1948, Policy Statement on Germany.2 It is noted that this Policy Statement is dated August 26 (according to the note on page 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], the Statement was prepared early in the summer of 1948), evidently representing the Department’s German policy as of that date. This is the first information which has reached this Mission regarding it.

I find the Statement an excellent outline of certain features of our German policy as I understand them.

There is however a basic consideration which I would like to advance at this stage. Over and above the expense which the United States taxpayer is now suffering for the maintenance of an Army of Occupation in Germany, the Congress is appropriating under the heading of GAROIA and ECA funds approximately one billion dollars annually for the support of the German economy. Possibly it is old-fashioned to assume that this amount of money is substantial but what I have to say is based on that assumption. The principal argument which could be advanced for the expenditure of this money is that it is required as support for the prosecution of our German and European policy. Our policy contemplates the development of a peaceful, democratic and self-sustaining Germany. I believe that, if left to its own devices, the United States would be able to achieve that objective. It has not, however, been able to coordinate this policy with its Allies. While the United States has gone forward during the past year in an honest endeavor to further German reconstruction and provide a substantial basis for democratic development, this effort has not been well synchronized with the policies of France and the UK, to a lesser extent with Benelux, and not at all with the Soviet Union. Having split completely with the Soviet Union on German policy, the United States is now struggling to harmonize its efforts in Western Germany with the policies of France, the Benelux and the UK. I use the word “harmonization” as a polite expression because what actually happens is that US policy is subordinated both to French and UK policy. French policy, I think it can be said unequivocally, is based primarily on fear and apprehension of the Germans as potential aggressors and, to a lesser but still to an important degree, as commercial competitors. While the French for selfish reasons do not want Germany to be an economic morass they wish the Germans to remain in an unrealistic limbo which will keep them submerged both economically and militarily. UK policy, which has been paralleling US policy in many respects, more recently has taken another turn which is illustrated by the UK note of December 43 from which the following is quoted as apropos. “In their opinion neither the international situation nor the present political and economic position of Germany dispel the possibility of a resurgence of German Military Power at a future date, whilst the danger of German War Potential being put to effective use by an invading power has greatly increased.”

Of the Benelux countries the Dutch view of Germany is by far the most realistic and particularly during the past year the Dutch have been constructive and forward-looking. This applies to a lesser extent to Belgium and Luxembourg.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The point I am trying to make is that if the Carthaginian school of thought regarding Germany is to prevail, then the huge expenditure of funds which the United States is making in this area is thoroughly unjustified and is an abuse of the United States taxpayer. If our objective is not the reconstruction of German economy to enable the present density of population to maintain a minimum standard of living, then there is utterly no basis for our expenditure of funds for this purpose and the United States should withdraw the present subsidy.

Apart from this, I feel that there has been a further tactical error in our policy from the end of hostilities. I brought this matter up for discussion with Ambassador Douglas in London last February and I have also called it to the attention of the Secretary. We have never forced the issue regarding a general provision for security although a start was made in that connection with the proposal evolved during Secretary Byrnes’ administration concerning a quadripartite security board. In the absence of this provision at every step of the way progress has been impeded by French insistence on loading with the question of security every item, whether relating to the manufacture of aspirin or textiles, traffic on the Rhine, the Occupation Statute, western German government, or the Ruhr Control Authority. In fact, every issue has had attached to it French fear and apprehension, regarding security and commercial interest. This approach is inconsistent with our basic policy of reconstructing a peaceful and self-sustaining Germany and if it is continued it is doomed to failure for which the United States will be blamed and for which again the United States taxpayer will foot an enormous bill. I have never believed in reparations as a security measure nor do I believe in the theory of prohibited and limited industries as a means of obtaining security. As an analogy, there were ample provisions in the Treaty of Versailles which would have prevented Germany after the first World War from becoming again an aggressor nation but in the absence of a determination by the Western Powers to take the necessary security action those clauses fell to the ground. Thus again, tearing down factories and formulating control provisions will not provide security unless there is a continuing determination to prevent aggressive moves by prompt measures of intervention. Dismantling of plants producing consumers’ goods will only succeed in delaying recovery and in defeating the underlying purposes of our European policy.

[The remainder of Ambassador Murphy’s letter is devoted to proposed detailed revisions of various paragraphs of the Department’s Policy Statement on Germany.]

Sincerely yours,

Robert Murphy

1 Not printed.

2  Ante, p. 1297 [Pg. 1297 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720].

3  Ante, p. 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500].

VII. Department of State policy statement on AustriaVII. Department of State policy statement on Austria

[723] Department of State Policy Statement on Austria

Washington, September 20, 1948.

Vienna Legation Files: Lot 55F74, Box 3160

Department of State Policy Statement on Austria Vienna Legation Files: Lot 55F74, Box 3160

[Document 723]

Department of State Policy Statement on Austria

secret Washington, September 20, 1948.

A. Objectives

The basic objective of the United States with respect to Austria is the reestablishment of Austria as an independent and democratic country. The fulfillment of this objective has been the main consideration in determining US policy since the signing of the Moscow Declaration on November 1, 1943.1 The principal means employed have been the military occupation of Austria, the conclusion of various international agreements designed both to establish and to enlarge the functions of the Austrian Government, and the negotiation of a four-power treaty terminating occupation and recognizing the full sovereign rights of the Austrian Government and people. To assure that the full intent of the Moscow Declaration is carried out, the US has extended economic assistance to Austria on a considerable scale, and in military occupation as well as international discussions has insisted that no action should be taken or rights be acquired by any foreign power in Austria which would prejudice independence following the termination of military occupation and the withdrawal of the military forces of the four powers.

B. Policy Issues

The position of Austria with respect to the Allied Powers is unique in that Austria is still subject to military occupation and at the same time is recognized as a sovereign state by this government and treated in all political and economic matters as a liberated area. The legal rights of the United States as an occupying power, originally defined in the Agreements on Control Machinery and Zones of Occupation concluded by the European Advisory Commission in July 1945,2 were redefined in the new Control Machinery Agreement of June 1946.3 These agreements assign to the US a zone of occupation in Austria, a zone in the city of Vienna including rights of transportation and free access, and membership, along with Great Britain, France, and the USSR, in the Allied Council which has general supervisory rights with respect to the Austrian Government. The Commanding General of the US forces in Austria represents this government in the Allied Council as the United States High Commissioner in Austria. In addition, as a result of the de jure recognition of the Austrian Government in January 1946, the United States and Austria have exchanged diplomatic representatives.

Through this mechanism of military and civilian administration, we have implemented in Austria our policy of enlarging progressively the sphere of authority of the Austrian Government and of giving such economic assistance, through UNRRA, army civilian relief, and various grants and credits as would provide for immediate relief needs and the reconstruction of the Austrian economy to meet the future requirements of national independence. In the international sphere, the US has taken the lead in pushing the conclusion of an Austrian treaty in the Council of Foreign Ministers and encouraging the Austrian Government to become affiliated with those international organizations which seek to attain common ends through the cooperation of independent national states.

1. political

The implementation of the basic policy of fulfilling the intent of the Moscow Declaration by the conclusion of a treaty establishing and recognizing Austrian independence has to date been made impossible by the clash between the western states and the Soviet Union on both the content and purpose of the treaty. To the western states in general, and the US in particular, the ultimate fate of Austria is important not only from the point of view of its strategic location in Europe but more immediately to prevent the inclusion of Austria in the Soviet orbit.

The objective of the west has been to reestablish Austria as an independent state within the frontiers of 1937. To this end the United States has made a heavy investment in Austria, in the cost of military occupation and in the expenditures made for relief and economic reconstruction. However great the past and future investments may be in material terms, no accounting can be made of the political value of the successful opposition which the Austrian Government and people have, with the assistance of the western powers, made to the encroachments of the Soviet forces on their national sovereignty as well as the efforts of the Austrian Communist Party to disrupt internal order and stability. Any weakening of this opposition either by the Austrian Government or by the western powers to permit either outright or veiled Soviet control would have serious repercussions in European politics.

The Austrian Government, formed as a result of the elections of December 1945, is composed of a coalition of the Peoples’ Party and Socialists. The Communists obtained approximately five per cent of the total popular vote in this election, and since that time such electoral tests as shop council elections in the factories show that the Communists have not increased their strength even in the Soviet zone of occupation. The government is staunchly anti-Communist by reason of the political orientation of its component parties and by reason of its experiences at the hands of the Soviet military authorities. All forms of coercion have been tried by the Soviets, including the kidnapping and arrest of government officials, but such pressure has not caused the Austrian Government to waver in its consistent support of western aims. Similarly, Austria has resisted all efforts by the Soviets to conclude a bilateral agreement settling the major issues which prevent the conclusion of the Austrian treaty.

The adherence of the Austrian Government and people to western aims is not solely the result of convenience arising from military occupation nor from fear of Soviet aggression in the event the Soviet [Western?] occupation forces were withdrawn. Historically, communism has had no roots in Austria and the Austrian people have always participated in western political movements. Since the liberation in 1945, no strikes or social unrest have hindered the operations either of the government or the occupation forces. The only strike of any consequence was in the Soviet zone in protest over the labor policies of the Soviet military managers. The Austrian Government has willingly participated in such United Nations activities as are permitted within the limitations of its sovereignty still remaining, and is a participating member in the organization for European Economic Cooperation.

In face of the overwhelming support of western aims, the Soviet Union has through its military occupation a formidable foothold in Austria which can nullify the fulfillment of the international agreements respecting the reestablishment of Austrian independence. The Soviet forces have in general pursued an arbitrary and unilateral policy in their zone and have impeded Austrian reconstruction. By means of the economic enterprises and resources held as German assets pending treaty settlement, the Soviets have, on the contrary, deprived the Austrian economy of necessary goods which would have been utilized internally or exported. These enterprises have been operated by Soviet managers with no regard for Austrian law or for administrative control by federal or local government. Resources produced in the Soviet zone have been withheld from time to time from other zones, a practice which has seriously interfered with efforts to establish a unified Austrian economy.

While the ultimate objective of Soviet policy cannot be exactly surmised, it does not appear that the Soviets wish to irrevocably partition Austria. The eastern zone including Vienna would be an economic and political liability to the Soviets unless major changes were made in the political and economic organization of central and eastern Europe. It is more likely that the Soviets seek the withdrawal of western occupation forces from Austria, either through a treaty settlement or through threats, in hopes that through external pressure and internal disorder a government more amenable to Soviet objectives may be formed to replace the present coalition.

The central fact in western policy and for the future of Austria is the conclusion of the treaty discussions. Discussions have been held in the Council of Foreign Ministers on the treaty since June 1946.4 The last session of the Deputies in London was suspended on May 6, 1948 as a result of fundamental disagreement on the two specific issues of rectification of the frontiers in favor of Yugoslavia and the payment of 150 million dollars in reparations to Yugoslavia.5 In the treaty negotiations the issues have narrowed down to the following: (a) German Assets.—Under the terms of the compromise French proposal, the problem is to determine the exact amount of properties to be turned over to the Soviets in satisfaction of their claims to German assets under Potsdam and the sum which Austria will pay to regain control over all properties now held by the Soviets which are not transferred to their ownership. The three western powers have insisted that any burden incurred by Austria in this settlement shall be within her ability to discharge without extensive foreign assistance, and, secondly, that any property or rights acquired by the Soviets shall be subject to Austrian law and not bear extraterritorial privileges.

(b) Frontiers.—The western powers insist that Austria shall possess the frontiers of 1937 and that no territory be ceded to Yugoslavia.

(c) Reparations.—The western powers insist that, in accordance with the Potsdam Agreement, no reparations be exacted from Austria.

(d) Military Defense.—The western powers insist that Austria be permitted to arm its military forces, the extent of which has been agreed, with no restrictions on the source from which material is derived.

(e) Independence.—The western states insist that all four powers agree to respect the independence and territorial integrity of Austria.

The remaining unagreed articles in the treaty would be readily settled once agreement is reached on these basic issues. The resumption of discussions on the treaty, the determination of which is initially in the hands of the US Deputy as next Chairman, will depend on developments in western relations with the Soviets in central Europe as a whole. In the negotiations to date we have urged that the treaty contain adequate safeguards to enable the Austrian people to maintain their independence. Pending the conclusion of such a treaty the US will continue to maintain the authority of the Allied Council as the most effective means to oppose Soviet pressure on the Austrian Government, to press for greater autonomy and authority for the Austrian Government, and to concert with Austrian leaders to maintain the present government coalition and to assist its efforts in combatting communism and the aggressive policy of the Soviet Union.

2. economic

The United States was mindful in adhering to the Moscow Declaration that an independent Austria could endure only if it were economically self-supporting. To achieve this result, Austria has to increase production, expand foreign trade, maintain internal financial stability and cooperate with all nations interested in the development of stable economic conditions.

At the end of the war Austria required outside assistance in order to make the structural changes in the Austrian economy required by its severance from Germany and to repair the severe damages and dislocations resulting directly from the war. The low level of economic activity and consumption prevailing in Austria at the end of the war, together with the disturbed conditions in Europe, prevented revival of the export and tourist trades and thereby made it impossible for Austria to finance even the most essential of its import requirements without outside assistance. Accordingly, the US has extended the major portion of all foreign aid received by Austria since the liberation in May 1945. As a result of this assistance, a gradual improvement has taken place in production and the level of consumption in Austria. By the spring of 1948, the average production of certain producers goods had practically attained the pre-war level. On the other hand, recovery in the field of agricultural production and consumers goods has lagged. A considerable degree of financial stability has been achieved as a result of two successful currency conversions taken by the Austrian Government since 1945 with the aid of the Allied Council. The currency reform in December 1947 played a particularly important role in promoting financial stability.6

Full recovery and the reconstruction of a national economy capable of sustaining an independent state depends on further foreign aid, a more effective use of available resources and the right of Austria to take her place as an equal among nations working for the establishment of stable international economic relations.

From 1945 to the beginning of ECA operations in April 1948, the foreign grants and credits extended to Austria amounted to more than 600 million dollars. About 80 per cent of this aid came from the United States. Notwithstanding this assistance, Austrian recovery progressed at a very slow pace until late 1947, owing in part to the persistence of abnormal conditions in international trade and in part to the necessary concentration of outside assistance on relief rather than on recovery goods. In addition, indigenous resources could not be fully utilized because of the inadequacy of raw material and capital goods imports and the fact that the country was divided into four zones under military occupation. Unsettled world conditions, particularly the prolonged uncertainty as to the nature and extent of Germany’s industrial reconstruction, have made it difficult for the Austrian Government to pursue a clear-cut policy of industrial reconstruction. In addition, the uncertainty of the status of “German assets” within Austria has proven to be psychologically as well as physically a disorganizing factor.

In order that outside assistance may not create a heavy debt for the Austrian economy, more than 90 per cent of the United States aid to Austria prior to ECA was extended on a grant basis. Because of the relatively slow recovery in Europe as a whole, and because it now appears that by the end of the European Recovery Program Austria may not achieve full recovery, it has been decided that ECA allotments for the present will be in the form of outright grants. We consider it important that the Austrian economy become self-supporting as quickly as possible. It is essential that recovery proceed at a more rapid pace. An increasing portion of the ECA allotments to Austria will have to be used for raw materials and capital goods rather than for food. With the 1948 harvest, food supplies in Austria should permit consumption at an average close to the pre-war level.

With respect to the control and utilization of Austrian resources, we view full Austrian sovereignty in these matters to be an essential concomitant of political independence. Although full sovereignty by Austria will not be realized until withdrawal of the occupation forces, we consider it of paramount importance that Austria be allowed to control its resources without interference. In accordance with this view, the US has consistently advocated and supported in the Allied Council various measures tending to place upon Austria the responsibility for the direction and control of its economy.

In regard to Austrian imports, the question has arisen repeatedly whether imports financed by ECA or through other US grants or credits should be distributed throughout the four zones of occupation. The United States in all cases has urged that Austria should be treated as a unit and that discrimination among the different zones of occupation would result in a division of the country making impossible eventual establishment of a sovereign and independent state. The only limitation which we have placed upon the freedom of trade among the zones in Austria is that shipments to the Soviet zone of materials procured with US funds should not include materials of war potential of the classification now barred from shipment to countries in the Soviet orbit by US regulations.

Since full economic recovery in Europe can be achieved only through international cooperation, we have encouraged Austria to join the various United Nations bodies and other international economic organizations. We have also encouraged the Austrian Government to resume trade relations interrupted by the Anschluss with Germany and by the war. As Austria’s economy complements those of its neighbors, and even though some of these countries are now in the Soviet orbit, it is not considered practical to attempt to persuade Austria to orient its trade primarily toward the OEEC countries rather than toward non-participating areas. Any trade relations beneficial to the Austrian economy should be encouraged provided they do not entail political ties or trade agreements of such a comprehensive nature as to limit its independence. In point of fact, Austria’s trade until the present time has been mainly oriented to the west owing to difficulties the satellite countries have created rather than any unwillingness on the part of Austria.

C. Relations With Other States

With the exception of relations with the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia, and other satellite states, Austrian relations with the European states in general are cordial and have been regularized through the interchange of diplomatic missions. Trade agreements have now been signed by Austria with most European states and the expanding commerce which has resulted from these agreements also effected the increased rate of economic recovery since 1947.

Great Britain and France are signatory to the same international agreements respecting Austria as the United States. On all major issues the British and French have made common cause with the US in opposing the encroachments of Soviet policy on Austrian independence and sovereignty. In many cases the British and French have taken the initiative either in the Allied Council or through diplomatic channels to establish principles of legal right respecting Austria. In economic matters, however, the initiative has been yielded to the United States since we can contribute a proportionately greater share of the assistance required for Austrian recovery.

Austria’s relations with Italy and Switzerland are good and are nourished by a steadily expanding commerce. There are no issues affecting relations with these two states, particularly since the South Tyrol problem has been solved by an Austro-Italian understanding.7 Relations with Germany are still subject to many military government controls and trade is hampered by the inability of the Austrian economy to provide dollars for the purchase of goods or services from the bi-zonal area. Relations between Austria and the satellite states of Czechoslovakia and Hungary are correct, with few outstanding issues affecting these relations which could not be solved by direct negotiation.

Austrian relations with the Soviet Union remain the paramount issue owing to the Soviet ability to block the conclusion of the treaty and to continue to maintain forces of military occupation within Austria. During the recent meeting of the Deputies of the Council of Foreign Ministers in London (February–May 1948), the Soviets made ostensible concessions on the German assets issue. At the same time, Soviet policy within Austria did not succeed in imposing the same type of restrictions on free access as imposed on Berlin. After the suspension of the discussions in London, however, relations between the USSR and the Austrian Government deteriorated. The Soviets arrested two high-ranking Austrian officials on charges of espionage against the Soviet forces.8 Within the Allied Council the Soviet High Commissioner vigorously denounced the agreement with the United States on ECA assistance.9 The attitude of the Soviet delegate towards the Austrian observer at the Belgrade Conference on the Danube does not indicate any change in the Soviet policy.10

At this point it is not known whether Soviet support given to the Yugoslav claims for frontier rectification and for the payment of reparations will be continued in any treaty discussions in the future. The Cominform denunciation of Yugoslav policy specifically mentioned the nationalistic tendencies of the Yugoslav Government particularly with reference to Carinthia and Trieste. The Austrian Communist Party is opposed to any cession of territory to Yugoslavia, and the only support which frontier rectification finds in Austria is in the microscopic Slovene Communist Party in Carinthia itself. In as much as the Soviets apparently supported the Yugoslav claims in the London Conference only on a formal basis, the Soviet position may conceivably be changed in any future negotiations, thus creating a situation which could be used to advantage in the negotiations on the frontier.

Since the controversy between the Cominform and Yugoslavia began, Austrian relations with Yugoslavia have shown a perceptible change. Prior to that dispute Yugoslavia refused to exchange full diplomatic representation with Austria. In the Council of Foreign Ministers the Yugoslav delegation was vigorously outspoken in its denunciation of the present Austrian Government and its policy with regard to the frontier. Since the Cominform denunication, however, an Austrian trade delegation has successfully concluded the basic work on a trade agreement with Yugoslavia and discussions have been held concerning other problems affecting the relations of the two states, excluding the frontier issue and the demand for reparations. It is not impossible, therefore, that the Austrian and Yugoslav governments could reach an agreement in which Yugoslavia recognized the 1937 frontiers in return for a settlement of the economic problems between the two states.

D. Policy Evaluation

In general terms, US policy in Austria has been highly successful both in promoting economic recovery and in assisting the Austrian Government to pursue a policy of national independence. As a result of the popularity in Austria of the similar objectives of United States and Austrian policies, the efforts of the Soviets to include Austria in the orbit of satellite states have not succeeded, despite the military, political and economic pressure used by the Soviet forces to achieve that end. In the implementation of our policy toward Austria the following problems have arisen, particularly in relating the Austrian settlement to the European situation as a whole.

1. The primary question is the advisability of concluding a treaty and withdrawing the four-power occupation forces in the immediate future. Since the February 1948 coup in Czechoslovakia it has been felt that the presence of the US, British and French occupation forces in Austria provided a means of security against Soviet tactics, which if withdrawn would make Austria susceptible to Soviet aggressive aims. In view of this feeling the Department requested the Joint Chiefs of Staff for a decision whether it would be desirable to withdraw the occupation forces from Austria. The Joint Chiefs of Staff concluded that it was not desirable from a military point of view to withdraw these forces unless such withdrawal was made necessary by overriding political and diplomatic factors. The delegation at the London meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers subsequently was instructed to continue negotiations in order to get the best treaty possible for Austria and the timing of a decision to withdraw forces was left to a later date in order to take into account general European developments. It has become increasingly clear that there is little possibility of the present Austrian Government being overthrown by a Communist coup unless great pressure is applied by the Soviets or unless one of the satellite states provokes a direct aggressive act against Austria. Nevertheless, in the event that a treaty is concluded, the western states will face the problem of providing safeguards for the maintenance of Austrian security after withdrawal of the occupation forces or of the timing that withdrawal in such a way as to enable Austrian security forces to assume responsibility.

2. The western states agreed, therefore, that it would be undesirable to withdraw the occupation forces until the Austrian security forces can be organized and supplied with arms. Discussions are now taking place among the western powers and Austrian officials concerning the arming of the Austrian police and the drawing up of plans for the organization and supply of the future Austrian army.11 It is hoped that the police and army will be sufficiently prepared in Austria at the time of the withdrawal of the occupation forces to take over immediately the task of maintaining internal order and providing a formal border defense. It is recognized, however, that the Austrian army, as agreed in the treaty, would not be capable of withstanding any direct aggressive act on the part of the Soviets or any of the neighboring satellite states.

3. The apparent impossibility of the Austrian security forces to maintain national independence and territorial integrity raises the problem whether the western states should guarantee Austria against any unprovoked aggression. In the course of modern politics, a coup carried out by an armed minority can have the same effect as an aggressive war in overthrowing established governments and revolutionizing established societies. If any guarantee were given to Austria by the western states it would have to include both a pledge of protection against external aggression and have to take into consideration measures to be employed to prevent any internal coup. The problem of the guarantee of Austrian independence and territorial integrity is involved in Article 2 of the draft treaty. This problem will be discussed in any forthcoming negotiations and a decision will have to be reached either to drop this article from the treaty or to agree among the western states as to the exact form of the guarantee of Austria and the means whereby it is to be implemented.

4. In the event that the treaty is concluded and a compromise solution reached on the German assets question, care will have to be taken to provide Austria with such assistance as may be required to offset the economic advantages accruing to the Soviet Union through the control and ownership of former German assets in Austria. It may be necessary, therefore, to supply Austria on a commercial basis with economic products such as oil and other petroleum products to make up for any deficiencies from local production which will be drained off by the Soviets.

5. Austrian participation in the European Recovery Program gives renewed emphasis to certain problems with respect to the future of Austrian trade with Eastern European countries. Before the war Austria had strong trading ties with these countries, importing from them large amounts of such essential items as coal and foodstuffs. Since the war Austria has resumed its economic ties with the Eastern European countries on a reduced scale and in a somewhat changed pattern. Except for considerations of United States security objectives with respect to the export of items of a military nature, it is United States policy to encourage Austrian trade with Eastern Europe since such trade tends to lessen the need for making available essential items in short supply from the Western Hemisphere or from other participating countries and adds to the over-all pool of these items which can be made available to the participating countries. The possibility must be reckoned with, however, that the Soviets may demand trade arrangements of such a comprehensive nature as to give the Soviets opportunity to exert considerable influence in Austria’s political and economic affairs. Austrian resistance to such an attempt should of course be encouraged and it may be necessary to consider what steps can be taken in conjunction with other interested countries to meet from other sources Austria’s needs from Eastern Europe. Care should be taken, however, to insure that the Austrians are not led by a Soviet attempt at economic penetration to forego appropriate efforts of their own to achieve economic recovery and to increase unduly their dependence on economic assistance from the United States.

1  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 761.

2 For the text of the Agreement on the Control Machinery in Austria see Foreign Relations, The Conference of Berlin (The Potsdam Conference) 1945, vol. i, p. 351. For the text of the agreement on the Zones of Occupation and the Administration of the City of Vienna see Department of State, Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS) No. 1600.

3 For the text of this Agreement, signed June 28, 1946, see A Decade of American Foreign Policy, Basic Documents, 1941–49 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1950), p. 614.

4 See Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. ii, pp. 493 ff. and 1947, vol. ii, pp. 139 ff. and pp. 676 ff.

5 For documentation on the meetings of the Deputies for Austria, February–May 1948, see pp. 1466 [Pg. 1466 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815] ff.

6 Documentation on the 1947 Austrian currency conversion is included in the compilation on problems of Quadripartite Control of Austria, Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 1167 ff.

7 For documentation on the Austro-Italian understanding on the South Tyrol see pp. 1352 [Pg. 1352 includes portions of Doc. 724 and Doc. 725] ff.

8 Regarding the Soviet arrests of Austrian officials see pp. 1433 [Pg. 1433 is part of Doc. 789] ff.

9 The text of the agreement under reference, signed July 2, 1948, is printed in the Department of State, Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS) No. 1921.

10 Documentation on the Danube Conference is included in volume iv .

11 For documentation on the problem of arming the Austrian police and organizing the future Austrian Army, see pp. 1356 [Pg. 1356 includes portions of Doc. 728 and Doc. 729] ff.

VIII. The efforts of the United States to assure the maintenance of the independence and integrity of AustriaVIII. The efforts of the United States to assure the maintenance of the independence and integrity of Austria1

1 For previous documentation on this topic, see Foreign Relations, 1947, volume ii .

Contents

A. The interest of the United States in the question of the South TyrolA. The interest of the United States in the question of the South Tyrol

[724] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Italy

Washington, January 16, 1948—8 p. m.

865.014/1–748: Telegram

[725] The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, January 16, 1948—11 a. m.

865.4016/1–1648: Telegram

[726] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

Washington, February 5, 1948—6 p. m.

865.4016/1–1648: Telegram

[727] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

Washington, June 25, 1948—8 p. m.

865.4016/6–2548: Telegram

[728] The Ambassador in Italy (Dunn) to the Secretary of State

Rome, July 6, 1948—8 p. m.

865.4016/7–648: Telegram

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Italy 865.014/1–748: Telegram

[Document 724]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Italy

secret Washington, January 16, 1948—8 p. m.

128. Urtel 73 Jan 7.2 Brit Emb has advised us continuing concern FonOff re negotiations revision draft Statute for Alto Adige. FonOff has studied text and considers does not cover adequately clauses Austro-Ital Agreement re economic development German-speaking element and exercise autonomous legislative and executive regional power. Brit fear failure correct deficiencies would cause rejection by even moderate elements with extremely unfortunate consequences.

While Dept in full agreement Brit re importance negotiations and most anxious satisfactory settlement be reached, we informed Brit you consider talks proceeding satisfactorily and that representations not necessary this juncture. We have assured Brit you will informally urge discretion on Ital Govt along lines already taken your Brit colleague shd you consider such action desirable during course present negotiations.

Marshall

2 Not printed.

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 865.4016/1–1648: Telegram

[Document 725]

The United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

secret Berlin, January 16, 1948—11 a. m.

122. Regarding South Tyrol optants (Rome’s telegram 74, January 7 to Department repeated Vienna 3, Berlin 1, Frankfurt 1; my despatch 1098; September 23; Vienna’s despatch 3538 December 3 to Department and Vienna’s unnumbered note December 4 to USPolAd).1

USPolAd’s reply to Rome’s 82 December 10 (repeated Department 398, Vienna 63)2 was postponed pending receipt Austrian note and discussion with MG officials here.

Opinion was expressed in discussion with MG authorities that Austrian Government should not concern itself with repatriation of South Tyrolean optants in Germany. OMGUS position is any such optants here desiring repatriation should individually and of own volition approach Italian representatives in Germany for permission to return to South Tyrol and should then apply to Combined Travel Board for exit permits from Germany.

Department’s views requested.

Reference sentence three paragraph 2 Rome’s telegram 74,3 Frankfurt office merely informed Italian representative there he was not advised regarding US view this point but would transmit Italian memo to USPolAd.

Sent Department 122, repeated Rome 4, Vienna 6.

Murphy

1 None printed.

2 Not printed.

3 The paragraph under reference reported that Murphy shared the Italian view that Austria should not concern itself with the registration of the South Tyrolean optants (865.4016/1–748).

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) 865.4016/1–1648: Telegram

[Document 726]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

secret Washington, February 5, 1948—6 p. m.

211. Reurtel 122 Jan 161 and Rome’s 74 Jan 7 rptd Berlin 1 and Vienna 3,2 Dept position concerning repatriation South Tyrol optants from US zone Germany indicated Deptel 917 Nov 7 Vienna rptd Berlin as 2252.3

Language Sept 5 Agreement4 may be construed to extend to optants transferred under Hitler–Mussolini Agreement 19395 to all parts German Reich, including present German areas and Austria. Annex 4 Italian Treaty provides for revision optants question raised by 1939 Agreement and in our opinion gives Austria as well as Italy an interest in settlement of entire repatriation problem re South Tyrol. Since Tyrolese issue not resolved by plebiscite it is desirable that action in implementation Sept 5 Agreement be taken in broadest spirit understanding and cooperation. Amicable settlement regarded as essential in removing a possible source for political differences between Austria and Italy in order to assure maximum cooperation of ERP countries in all political and economic matters.

Account should be taken of fact that optants constitute special group displaced persons in Germany and may require definite repatriation arrangements not on individual basis as suggested by OMGUS (urtel 122). We repeat, however, (Deptel 2252 Nov 7) that actual repatriation or preparation for repatriation can not be undertaken until Austro-Italian agreement has been obtained through bilateral negotiations.

Text of draft law and record of discussions (Rome’s 3897 Dec 3 rptd Berlin as 81)6 not available in Dept. If consistent with text draft law, Dept recommends reply to Austrians on following lines:

US regards voluntary repatriation from Germany and Austria of Tyrolese optants, excluding those objectionable because of Nazi activities, desirable to rectify situation created by Hitler-Mussolini Agreement 1939, provided such repatriation is agreed in Austro-Italian discussions on implementation Sept 5 Agreement. Prior to satisfactory conclusion Austro-Italian discussions, US considers that arrangements for repatriation by agencies US zone Germany would be premature. If and when satisfactory Austro-Italian agreement is concluded, we will be glad to arrange for implementation in US zone agreed plans for repatriation optants.7

Sent Berlin as 211; rptd Vienna as 98, and Rome as 315.

Marshall

1  Supra.

2 Not printed.

3  Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 1223.

4 The September 5, 1946, Agreement, which was incorporated in the Italian Treaty of Peace as Annex IV, provided for conversations between Austria and Italy to settle outstanding questions affecting the South Tyrol. For the text of this agreement see Department of State Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS) No. 1648, or 61 Stat. 1245.

5 The agreement under reference provided for the emigration of German-speaking South Tyroleans to Germany. For a summary of the agreement see Documents on German Foreign Policy, 1918–1945, Series D, vol. vi, Document 562, p. 778.

6 Not printed.

7 On January 31, 1948, the Italian Constituent Assembly passed the South Tyrol Autonomy Law.

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy) 865.4016/6–2548: Telegram

[Document 727]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser for Germany (Murphy)

confidential Washington, June 25, 1948—8 p. m.

1113. Dept approval of authorizations extra personnel for Ital registration South Tyrol optants urtel 1302 June 51 given in expectation Ital authorities will keep OMGUS and Aust Govt adequately informed of results census and progress repatriation. In Dept’s view Aust has legitimate interest under Sept 5 Agreement in repatriation South Tyroleans from Germany as well as Austria, extending to participation in registration optants if the parties agree (Deptel 211 Feb 52 ). Details of cooperation matter for Ital and Aust to work out and not for this Govt to impose. In absence Ital agreement to Aust participation, registration can however proceed under Ital auspices as expeditiously as possible in order meet Feb 1949 deadline.

For Rome and Vienna: Dept earnestly desirous that repatriation program may be carried through smoothly and without incidents that can be developed into political issues or charges of illiberal implementation Sept 5 Agreement. Please inform respective foreign offices our interest in their continued cooperation toward this end.

Sent Berlin as 1113; rptd Rome as 1751 and Vienna as 561.

Marshall

1 Not printed.

2  Supra.

The Ambassador in Italy (Dunn) to the Secretary of State 865.4016/7–648: Telegram

[Document 728]

The Ambassador in Italy (Dunn) to the Secretary of State

confidential Rome, July 6, 1948—8 p. m.

2893. We have delivered to Foreign Office message based on Deptel 1751 June 25 (sent Berlin 1113, repeated Vienna 5611 ). We were orally assured that Department’s views would be brought to attention interested Italian authorities in Italy and in Germany and Austria and that we would be kept informed of progress. Official with whom we spoke indicated that from Italian point of view registration of optants who wish to return to Italy is proceeding smoothly, and that many of those who left Italy 1939 appear reluctant to break ties made since then by returning. While Italian Government does not intend seeking to persuade them, Austrian Government continues its efforts along those lines. For example, we were told, Austrians thought up scheme of large scale tours of prospective repatriates to South Tyrol, so that potential repatriates might have an opportunity to see what awaited them. Italians decline authorize any but small scale operation of this sort. It was clear that Foreign Office, with whom we discussed this matter periodically for past eight months, have in no way altered their firm view that no 1939 optant should be forced to return to Italy, especially by Austrian pressures. (See my tel 1444 April 1, rptd. Vienna 25, Berlin 262 ). Quite apart from general population problem here, continued Austrian efforts to get all optants back where-ever they may be are not taken kindly by Italians who are led to suspicion that Austrians deliberately building foundations for irredentists movement in South Tyrol.

Sent Department 2893, repeated Berlin 73, Vienna 55.

Dunn

1  Supra.

2 Not printed.

B. The interest of the United States in the formation of a future Austrian army and the arming of the Austrian police and gendarmerieB. The interest of the United States in the formation of a future Austrian army and the arming of the Austrian police and gendarmerie

[729] The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Vienna, February 10, 1948.

740.0011 EW Peace/2–1048: Telegram

[730] The Director of Plans and Operations, General Staff, U.S. Army (Wedemeyer) to the Military Attaché in the United Kingdom (Bissell)

Washington, February 16, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 71: Telegram

[731] The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

London, March 13, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Council/3–1348: Telegram

[732] The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

Washington, March 16, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Council/3–1648: Telegram

[733] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, March 18, 1948—1 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/3–1848: Telegram

[734] The Military Attaché in the United Kingdom (Bissell) to the Director of Plans and Operations, General Staff, U.S. Army (Wedemeyer)

London, March 18, 1948.

740.00119 Council/3–1848: Telegram

[735] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, April 14, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–1448: Telegram

[736] The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Vienna, April 20, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/4–2048: Telegram

[737] The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Vienna, April 22, 1948.

740.00119 Council/4–2248: Telegram

[738] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber)

Washington, April 22, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–2248: Telegram

[739] Memorandum by the Secretary of the Army (Royall) to the Department of State

Washington, May 7, 1948.

863.20/5–748

[740] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, June 11, 1948.

863.20/6–1148

[741] The Minister in Austria to the Secretary of State

Vienna, July 16, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/7–1648: Telegram

[742] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, August 10, 1948—5 p. m.

863.20/8–1048: Telegram

[743] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, September 21, 1948.

863.20/9–2148

[744] Memorandum by the Counselor of Legation in Austria (Yost) to the Minister in Austria (Erhardt)

Vienna, November 16, 1948.

Vienna Legation Files: Lot 54F57: Box 565

[745] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, November 30, 1948—5 p. m.

863.20/11–1648: Telegram

[746] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, December 6, 1948—6 p. m.

863.20/12–648: Telegram

[747] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, December 9, 1948—12 noon.

863.20/12–648: Telegram

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff 740.0011 EW Peace/2–1048: Telegram

[Document 729]

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

top secret Vienna, February 10, 1948.

P–1258. From USFA Sgd Keyes Action to JCS to DA and State. Repeat to MA London for USDel. In event of Austrian treaty the question of Austrian armed forces will be most urgent. In a conference between Austrian Foreign Minister and a representative of the British High Commissioner’s office the following is the gist of the statement given to the British representative:

Dr. Gruber indicated that he was under the impression that the Soviets realized that their proposals in Article 17, clause four, of the draft treaty were impracticable and in consequence at Moscow they had proposed clause four of Article 26 which would permit the Austrians to use German equipment remaining in Austria after the war. He asked whether such arms and equipment would be available from this source. Dr. Gruber was certain that the Soviets would never agree to the western powers providing arms and equipment for the Austrian armed forces. For their part the Austrian Government did not wish the Soviet or one of her satellites to provide arms and equipment and he felt that the western powers should not agree to this either. He felt that the best solution would obviously be for Austria to be free to purchase the arms and equipment where she wished. He hoped that the western powers would try hard to find this solution but also felt that Soviet agreement would be unlikely.

He was forced to consider whether each of the occupying powers could provide arms and equipment and asked whether each of the occupying powers can leave behind them specified amount of their arms and equipment when they withdrew. Dr. Gruber pointed out that if each occupying power provided the complete amount of each type of arms and equipment it would still be essential that the Soviets should not be placed in such a position that they would be able to hamstring the creation of Austrian warmed forces by deliberate failure to honor their obligations or at a later date not make difficulties by failing to provide ammunition and spare parts. Dr. Gruber assumed that the initial strength of the land army would be approximately 35,000 designed for internal security and what he described as “partisan” warfare only. The army would be largely infantry and consequently the requirements would be principally for infantry use. A small amount of artillery, a few tanks and some engineer equipment would also be wanted later.

The British representative indicated that he considered the only practical way in which the arms and equipment of the Austrian Army could be furnished by all four occupying powers would be for one power to supply the whole requirement for each particular type of equipment. For example, one power supply all small arms and small arms ammunition, another power all artillery, still another mortars and hand grenades. The British representative has forwarded to the British Foreign Office the above statement and recommendations with a request that the War Office be asked to ascertain the availability of pistols, machine carbines, rifles, light machine guns, hand grenades and mortars, artillery, engineer and signal equipment, fighting and gun carrying vehicles and web equipment. The above proposals will undoubtedly be presented to the American delegation in London.

[ Keyes ]

The Director of Plans and Operations, General Staff, U.S. Army (Wedemeyer) to the Military Attaché in the United Kingdom (Bissell) CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 71: Telegram

[Document 730]

The Director of Plans and Operations, General Staff, U.S. Army (Wedemeyer) to the Military Attaché in the United Kingdom (Bissell)

top secret Washington, February 16, 1948.

War 96023. See message number P–1258 of 10 February from Keyes to JCS 1 (copy sent to MA London for US Delegation). If Austrian Treaty should be agreed or in unlikely event agreement is reached that Austria Armed Forces should be established prior to conclusion of treaty considered here most desirable that equipment should not be of Soviet or Soviet satellite origin. Also considered that Austrians should not be encouraged to utilize German equipment because of maintenance and spare parts difficulties and because no substantial quantities German equipment under control US–UK. Such German equipment would therefore have to be obtained from Soviets (who are possibly continuing manufacture). Some initial equipment possibly may be derived from US–UK occupation forces in Austria upon withdrawal. However, amount equipment available these sources probably inadequate. Believe US must maintain position that Austria as sovereign nation must have full freedom to obtain equipment from any source she desires and is able. Realize unattractive position of Austrian Army upon withdrawal occupation forces. However, no method now forseen whereby trained effective Austrian Army can be in existence prior to withdrawal occupying forces. Considered, in any event, occupation forces will still be present in Germany and will prove stabilizing influence and tend to neutralize undue Soviet pressure on weak Austria.

However, possibility Soviet opposition to equipping Austrian Army through free purchase is recognized. If Soviet fears have decisive effect on whether or not Austrian Army gets established we should be prepared consider proposal along lines suggested in P–1258. As you know, in absence legislation, US capabilities limited. Suggest you discuss with General Keyes requirements Austrian forces and possible sources equipment.

Notice Gruber does not mention Air Force or Gendarmerie so presume the strength of 35,000 pertains to ground army only. Re Air Force equipment, it is considered size of Air Force necessitates standardization of equipment and therefore believe agreement must be reached with British as to responsibility provide this equipment.

Above represents initial Army thinking only and forwarded to you for guidance in event the subject is raised in London. No JCS action contemplated this matter unless conference developments indicate overall agreement might be reached on Austrian Treaty or unless British formally request US views.

[ Wedemeyer ]

1  Supra.

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–1348: Telegram

[Document 731]

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, March 13, 1948—4 p. m.

1042. Delsec 1635. From Reber (repeated Vienna for Keyes and Erhardt Eyes Only). I had opportunity to discuss with both French and British representatives separately the organization of Austrian armed forces (reference Deptel 844 March 10).1 Both are in agreement that it would be useless at this time to submit or to discuss any formal proposal in AC Vienna. Pending further progress toward treaty settlement, only strengthening of Austrian police gendarmerie and customs guards seems to offer reasonable chance of success. In this connection, it is felt that three western powers should agree among themselves as to desirability of steps to be taken in this connection before notifying AC of their intentions to do so.

Whereas it is recognized that Austrian Government will have to be brought into discussions at an early date, an agreement in principle should first be reached among western powers for fear premature disclosure through Austrian Government might give rise difficulties AC. French deputy is without instructions in this respect, but is prepared to raise question with his government as soon as it appears treaty unlikely. British representative has only considered arming police in British Zone, but it would be prepared to consider extension to other western zones and discussions with US regarding availability of equipment.

Should treaty prospects be improved, French deputy is prepared to suggest early organization Austrian armed forces so that establishment thereof can be completed at time of evacuation, thereby providing form of guaranty internal security as soon as occupation forces are withdrawn. Any proposal of this sort, however, at this time would, in his opinion, be premature and likely to meet strong Soviet opposition. Colonel Parker asks foregoing be transmitted Department of the Army.

Sent Department as 1042, repeated Vienna 29.

[ Reber ]

1  Ante, p. 1474 [Pg. 1474 is part of Doc. 823].

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London 740.00119 Council/3–1648: Telegram

[Document 732]

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

top secret Washington, March 16, 1948—6 p. m.

924. Ausdel 5. For Reber. With reference to JCS Recommendation (c),1 Dept realized likelihood of Sov objection but considered submission of proposal in Vienna ACC [ AC ] might be of tactical advantage as indication of US willingness to prepare necessary steps for treaty implementation. Sov rejection might also be of propaganda value to US. Subject to any reconsideration you may wish to give matter after further consultation with Brit and French, Dept prepared to leave the question in your hands on basis last para Delsec 1635,2 namely, that French would be willing to suggest early organization Austrian armed forces should treaty prospects improve.

As regards strengthening of Austrian police, gendarmerie, and customs guards in event of non-agreement on treaty, consider you should continue discussions with French and Brit. Such discussions should presumably lead to general agreement as to the size, organization and source of equipment for such forces. In this connection it has recently been reported by officer returning from Austria that the Brit at one time had equipment earmarked and in Austria for police, gendarmerie, and customs guards for all four zones. If Brit have such a plan, and are in fact willing to furnish police equipment, it may be that some agreement could be readily reached among the three delegations now in London for three western zones only. Dept and Army here would wish to be consulted before final approval of any such plan.

Unless some easy solution such as above can be arranged it apparently will be necessary for High Commissioners in Austria to produce detailed plans so that requirements for equipment can be considered by the three powers. Army prepared to request Keyes to enter such discussions if you consider advisable at this time.

As you know, our ability to furnish any equipment strictly limited. Furthermore, statement of availability cannot be made until actual requirements are known.

Above represent State and Army views. Please pass to Colonel Parker.

Sent to London as 924; repeated to Vienna for info Keyes and Erhardt Eyes Only 242.

Marshall

1 For the JCS recommendations see telegram 844, March 10, to London, p. 1474 [Pg. 1474 is part of Doc. 823].

2  Supra.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/3–1848: Telegram

[Document 733]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Vienna, March 18, 1948—1 p. m.

332. General Keyes has from time to time since May 1947 and more often since early February 1948 in accordance with his understanding of his directive to reestablish an independent Austria, been (a) discussing with General Galloway the British High Commissioner distribution to Austrian police of arms held by British and (b) considering with Generals Galloway, Béthouart and Austrian authorities best means of initiating plans for the Austrian Army (reDeptel 242, March 16).1

As reported in USFA telegram P–1426, March 17,2 Galloway with Foreign Office approval last week turned over substantial quantities of rifles, pistols and ammunition to Austrian police in British zone. At request of Austrian Minister of Interior he did not inform AC of this action and its meeting March 12 as he had originally intended. As Department is aware question of distribution of these arms has been repeatedly discussed in AC and reported to Washington since April 1946 when AC first decided on distribution to Austrian police, a decision implementation of which has been blocked by Soviets. Most recent discussions in AC were May 20, June 13 and August 29 of last year.

General Galloway is prepared to make available to US elements similar quantities of these arms which General Keyes will distribute to Austrian police at appropriate moment. British have sufficient arms of this kind to equip police of all Austria. USFA is, however, since such arms may not prove adequate to meet the situation, studying further question of supplying police with machine guns and automatic weapons.

As to plans for organization of Austrian Army, tripartite military authorities here have agreed that seeking permission of AC would inevitably encounter Soviet veto and would be useless. Present opinion here is that Austrians should simply proceed with planning on their own initiative, question still under discussion being whether they should formally notify AC of their action or should keep matter quiet. This problem is obviously not of same degree of urgency as that of arming police, which in light of recent reliable reports of arming of Communist workers at Zistersdorf (see Vienna controlled American source No. 437, March 17) is clearly of highest importance.

Legation believes these questions are being effectively handled by General Keyes with his British and French colleagues and hopes no decisions will be taken in London or Washington until High Commissioner’s views have been presented and fully considered.

Sent Department 332; repeated London USDel 63.

Erhardt

1 Same as telegram 924 to London, supra.

2 Not printed.

The Military Attaché in the United Kingdom (Bissell) to the Director of Plans and Operations, General Staff, U.S. Army (Wedemeyer) 740.00119 Council/3–1848: Telegram

[Document 734]

The Military Attaché in the United Kingdom (Bissell) to the Director of Plans and Operations, General Staff, U.S. Army (Wedemeyer)

top secret London, March 18, 1948.

72974. From USMA London to GSID for Wedemeyer from Parker Pass to State, Info to CGUSFA. Accompanied Reber today to meeting with British reference arms for Austrian Army, gendarmerie and police. Present were representatives Foreign Office, Ministry of Defense and War Office (see Delsec 1640 dated 18 March).1

It was quickly agreed that specific measures for organization Austrian armed forces now were impracticable and should be delayed pending greater progress toward conclusion Austrian treaty but attention should be directed now to strengthening security forces.

British reported they had already begun issue of rifles and pistols from stock of approximately 10,000 each item which had been set aside for issue to gendarmerie all four zones. British indicated willingness to utilize these weapons for issue in three western zones. Discussion brought agreement in principle to desirability of creating small centrally-located mobile reserve for gendarmerie, perhaps organized as battalion of six to 800 men. Discussion also indicated consideration should be given to providing small local reserves for police in nature of riot squads. However, it was agreed that details of solution to both these problems should first be worked out as far as possible in Austria by High Commissioners of US and UK initially, later consulting French High Commissioner and Austrians.

In discussion of availability of weapons and other equipment British stated their probable capability of furnishing small arms and ammunition therefor and also possible capability of furnishing automatic weapons even though this might require re-institution of some production. Defense Ministry representative observed that such production might be required for other commitments anyway and that desirability of educational contracts was point in favor. Marjoribanks of Foreign Office repeated former statement of British ability to satisfy Austrian Air Force requirement. British were emphatic in their statement of inability to furnish equipment in categories other than those set forth above.

It was agreed that study in Vienna should cover such points as increasing and reorganizing the gendarmerie in western zones including equipment requirements, and consideration of strengthening of riot squads for police, particularly in Vienna. Reber has reported to State Department agreed recommendation that governments should direct this study be made. Presume State and Army will frame instructions to Keyes to carry out this recommendation.

Additionally British are preparing despatch to British Embassy Washington directing that problem of arming Austrian armed forces be taken up officially with US Government.

[ Bissell ]

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 740.00119 Council/4–1448: Telegram

[Document 735]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

top secret Washington, April 14, 1948—7 p. m.

348. For the High Commissioner. Dept has received from BritEmb aide-mémoire 1 concerning plans for equipment Austria’s armed forces and referring to USDel conversations in London on this subject (London’s 72974 Mar 18 from USMA and DelSecs 1635, 1640).2 Proposing to concert plans with US, Brit suggest they equip from RAF surplus stocks future Austrian air force and train its personnel in UK while US might provide equipment for Austrian army. aide-mémoire states it was agreed in London conversations small efficient striking force would best serve Austria’s needs and as step towards organization of such a force there should be established efficient and adequately equipped gendarmerie in Western zones which might eventually be extended to Eastern zone. Brit are concerned particularly about threat along Carinthian frontier and from armed factory guards in Eastern zone, and consider desirable as initial measure formation of reserve battalion gendarmerie. Brit desire following: 1. Instruction to Brit and US High Commissioners to consider jointly question of forming battalion of gendarmerie and to transmit detailed specifications to London and Washington with view to approval by US and Brit Govts of allocations of equipment.

2. Views of US Govt on plans and common action in dealing with problem of equipment Austrian army proper.

3. Possible consideration of this problem by JCS.

4. Early decision on matter of Austrian air force.

Mémoire does not indicate: (a) Timing in implementation of these several proposals; (b) whether formation of gendarmerie should take place outside purview of Allied Council, and (c) how these plans might be affected in event of failure to conclude a treaty in near future.

Aide-mémoire is being referred to Dept Army for its views.

Sent Vienna as 348; rptd London as 1326, Ausdel 17.

Lovett

1 Not printed.

2 72974, supra, Delsec 1635, p. 1358 [Pg. 1358 includes portions of Doc. 730 and Doc. 731], Delsec 1640, not printed.

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff 740.00119 Control (Austria)/4–2048: Telegram

[Document 736]

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

top secret
priority Vienna, April 20, 1948.

P–1602. Reference your WX–98886.1 Following is a brief summary of past quadripartite discussions concerning the armament of the Austrian Police and Gendarmerie and a report on unilateral acts taken. Since subject has been under practically continuous discussion within the Allied Commission for two years, the following condensation is too brief to give the full picture. Therefore, more detailed report follows by mail.

On 10th April 1946 the Allied Council reached agreement that the Austrian Gendarmerie would be permitted to carry rifles and the security police would be permitted to carry revolvers. The weapons presently in their possession were to be turned in, and uniform arms then available from the British were to be substituted therefor. Ammunition supply was fixed at 40 rounds per weapon. Finally, the decision provided that before the issue of arms took place the Allied Commission would approve the Ministry of the Interior’s plan for the training and use of these weapons. Subsequent attempts to reach agreement on this last clause broke down over the Soviet refusal to permit the Austrian Police to use arms against Allied Nationals in uniform even in self defense. Distribution of arms was therefore never implemented and growing Soviet hostility toward the Austrian Police prevented any following agreements on the question.

By December 1946 the Soviet element mounted an attack on the Austrian Security Forces on the grounds that their strength had been increased without authorization and demanded allied limitation. In January 1947 Soviets charged that Austrian Police possessed unauthorized automatic weapons. Later the Soviet element, supported at that time by the French, attempted to limit numbers of the police on the grounds that their expenses exceeded the National Budget allocation. On this basis, and on the grounds of inadequate denazification, the Austrian law enforcement forces have been under fire by the Soviets ever since. Numerous requests from the Chancellor during the past eighteen months for authority to properly arm and equip the police have been of no avail in changing the Soviet attitude.

Elements within the Allied Council have been consistently divided for many months, with the Soviets demanding limitation of strength and denazification, while the US and British insist on proper armament and equipment. During January 1947 British element took the view that discussions on limitation of Gendarmeries’ strength were inopportune because of the treaty negotiations on article 17 which also covered this question. In June 1947 Soviets used this same argument to obstruct discussion of arms for Gendarmerie. British and US offered to consider the matter of arming the police only but Soviets refused to consider them separate from the Gendarmerie. Soviet element on several occasions has voiced the charge that the Austrian Govt was surreptitiously preparing a military organization under the guise of police. The last position taken by the Soviets was that the Austrian Police were already adequately armed. Except for incidental references, discussion of the entire question was confined to the Internal Affairs directorate between 29th August 1947 and 16th April 1948 as far as the Allied Council was concerned. On this last date the Soviet element raised the matter of limitation of authority of the Allied Military Police, and the US High Commissioner took the position that such an increase in the responsibilities of the Austrian Law Enforcement Agencies would necessitate their possession of proper and uniform armament. Reference our P–15842 for details.

The armament of the Police today is made of a heterogeneous collection of pistols requiring some fifteen different kinds of ammunition and nine types of rifles or carbines. Ammunition in some cases is non-existent and there is no possibility for re-supply of others. During the weeks 18th to 31st March the British element issued to the Austrian Public Safety officers in their zone 1,624 revolvers and 3,315 rifles of standard pattern. The basis for the issue was the authorized budget strength and they were issued in bulk with 40 rounds of ammunition for each weapon. This transfer was not accomplished through the Ministry of the Interior. The total stores of arms in the British Zone amounted to 12,000 Smith and Wesson PT 38 caliber revolvers of US manufacture but acquired by the British through lend lease, and 10,750 British Enfield PT 303 caliber rifles. These arms have been available for distribution throughout Austria for two years. At present in Vienna there is an authorized Armed Police strength of 8,784 for which there are pistols available for 3,504, the balance of the Police being armed with rifles. Pol Ad concurs.

Keyes

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff 740.00119 Council/4–2248: Telegram

[Document 737]

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

top secret
priority Vienna, April 22, 1948.

P–1617. From USFA Sgd Keyes Action to JCS Pass to State from Keyes info to USDel London. Subject is interview between US Deputy Commissioner and Austrian General Julius Deutsch on 20 April.

At the request of General Deutsch, an interview was held with respect to the arming and training of the future Austrian Army. Deutsch explained that as a result of Soviet concessions in London, bipartite committee had been formed composed of the Minister of the Interior and himself for the Socialist Party and State Secretary Graf and Colonel Liebitzky representing the Peoples Party.

As a first step towards the establishment of an Austrian Army, he envisaged the organization of battalions within the framework of the police and gendarmerie containing 5,000 men within the police and 2,500 within the gendarmerie. These forces were to be centered in Linz or Graz or both, Linz being preferred. Deutsch explained that the main problem at the moment was the farming of these forces and he expressed the hope that the US would be able to provide the necessary rifles, pistols, machine pistols, machine guns, and light artillery weapons, as well as transportation and communications equipment. He stated that there already existed in Vienna a special student battalion of approximately 500 men enrolled in the police force, but not yet fully accredited. They have practically no arms. The most immediate problem was considered to be the provision of weapons for training purposes, and the required quantity was estimated to be 200 rifles, 200 pistols, 20 machine pistols, 20 machine guns, and such small infantry support weapons that the US might be able to provide.

Deutsch was asked whether they visualized the use of German or American armament. He suggested that German armament would be less likely to encounter Soviet objection. However, if German arms were not available, US would be acceptable. He understood that the Soviets favored the use of Swiss arms, but the Austrians objected to this inasmuch as they would have to be paid for in hard currency. Deutsch stated that he thought it would be inadvisable to propose authorization for preliminary planning for the Austrian Army in the Allied Council due to almost certain Soviet opposition. For this reason, the present planning was confined to a bipartite commission instead of on a governmental basis. Deutsch explained that the interview was simply for exploratory purposes and on subsequent visit he would bring the State Secretary Graf with him.

[ Keyes ]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) 740.00119 Council/4–2248: Telegram

[Document 738]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber)

top secret Washington, April 22, 1948—2 p. m.

1430. Ausdel 19. For Reber. Delsec 1675.1 We agree AC should authorize organization and planning for Austrian army at early date in light possibility treaty may be concluded. Believe before matter raised in AC, US and UK must reach agreement on best course to follow and must approach French reps and Austrian Govt.

Concerned that if we agree to treaty, including 90 day provision in Art 33,2 Soviets may subsequently stall in AC on authorization to organize Austrian armed forces, leaving Austria incapable of protection against internal disorders, armed action by Communists, and Yugo encroachments when Allied troops withdraw. No assured safeguard seen unless four-power agreement that Allied troops will not be withdrawn until Austrian gendarmerie and armed forces proper are adequately equipped and in effective operation. Awkwardness recognized of proposing clause to this effect as part of Art 33 since Art already fully agreed. Under circumstances, suggest approach of separate protocol attached to treaty by which Allied and Associated powers would agree that Art 33, para 3,3 would not become effective if prior to the expiration of 90 days following the coming into force of treaty the Austrian Govt should inform the Allied and Associated powers that the Austrian armed forces prescribed by the treaty were not adequately equipped and trained to perform their functions. In that case Allied troops would remain in Austria until the Austrian Govt should inform Allied Commanders that organization of Austrian armed forces was sufficiently advanced to permit effective performance recognized duties. Inasmuch as readiness of French to take initiative is indicated Delsec 1635,4 would they be prepared to advance proposal for such protocol which might meet more favorable reception by Soviets from them than from US or UK?

Sent London as 1430, Ausdel 19 for Reber; repeated Vienna as 372 for Keyes and Erhardt.

Lovett

1 Not printed.

2 Article 33 of the draft treaty provided that allied forces in Austria would be withdrawn as soon as possible after the coming into effect of the treaty and in no case later than ninety days after its coming into effect.

3 Ninety-day paragraph.

4 Telegram 1042, March 13, p. 1358 [Pg. 1358 includes portions of Doc. 730 and Doc. 731].

Memorandum by the Secretary of the Army (Royall) to the Department of State 863.20/5–748

[Document 739]

Memorandum by the Secretary of the Army (Royall) to the Department of State

top secret Washington, May 7, 1948.

Memorandum for the Department of State:

(Attention: Mr. Jacob D. Beam, Director of Central European Affairs.)

Subject: Comments on British Aide-Mémoire re Austrian Arms.

1. The following are Department of Army informal views concerning British proposals to build up Austrian forces of sufficient strength to maintain internal security in Austria. The British proposals aré set forth in the attached Aide-Mémoire which you transmitted informally to the Department of the Army on April 13, 1948.1

2. On 5 March 1948 the Joint Chiefs of Staff reported to the Secretary of Defense their views concerning the desirability of concluding an Austrian peace treaty in which one of the conclusions was as follows: “Regardless of the trend of treaty negotiations at the present conference, Austria should be permitted to begin now the organization of her armed forces.”

3. You will note that these conclusions agree in principle with British views that the Austrian Government should be assisted now in the planning, organizing, equipping, and training phases of a limited development of armed forces prior to withdrawal of allied occupation forces. Since a general agreement exists as to the advisability of this measure, a decision as to the next procedural step appears necessary to determine: a. The size, category and composition of forces. This is now being considered in Vienna.

b. The extent and method of allied participation on which our views follow in the next paragraphs.

4. A police strength of 14,000 armed and 4,000 administrative is deemed a minimum requirement. At present the police force is subject to a certain amount of Communist infiltration and continues to be completely occupied with normal police security and frontier control missions. The need of a mobile striking force is paramount, and can best be constituted as an integral part of the Austrian Army. The equipment of the U.S. Constabulary Regiment now in Austria might be suitable for the initial supply of this force. We are in agreement with Delsec 16402 which suggests that the initial problem of organization can best be determined in Vienna by the U. S. and U. K. High Commissioners and then with the French and Austrian Governments. General Keyes’ recommendations and proposed courses of action have been solicited in this respect.

5. Standardized equipment for all components of the Austrian Armed Forces is desirable and it is at least mandatory by major category within each component. We will give sympathetic consideration to the British proposal that they equip the Austrian Air Forces and the U.S. equip the Austrian Army, however, we will insist that maintenance and replacement items be provided by the supplying power as well as initial allocations. This maintenance responsibility applies with equal force to re-transferred U.S. lend-lease equipment. General Keyes reports (20 April) that there are sufficient British-owned personal-type weapons stored in the British zone to arm a combined internal security force of Gendarmerie and police of approximately 22,000. These weapons have been earmarked for that purpose (Delsec 1640). It therefore appears reasonable to suggest that the U.K. assume responsibility for equipping the police forces completely. If the British were willing to assume responsibility for equipping the Air Force and the police forces, the U.S. might assume responsibility for equipping the Austrian Army. Due to the close relationship in training and operation of the Gendarmerie and Army it would appear necessary to establish interchangeability of their arms and equipment. Such a plan will facilitate procurement of items and insure standardization within each component.

6. However, no comprehensive planning can be done and no commitments can be made until the following two conditions are met: (1) An integrated total military aid program is evolved.

(2) General authorizing legislation such as the Lend Lease Act (and appropriations for military foreign aid) is enacted by Congress.

7. Surplus stocks of the U.S. Army are practically non-existent.

8. A determination of priority and collation with other foreign aid programs must be made by the Department of State and the National Military Establishment. It is suggested that the Department of State prepare a formal presentation of this matter to the Secretary of the Defense stating the importance and urgency of furnishing military equipment for Austria and establishing a priority relative to the existing and proposed aid programs for other nations.

9. In the meantime we shall continue to study the problems raised in the British Aide-Mémoire, and shall keep in close touch with your office. We shall also keep you informed of General Keyes’ recommendations, and of any developments he reports from Vienna.

For the Secretary of the Army:
Walter H. Grant
Lt. Colonel, GSC

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 863.20/6–1148

[Document 740]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

top secret Vienna, June 11, 1948.

No. 274

Sir: I have the honor to refer to your telegram 408, May 41 and previous correspondence, and letter from Headquarters, USFA to Intelligence Division, General Staff, May 6, 1948, “Organization of Future Austrian Army”.2 On March 18 Chancellor Figl discussed with the U.S. Deputy Commissioner the problem of making plans for the formation of an Austrian army; he believed that the Soviet element would almost certainly refuse permission to the Austrian Government to begin such planning if the Allied Council were asked, and that even if permission should be granted the Soviets would then have an excuse for closely supervising and perhaps interfering with the work of the planning committee. It was therefore decided that the permission of the Allied Council would not be asked, but that an unofficial bipartite committee of the two major parties would begin work in secret. This committee was appointed, and has been discussing the future army for about two months; it consists of Minister of Interior Helmer and Julius Deutsch for the Socialists and State Secretary of Interior Graf and General Emil Liebitzki for the People’s Party.

Deutsch and Liebitzki are the most active military planners of their respective parties, and both have been considering this question for over a year. Liebitzki was colonel in the pre-Anschluss Austrian Army, later a concentration camp inmate, and is at present working in the pensions office of the Finance Ministry. Deutsch was Secretary of War under the Social Democratic Government of 1919–1920, and later until 1933 commander of the Republican Defense Corps founded by the Socialists; he was a general in the Spanish Republican Army and during the late war worked on the Austrian desk of OWI.

Both major parties are now agreed on the necessity for an army, although large sections of both originally opposed it. The peasants believed that an army would draw too heavily on much needed farm labor, and the Diet of Vorarlberg voted in the summer of 1947 to express its opposition to an army; many Socialists feared that an army might again be used to suppress a worker’s movement, as was done in 1934. However recent events have convinced both groups that a trained army must be in existence before the occupation ends, to guard against possible internal communist uprisings as well as against border incidents. During the last month the Socialists have publicly come out in favor of the formation of an army, first in an article in the May issue of the official party organ Vertrauensmann, then in a resolution of May 26, prompted by a speech of Deutsch, which reaffirmed the old Socialist opposition to militarism but called for a democratic army “to defend the boundaries as well as to protect the republican-democratic constitution created by the free people of Austria”. Both the article and the resolution stressed the importance of assuring that the new army be closely connected with the people, and that the Socialist party cooperate in its creation to secure its democratic character.

In spite of this agreement on the fundamental question, the two parties still disagree on many details. The most important of these is the amount of political representation in the army. The Socialists are still afraid that an army can be made into an instrument of reaction, and want to be represented as a party in the leadership as well as in the rank and file. The People’s Party is opposed to the representation of political parties as such. Deutsch estimated a year ago that only about 100 suitable Socialist officers were available, and consequently Socialist plans have been largely directed towards making a census of possible officers and non-coms; it seems almost certain that most of the trained military personnel, particularly the officers, will be oriented towards the People’s Party. For this reason the Socialists are determined to secure representation in the military leadership, and would like to have one of their party, possibly Deutsch, as Minister of Defense. The People’s Party points out that under the Austrian constitution the army can only be called out by the President at the request of the Minister of Interior, both of whom are Socialists, and has advanced a counter proposal to the demand for political representation, whereby a bipartisan parliamentary committee would have an equal voice with the defense minister and chief of staff in military planning and appropriations. This dispute has not yet been settled.

Further points of disagreement are the length of enlistment, the type and organization of the army, and the source of arms. Deutsch first proposed the use of German arms, which Liebitzki opposed on the grounds that leftover German material is in a bad state of repair and could not later be replaced. This disagreement is not serious, since both parties would be willing to accept U.S. arms. The Socialists propose a militia type army, modeled on the Swiss, with a six-month term of enlistment for all able-bodied men at the age of 21. The People’s Party agrees that the army should be conscripted from the whole population rather than that it be a regular volunteer army, but insists on a regular military organization into about eight divisions disposed at strategic defense points, and especially opposes the idea of short-term enlistments. Liebitzki regards 18 months as the ideal term, 15 as the minimum, with overlapping terms to insure that one class of recruits would not be discharged before another’s training had begun. He proposes 18 or 19 as the draft age, partly to prevent the soldiers from being able to vote and thus subject to political propaganda; the Socialists are particularly anxious to insure that the soldiers keep their right to vote.

One proposal on which both parties agree is that the U.S. element furnish arms now to begin training a cadre for the future army within the framework of the existing police and gendarmerie. Headquarters, USFA, is at present giving sympathetic consideration to this proposal. Aside from assistance in this respect, it is not contemplated that U.S. representatives in Austria should intervene in the settlement of the organizational problems described above, unless it should appear that the inter-party differences are so irreconcilable as to jeopardize further progress in these vital preparations. On the date this report was submitted the Austrian Communist Party adopted a resolution opposing the creation of an Austrian army; a summary of this resolution is being sent by telegram to the Department.

Respectfully yours,

John G. Erhardt

1 Not printed.

2 Not found in Department files.

The Minister in Austria to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/7–1648: Telegram

[Document 741]

The Minister in Austria to the Secretary of State

top secret Vienna, July 16, 1948—3 p. m.

911. Ur 588, July 3.1 General Keyes advises that only preliminary exploratory conversations have taken place with Austrians so far on subject establishment Austrian Army. In view controversial nature of project, which might involve considerable friction between political parties, conversations so far have merely attempted encourage them to arrive at joint program, and have been conducted on informal basis without any commitments.

Question of authority for Austrians to commence planning on establishment of army has been raised in Allied Council and Executive Committee on two occasions but Soviets have consistently refused discussion.

Discussions of general nature have been held between US and British deputy High Commissioners although British have not been brought into our discussions with Austrians. We have not held discussions with French on this project except for discussion of problem of bringing subject up before holding Council. No objection would exist either from policy or security viewpoint to apprising French top level officials of our interest and Austrian plans.

Erhardt

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 863.20/8–1048: Telegram

[Document 742]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

top secret Washington, August 10, 1948—5 p. m.

689. With reference to French note (Deptel 588 July 31 ) and Gen Keyes’ recommendation (urtel 911 July 162 and P 2239 Aug 51 ) Dept of Army has recommended and Dept agrees that French participate in committee of mil experts with US and UK in Vienna to draw up plans for organization and requirements of future Austrian Army. Discussions will be held at appropriate time with Austrian authorities with a view to obtaining maximum agreement in Austrian Govt prior to possible submission of any plan to AC in line with Deputies’ recommendation in London. Submission of plan to AC would be determined by general political situation and course of treaty developments. Meanwhile, discussions should be held in strict secrecy. AmEmbassies in London, Paris have been requested to communicate foregoing to FonOffs for transmission to mil authorities with request that appropriate instructions be sent to Vienna.

Army sending appropriate instructions to General Keyes.

Marshall

1 Not printed.

2  Supra.

1 Not printed.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 863.20/9–2148

[Document 743]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

top secret Vienna, September 21, 1948.

No. 416

Sir: I have the honor to report that headquarters USFA has been preparing in conjunction with the British element a new plan for training, within the framework of the gendarmerie, a cadre for a future Austrian army. The desire of the Western elements is that such a cadre should be in being at the conclusion of any forthcoming treaty negotiations and that this cadre could be rapidly expanded into at least a small army prior to the evacuation of the occupation forces.

Conversations between the U.S. and British elements have resulted in the drawing up of detailed tables of organization and equipment for a battalion of gendarmerie in each of the Western zones, with regimental headquarters at Salzburg. Each battalion would be composed of about 500 men, and would include scout and motorized infantry units, and possibly an armored car unit; the issue of armored cars and of certain other armament is still questionable, since the U.S. element does not wish to risk issuing any military equipment which could not be justified by the legitimate mission of the police or gendarmerie. Gendarmes would be supplied with uniform American arms and ammunition, initially from British stockpiles of lend-lease equipment.

Formation of such a unit in the French Zone depends of course on permission of the French element, which has been informed of these plans and is now studying them in detail; the French High Commissioner has indicated that he may find the number of men too high and might prefer a company in each zone. As soon as tripartite agreement is reached, the plans will be communicated to the British, U.S. and French Governments, to determine whether there is any political objection and whether the materials recommended for release are actually available. If the plans are approved in Washington, London and Paris, they will then be submitted for consideration to the Austrian Government, which, it is hoped, will concur. The idea of training a cadre for the future army within the police was originally suggested to Headquarters USFA by Julius Deutsch, Socialist Party leader and member of the Austrian two-party military planning committee, although the U.S.-British plan involves a greater degree of control and surveillance by the Western occupation powers than Deutsch had envisaged.

The excuse for arming and training this force would be that a heavy cut in U.S., British and French troop strength has made it imperative that the Austrian gendarmerie be better equipped for maintenance of law and order and for the protection of ECA supplies.

A second and wholly separate plan for the training of Austrian police and gendarmes in the use of American weapons has been worked out by Headquarters USFA at the request of Chancellor Figl. The purpose of this plan is, of course, to enable the Austrian police, now grossly underarmed, to deal with an emergency such as might be created by the Werkschutz or other Communist elements. The Austrian Minister of the Interior and representatives of HQ, USFA, have reached agreement on the details of this plan and it is hoped that the commanding general of the U.S. Zone and police and gendarmerie officials in Salzburg and Upper Austria will begin to implement the program by the end of September.

The training will be limited initially to the U.S. Zone; training in the U.S. sector of Vienna may be added later. No publicity will be given but if, as is to be expected, the facts become known, the Austrian Government will explain that its intention is to enable the police to receive effective aid from the U.S. authorities in case of disturbance in the American Zone, and also that the Austrians desire to arm their police with U.S. weapons after the occupation is ended.

No arms will actually be released to the Austrians in the absence of an emergency but stockpiles of arms and ammunition under U.S. control, including automatic weapons, will be maintained in readiness to be turned over to the Austrians in case of necessity. HQ, USFA fears that under present conditions arms turned over to the Austrians in Vienna might fall into Soviet or Communist hands.

Austrian police instructors will first be trained themselves in the use of U.S. arms; then, under U.S. military supervision, they will travel from district to district instructing other policemen. Three ranges are now available for firing, and others may be added. The number of persons to be trained will be worked out by U.S. and Austrian officials in the U.S. Zone. Tentative plans are to give eight hours of classroom instruction and eight hours on the firing range to all personnel on both the carbine and sub-machine gun; two hours classroom and two of firing to all officers on the pistol; and six hours classroom and four firing on the light machine gun to fifteen selected crews of four men each.

Respectfully yours,

John G. Erhardt

Memorandum by the Counselor of Legation in Austria (Yost) to the Minister in Austria (Erhardt) Vienna Legation Files: Lot 54F57: Box 565

[Document 744]

Memorandum by the Counselor of Legation in Austria (Yost) to the Minister in Austria (Erhardt)

top secret Vienna, November 16, 1948.

As far as I can ascertain the preliminary plans for organizing an Austrian defense force seem to have bogged down rather completely. Those plans fall into three phases.

1. The first is the program for training of Austrian police and gendarmerie in the use of American arms. This seems to be proceeding satisfactorily and the arms are stockpiled for issue to the Austrians in case of emergency. This, however, is the smallest part of the program and would suffice only to deal with minor riots and demonstrations.

2. The second phase is the plan to develop a cadre for a future Austrian army within the gendarmerie by providing with modern equipment and training a full gendarmerie regiment in each of the Western Zones. This plan had been approved by each of the three Western governments and was about to be presented to the Austrians when it was discovered that the equipment therefor, which had been supposed the British had available, is not in fact available for this purpose. Washington has stated categorically that the equipment does not exist in the U.S. This phase of the plan is therefore wholly in abeyance.

3. The third phase, Austrian planning for their future army under an inter-party committee headed by Scharf, Deutsch, Graf and Raab, also seems to have broken down because of disputes between the two parties as to the character of the army to be set up.

Unless something can be done to break the impasse existing in the two latter phases of the program, we may see treaty negotiations resumed and substantial progress made thereon without one of the indispensable prerequisites to an Austrian treaty being provided. I would suggest that we should consult USFA on this matter and if they approve take the following two steps: 1. Urge Washington that, if the arms for the second of the above phases are not now available, the legislation which will presumably be introduced in the forthcoming session of Congress authorizing provision of arms to the Western Union be so worded that it will also permit prompt provision of arms to Austria.

2. Make strong representations to the leaders of both Austrian parties emphasizing the necessity of their reaching agreement, before treaty negotiations are actually resumed, on plans for the organization of an Austrian army.

C[harles] W. Y[ost]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 863.20/11–1648: Telegram

[Document 745]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

top secret Washington, November 30, 1948—5 p. m.

898. Fr Emb communication re planning for Aus police and army considers actual formation mobile gendarmerie force at this time violation Control Agreement. Action by western powers in creating security force might lead to formation rival gendarmerie in Sov zone. Fr state further that occupation forces can maintain internal order and that no date has been set for withdrawal. Communication proposes that current discussions be continued but that date for establishment actual forces under present program be made subject governmental agreement and instructions to this effect be transmitted to US reps Vienna.

Fr will be told orally by Dept that continuation current discussions and planning is desirable in light forthcoming proposal for resumption Treaty negotiations. Reference will be made to previous tripartite discussions concerning desirability creating Aus security force capable fulfilling obligation now assumed by occupation troops. Recommendation will be made to Fr that any decision on question raised in communication be postponed pending resumption Treaty negotiations to enable formulation possible timetable for termination occupation. Dept will not agree that decision to create gendarmerie be made by four power agreement since such agreement is impossible. Raising question at this time will intensify Sov attacks on Aus leaders as well as provide substantive basis for creation rival Sov forces in eastern zone.

Dept presumes similar Fr communication sent Brit.

Marshall

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 863.20/12–648: Telegram

[Document 746]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

top secret Vienna, December 6, 1948—6 p. m.

1270. We are surprised French are taking line described Deptel 898, November 30,1 since General Béthouart informed General Keyes in September that he agreed in principle to plan for equipping three gendarmerie battalions in western zones. Our understanding has been that delay by three High Commissioners in approaching Austrian Government with plan was caused only by current non-availability of arms and equipment of desired type. British have stated none available in their stocks. USFA is awaiting reply to cable sent Joint Chiefs of Staff November 242 requesting availability in stocks of US European Command.

Our opinion is that as long as proposed organization and equipment are kept within reasonable concept of “gendarmerie”, plan will not violate any article of Allied Control agreement or any Allied Council decisions. Assuming their agreement, the Austrian Government which has the legitimate interest in the matter would implement plan. Actually Allied Council decision of December 10, 1945 on prohibition of military activities, if interpreted literally and applied to Austrian police agencies, would deprive both police and gendarmerie of weapons they have now. However, no element has ever suggested such interpretation. On other hand, no Allied Council decision exists which limits strength or organization of Austrian police and gendarmerie.

US element does not contemplate that plan necessarily would require increase in strength of gendarmerie. It is thought discussion with Austrian Government may disclose they could organize and equip one battalion in each of three western zones with current strength.

Soviets have been following a practice of weakening Austrian police agencies in Soviet occupied territories and creating illegal forces such as Werkschutz and Black Brigade. Therefore, their capability of countering with formation of gendarmerie battalions in eastern zone would be highly inconsistent with current procedure.

French are, of course, correct that occupation forces can maintain order in western zones at present time. However, inference of paragraph (c) (i) Article II of the Allied Control Agreement is that US Austrian authorities have primary responsibility. It is true also, no date set for withdrawal occupation forces from Austria. However, it is felt there will not be an effective Austrian army at time of withdrawal unless some means found to create nucleus for army beforehand. We would therefore urge strongly that French be asked to reconsider their stand and to authorize French High Commissioner to join with US and British High Commissioners in approaching Austrian Government with proposal for Gendarmerie battalion in each of three western zones. It would be understood that Austrian Government would not be urged to accept any plan which would violate any article of control agreement or any Allied Council decisions. Discussions with Austrian Government would not be initiated until availability of equipment has been determined. It is felt that Soviet reaction would be of such concern to Austrian Government that they would be unwilling to accept plan if they agreed with French estimate of probable Soviet countermeasures.

It is our understanding that Western Powers are agreed that security of Austria demands there be an Austrian army in being at time of withdrawal of occupation forces. Since Soviets are likely to refuse to sanction necessary preparations until treaty goes into effect, only means of avoiding ultimate deadlock may be device we are suggesting of proceeding within framework of existing gendarmerie. Otherwise situation might well arise whereunder there would be full agreement on all articles of treaty but Western Powers would be obliged to bear onus of holding up signature or ratification because no effective internal Austrian security forces were in being. We therefore believe preparations of this kind should proceed simultaneously with treaty negotiations.

USFA concurs.

Sent Department, repeated Paris for Bohlen 176, London 216.

Erhardt

1  Supra.

2 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 863.20/12–648: Telegram

[Document 747]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

top secret Washington, December 9, 1948—12 noon.

925. We concur your views on Fr position ur 1270 Dec 61 concerning arming police and fully appreciate importance this question to present and future Aus security. Dept’s view program training and equipping police and organizing, training and equipping basic units army should be continued during Treaty negotiations communicated in letter to Forrestal Dec 7.2 Difficulties obtaining supplies for program reported by Gen Keyes Nov 24 called attention Nat Mil Establishment with request all steps be taken overcome difficulties and consider Aus requirements in formulation proposed Military Assistance Act permit transfer necessary equipment.

On assumption delay in approaching Aus Govt desirable until arms and equipment available, reply to Fr made as reported Deptel 898 Nov 30.3 If Treaty discussions resume early next year, this question can be raised with Fr on Governmental level and by that time problem availability may be clarified sufficiently enable tripartite approach Austrians. French will be asked prior any discussions reconsider position and agree establishment battalions in each western zone. No difficulty expected as French have already agreed principle Aus army should be in existence at time withdrawal occupation forces and have many times expressed desire see gendarmerie established now. New approach French will be made shortly after receipt four power replies Aus note on Treaty negotiations. In meantime, tripartite planning and discussions should not be interrupted.

Lovett

1  Supra.

2 Not printed.

3  Ante, p. 1375 [Pg. 1375 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745].

C. The interest of the United States in the economic and political stability of AustriaC. The interest of the United States in the economic and political stability of Austria

[748] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, January 31, 1948—4 p. m.

840.50 Recovery/1–3148: Telegram

[749] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, February 10, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/2–1048; Telegram

[750] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, March 1, 1948—5 p. m.

860F.00/3–148: Telegram

[751] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, March 3, 1948—3 p. m.

661.6331/2–1248: Telegram

[752] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, March 3, 1948—4 p. m.

863.00/3–348: Telegram

[753] The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, March 5, 1948.

863.00/3–548: Telegram

[754] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, March 9, 1948—4 p. m.

Vienna Legation Files: Lot 54F57: Box 565: Telegram

[755] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, March 24, 1948—1 p. m.

840.50 Recovery/3–2448: Telegram

[756] The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, April 5, 1948—6 p. m.

840.50 Recovery/4–548: Telegram

[757] The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, April 8, 1948—3 p. m.

863.00/4–848: Telegram

[758] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, April 20, 1948—6 p. m.

840.50 Recovery/4–2048: Telegram

[759] The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, April 28, 1948.

840.50 Recovery/4–2848: Telegram

[760] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, April 29, 1948—1 p. m.

840.50 Recovery/4–2948: Telegram

[761] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, May 11, 1948—7 p. m.

663.119/5–1148: Telegram

[762] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, May 13, 1948—5 p. m.

863.5151/5–1348: Telegram

[763] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, May 13, 1948—6 p. m.

663.119/5–1348: Telegram

[764] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, May 15, 1948—5 p. m.

863.5151/5–1548: Telegram

[765] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, June 3, 1948—6 p. m.

Vienna Legation Files: Lot 55F74: Box 3160: Telegram

[766] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, July 9, 1948.

Vienna Legation Files: Lot 55F74: Box 3160

[767] The Under Secretary of State (Lovett) to the Administrator of the Economic Cooperation Administration (Hoffman)

Washington, August 23, 1948.

840.50 Recovery/8–2348

[768] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, September 23, 1948—7 p. m.

663.6531/9–1648: Telegram

[769] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, November 5, 1948—7 p. m.

840.811/10–748: Telegram

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 840.50 Recovery/1–3148: Telegram

[Document 748]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret   us urgent
niact Vienna, January 31, 1948—4 p. m.

104. Reurtel 57.1 Delay in authorizing commencement ERP assistance until July 1 would cause most critical situation Austria. Two questions exist re ERP Austria. First—is extent and scope anticipated ERP assistance Austria 1948–49 sufficient to lead to desired recovery by end 1952? Second, and most critical—will supplies furnished under ERP be procured and arrive in Austria in time to avoid a break in existing supply pipeline? Experience with UNRRA military’s civilian supplies, PL 84 and PL 389,2 has indicated an average interval of 13 weeks exists between the time funds are authorized and procurement begins until supplies are available for use in Austria. This refers particularly to food, agricultural supplies, and in lesser degree to coal, which are currently key commodities of US assistance to Austria.

Food as programmed in urtel 553 plus PL 84 food, not yet arrived in Austria, is only sufficient to last until May 23. After that, food pipeline will be completely dry. The only food remaining in Austria after that date will be approximately 822 calories per day per average consumer plus small US emergency reserve of twenty days flour, ten days meat, ten days fat, eight days pulses, four days sugar. Drop to approximately 800 calories a day would not mean that average consumers throughout all Austria would receive this amount. Soviets would probably curtail deliveries from Soviet Zone to Vienna and other zones. Result would be population of Soviet Zone would have daily ration greater than 800, population of US Zone would have daily ration of somewhere between 700 to 800 calories, population of French-British Zones would have daily ration of approximately 400 to 500 calories and population of Vienna might almost be without any food.

Since harvest is not available for consumption until approximately 15 September, period in question is most serious of entire agricultural year. Lack of food in itself would immediately result in sharp decline industrial production. The morale of population would be reduced to dangerous low which USFA fears might threaten status of US and western occupation forces, and physically endanger approximately 3000 dependents of American personnel Austria. Break on coal supply line would curtail encouraging growth in exports and reduce production to approximately status of that of 1945.

In order to avoid these disastrous results, it is necessary that procurement of food and coal be authorized early March for shipment from east coast US first week April. Without other assistance, authorization of ERP July 1 would not supply minimum food requirements to Austria until mid-September. Result would be that political and economic gains earned from previous assistance, including PL 389, would be jeopardized. It would endanger basic purpose of ERP and give Soviets and Communists an advantage they have never yet enjoyed in Austria, even during first days following liberation of Vienna and Eastern Austria. This situation would confirm Soviet and Communist predictions that American assistance is doomed to failure. Soviets undoubtedly would exploit situation fullest.

Consequently assistance is needed to cover gap May 23 to September 15. Minimum assistance to avoid fall in ration and stoppage of production would require supply of food and coal for that period. Food would total $51,960,000 based on landed costs as reported WCL 41994, WCL 47158, and WCL 25476,4 and 3% loss factor on basis population of 37 ration period. We repeat again that shipments must begin first week April. Based on ration of 1800 calories per day, items and quantities required are listed in three columns: item, quantity in metric tons, and estimated cost: flour, 131029; $23,992,000; meat, 3998, $1,539,000; fat, 13709, $9,212,000; cereals, 38158, $6,563,000; pulses, 24338, $9,733,000; sugar, 4458, $921,000. On basis of 240,000 tons of coal per month planned under PL 389, it would be necessary to furnish 840,000 tons for period in question at estimated cost approximately $12,100,000. In the case of coal provision must be made to continue shipments from Ruhr, Poland and other European sources to maintain increasing industrial production. Austrian resources are negligible.

Inquiry of Finance Ministry and Austrian National Bank results in following information: Austrian gold holdings now include $4.7 million listed National Bank as reserve plus approximately $27.9 million worth of gold allotted to Austria November from Brussels gold pot now held $21.5 million Frankfurt, scheduled for shipment US February 10 and remainder New York. Against this gold following obligations are noted: first, the amount now held as “reserve” in Austrian National Bank which cannot be encumbered or eliminated from statement without grave effect on public confidence. Second, Austrian Govt has agreed, if required, to return gold sufficient to cover amount delivered from Salzburg $4,700, if allied claims to Brussels gold pot based on nature origin of this gold, make this necessary. Third, agreement to contribute approximately $7 million (International Monetary Fund) and (Bank for Reconstruction and Development).

The residual $16.2 million worth of gold can be considered available for any purpose authorized under Austrian law. Current opinion Austrian Govt authorities is that a new law would be required to hypothecate gold. Policy of availability of gold for emergency use will be discussed Cabinet next week. Appreciate your opinion to advisability of Austrian Govt hypothecating gold if necessary and possible.

Austria had, on 1 January, $4.4 million, of which $2.5 million was obligated; 13 million Swiss francs, of which 7.6 million obligated; 430,000 pounds sterling, of which 211,000 obligated. Taking total available resources, including returns from exports and dollar occupation cost all of Which are now obligated, it is our opinion that by making readjustments in these obligations including payments to OMGUS, Austria might, in the next four months, have at its disposal for emergency food purchases approximately $5 million and less than $1 million equivalent in other foreign exchange. No additional resources are available in foreign dollar assets. No prospective credits are in sight. Potential amount of less than $6 million would not finance one-third of food import requirement for one month. If available gold residual is hypothecated in addition, food import requirement could be financed for only one and one-half months. Such sacrifice would simply postpone period of emergency at great cost to economic and political stability Austria and damage to present favorable foundation for commencement ERP.

Pass to JCS and Department of Army.

Erhardt

1 Not printed.

2 For the text of Public Laws 84 and 389, see 61 Stat. 125 and 934.

3 Not printed.

4 Not found in Department files.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 740.00119 Control (Austria)/2–1048; Telegram

[Document 749]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

secret Washington, February 10, 1948—4 p. m.

116. Brit memo1 received Jan 13 stresses need for long-term economic planning in Aus coordinated with political objectives of US and UK, and proposes secret informal discussions of US–UK in Vienna, with addition Fr and Aus representatives at appropriate time. Preliminary meeting US–UK would discuss constitution of informal working party on economic policy, terms of reference, approach to Austrians for cooperation, and timing of approach to French. Brit propose to instruct Southam, of ACABrit, to conduct talks for them.

Dept has agreed to such preliminary discussions but has suggested that they be held in London in view of forthcoming discussions Austrian deputies which will to large extent determine type of long-range economic problems that must be met and for which experts will come to London. Dept understands Southam will be in London for German assets negotiations. Trust that AmLeg and USFA reps participating in Aus deputies work will also be available for such preliminary discussions with Brit. Anticipated that discussions in London will be followed by more detailed substantive examination of problems in Vienna.

Sent Vienna as 116; rptd London as 429.

Marshall

1 Not printed.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 860F.00/3–148: Telegram

[Document 750]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

confidential Vienna, March 1, 1948—5 p. m.

259. First effect of Czech developments1 on Austria has been sobering and deeply disturbing. Feeling of isolation and little security arising from Austrian geographical position has been sharply increased and first expressions of doubt concerning desirability of state treaty at this time are being heard.

Socialist leaders have hastened in public statements to draw sharp distinction between Austria and Czechoslovakia to point out that Czechoslovak Communists had 38 percent of vote and Austrian only 5 percent, that Austrian Socialists are unanimously anti-Communist and have no Fierlinger among leadership, that Socialists not Communists control trade unions, and that all strategic positions in government are held by two major parties. Schaerf and Helmer in speeches over week-end have stated Socialist determination to resist totalitarian pressure and even leader of weak Socialist left-wing has publicly declared his conviction that collaboration with Communists would be fatal. Interesting to note, however, that Austrian Socialist leaders have long nourished illusions about Czechoslovak Socialist party and Only very recently did they finally admit Fierlinger is Communist stooge and that they welcomed Lausman triumph at party congress in November as demonstrating Czechoslovak Social Democrats would play resolutely anti-Communist role.

People’s party leaders have reacted with equal vigor against Czechoslovak coup but have shown unfortunate tendency to seek electoral advantage by highlighting role of Czechoslovak Social Democrats in Communist victory and emphasizing that only sure bulwark against Communists in Austria is People’s party. This attitude has caused considerable apprehension among Socialists who appear more keenly aware of importance of maintaining coalition unity under present circumstances.

Communists are, of course, jubilant, and Fischer in Volkstimme editorial states that now is time for Socialists to proclaim their colors, that there is no longer a “third way”, but only way of Italian, Hungarian, and Polish Socialists, or way of Bevin and Blum that Austrian Socialist leaders have chosen to ally with most reactionary wing of European Socialism but that Austrian working class will sooner or later create unified front of progressive forces.

While leaders of non-Communist parties in press are striving to give impression that Czechoslovak coup is not materially affecting Austrian situation and that prompt conclusion of state treaty remains primary Austrian goal, note of doubt and confusion is, nevertheless, apparent in private conversations. It would appear that leaders may be reexamining all factors which might conceivably cause them to modify attitude toward treaty and withdrawal of occupation forces.

Sent Department 259; repeated to London for USDel 42, Praha 9.

Erhardt

1 For documentation on the Soviet takeover of Czechoslovakia see volume iv .

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 661.6331/2–1248: Telegram

[Document 751]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

secret Washington, March 3, 1948—3 p. m.

187. Dept agrees that delay of any USIA discussions essential pending outcome London sessions (reurtel 174, Feb 121 ). It is possible that present inefficient state of USIA operations may have contributed to Sov desire to conclude treaty, if such desire does exist. However desirable integration of the USIA units into Austrian system may be, serious risks involved in any de facto arrangement before the legal or treaty points cleared up.

Much the same considerations against conclusion Aust-Sov trade, agreements at this time, although no objection to exploratory talks. Austrian trade with Eastern Europe under ERP envisaged with reference mainly to Polish coal and trade with Danube valley for food and raw materials. Trade with USSR considered desirable to extent it contributes to European recovery and does not result in critical Austrian dependence on USSR.

Marshall

1 Not printed.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 863.00/3–348: Telegram

[Document 752]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, March 3, 1948—4 p. m.

272. Gruber’s frame of mind three weeks ago before he left for London treaty negotiations, when he was exploring every possible means of reaching compromise based on Soviet proposal, contrasts sharply with present preoccupation upon return from London with (1) strengthening Austrian internal unity and (2) developing Western European collaboration. Change of attitude appears to be caused by Czechoslovak coup, fear of further Communist successes, particularly in Italy, lack of progress in treaty negotiations and Anglo-French initiative on Western European unity.

Gruber states he is endeavoring during stay in Vienna to promote truce between two major parties and adoption of joint program on controversial issues representing compromise between two extremes. He considers that bickering between two parties has grown to disquieting extent but believes it will be possible in view of international situation to persuade leaders he has already talked to Schaerf and Raab) to agree on program which will preserve coalition for at least one year.

Minister’s apprehension over international developments is demonstrated by his contention that it is vital that Western European countries not only consolidate CEEC at forthcoming Paris meeting but also proceed rapidly to measures of political and military collaboration.…

Gruber is not optimistic about agreement on Austrian treaty in near future and, while he believes negotiations should be pursued, is obviously less concerned with pressing them to early conclusion. He wishes among other matters to assure himself that Austria is in position to defend herself from internal and external aggression, short of war, before occupation forces withdraw. He will deliver public Statement on treaty to Steering Committee of Parliament March 5.

Gruber plans to return to London via Paris early next week and also to be present at CEEC meeting in Paris March 15. Gruber’s ideas on CEEC program appear to resemble closely those set forth in Department’s circular February 29, 1 a. m.1

Sent Department; repeated London 50, Paris 29, Rome 18.

Erhardt

1 Not printed.

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Secretary of State 863.00/3–548: Telegram

[Document 753]

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, March 5, 1948.

P–1372. WEEKA Austria. From USFA sgd Keyes action to CSGID from Keyes to State info Deputy Dir of Intelligence EUCOM, MA London pass to Keyes, clear text copies forwarded by pouch to MA Italy, MA Switzerland, MA Rumania, MA Bulgaria, MA Czechoslovakia, MA Yugoslavia, MA Hungary and Trust [Trieste?].

Current intelligence: Now possible to appraise, with at least modest claim to comprehensive basis, effect of Communist victory in Czechoslovakia on political situation in Austria. Most immediately perceptible consequence has been first class attack of jitters. Several developments of past week interpreted as local crystallizations of this basic reaction, especially immediate change in popular Austrian attitude toward state treaty. To probably large majority of Austrians physical presence of western occupying powers in Austria suddenly seen as Austria’s guarantee against what happened in Czechoslovakia. Week’s labor tension also related to popular reaction to developments in Czechoslovakia. Among trade union leaders, especially attitude of fear and despair among masses of workers has contributed to anxiety with which wave of labor tension is regarded. Labor leaders feel that panicky reaction of rank and file hinders control and responsible leadership doubly difficult. Most healthy development, however, is apparent realization by leaders of Peoples and Socialist parties that indulgence inward political recriminations and muck-raking, which reached alarming proportions last week, must stop. Concern with stability of coalition reported main reason for Foreign Minister Gruber’s return from London. Raab, Ludwig and other influential Peoples Party spokesmen known to share his view. Not unlikely that some formal reaffirmation of coalition will be forthcoming within next week (or so).

Labor unrest referred to above sparked by failure of 1,800 calory ration. Work stoppages and demonstrations apparently spontaneous, but Communists have exploited with usual determination, using USIA factories as bases of operations. Discontent with price wage situation contributory factor.

On this issue, position taken by top leadership of trade unions and Labor Chamber, both Socialist-led, constitutes controlling factor in official Socialist Party position. No sign of wavering in widely publicized stand of top leadership either political party. Stand of Labor and Socialists include: opposition to wage increase; opposition to agricultural price rises as presently proposed; pressure for lowered industrial prices and elimination of middleman’s profits; increase of ration schedule to 1,800 calories and strong measures to insure deliveries and distribution to meet ration call-ups. Both parties have tended in last weeks to become rigid in, their attitude on these issues. Labor seems to be ready to get down to cases on any possible compromise solution on agricultural delivery problem not involving break in price wage front. Conviction remains, however, that main responsibility rests with industrial and agricultural leaders, some of whom are accused of putting group and political interests ahead of national interests. Major point made by Labor is fast solution must be reached on agricultural price and delivery issue since deliveries certain to grow worse as long as talk of major price rise gives farmer incentive to wait and see. Labor’s refusal to compromise on other issues makes it appear unlikely that there will be retreat on price wage stand short of rupture in coalition.

Psychological: Communist coverage of London negotiations on Austria continue to stress Anglo-American “disinterest” and delay tactics, inspired by desire to maintain occupation of Austria indefinitely. This attitude said to have been strengthened by developments in Czechoslovakia. Success of Communists in neighboring “Peoples Democracy” utilized in attacks on Socialist and Peoples Parties for banding together with Americans in fear-inspired anti-Communist front. Much-played propaganda themes were non-fulfillment by Austrian Government of promised ration increase to 1,800 calories and wave of strike threats protesting bad food conditions. General Kourasov’s proposal for general amnesty for less-incriminated Nazis also given great prominence. Radio RAVAG (government-owned, Russian-censored station) gave unmistakable Soviet slanting to its foreign news coverage, particularly in case of Czechoslovakia. “Moscow to Austria” re-broadcasts dealt with America’s intention of cutting Austria off from her natural ties with East, with Peoples Party preference for Marshall Plan to state treaty, and with “Marshallization of Austrian culture”. … [Here follows short report on military and subversive activities.]

PolAd concurs.

[ Keyes ]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State Vienna Legation Files: Lot 54F57: Box 565: Telegram

[Document 754]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

top secret Vienna, March 9, 1948—4 p. m.

295. From General Keyes and Erhardt. Current outbreak of social unrest in Vienna, which is mainly question of food, is considered by highest authorities of both major parties in coalition and by ourselves to have very serious political possibilities especially in view of Communist coup in Czechoslovakia. Disturbances are culmination of series of disappointments since last October, superimposed upon two and a half years of extremely low rations. There is no doubt that, though Communists are seizing every opportunity to aggravate unrest, current disturbances result from justified complaint by workers that current week’s ration was particularly bad both in quality and quantity. Complaint as to quality is well founded and is due to failure in meat deliveries from provinces and to unbalance in deliveries of US supplies which are arriving on a hand to mouth basis.

Fact that such disturbances have occurred at a time when official calory ration, at least theoretically, is being nearly fulfilled is vivid warning of what must happen after Interim Aid shipments cease to arrive. It is obvious that reduction below 1700 calories will produce serious consequences. Under perfect conditions, barring any shortfall in US supplies, assuming shipments arrive exactly as scheduled, and materially improved indigenous collections, 1700 rate can be maintained to end of May. By that date last Interim Aid food will have been consumed and country will have only its own resources which can produce about 820 calories per person. Unless food cargoes leave eastern US ports by 1 April this will be condition in Austria.

The working population, at first submissive and then for long period relatively apathetic about short rations, appear now to be reaching end of their patience and mood of discouragement and despair is spreading. Trade union leaders are exercising their powerful influence to restrain workers but Communists are exploiting situation with increasing energy. Alarming events next door in Czechoslovakia and possibility of Communist successes in Italy have introduced element of insecurity and panic, and Communists, quick to seize advantage, are developing their activity to scale of general attack.

President of Trade Union Federation called last week accompanied by Chancellor Figl and said that, if food situation could be improved leaders could maintain control over workers, but if not they feared wave of stoppages and demonstrations might develop into general strike in which case leaders would lose their influence and Communists might gain the upper hand. Boehm is both able and conservative and we are convinced that his statement must be taken seriously. His appeal, endorsed by the Chancellor, is being transmitted to Washington by USFA, and we hope that it may elicit concrete reply which he can bring to his membership. We can do nothing here as USFA and Relief Mission operate on bare hand to mouth basis. Additional food supplies should therefore leave our eastern seaboard soon after March 15. [Keyes and Erhardt.]

Erhardt

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 840.50 Recovery/3–2448: Telegram

[Document 755]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, March 24, 1948—1 p. m.

365. Giesl has informed Austrian Government that there is no immediate prospect of action on Eximbank applications listed Legtel 279, March 51 or on any other Austrian Eximbank application except for cotton loan. We would appreciate being informed whether Giesl’s understanding is correct and, if so, whether reason for this decision is imminence of enactment of ERP.2

Austrian Government considers that unless funds for these projects will be provided promptly under ERP granting of Eximbank application is of vital importance to rehabilitation of Austrian industry and to success of export program envisaged under ERP estimates. Legation concurs fully with this judgment insofar as projects referred to in paragraph four Legtel 279 are concerned and hopes approval may be given at earliest possible time.

We should also appreciate being informed whether as matter of general policy future Eximbank loans to Austria and other ERP countries will be considered as part of funds authorized under ERP or whether Eximbank loans supplementary to ERP authorizations will be granted in deserving cases. Austrians, of course, urge strongly that latter policy be followed in their case particularly since ERP estimate so far available here provide far less-for industrial rehabilitation than is felt to be urgently necessary.

Erhardt

1 Not printed.

2 In telegram 370, April 22, not printed (840.50 Recovery/3–2448), the Department informed Legation Vienna that it was unable to take a position on Eximbank credits until the relation between ERP and Eximbank was clarified.

The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State 840.50 Recovery/4–548: Telegram

[Document 756]

The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, April 5, 1948—6 p. m.

423. Following enactment ERP, it is believed Department may wish to bring to attention of ERP administrator as soon as he is designated, respects in which Austria’s position differs from other participating countries. Austria can neither be considered same basis other sovereign countries nor bizone or French zone occupied Germany.

Austria has sovereign government which is however, to some degree restricted in its authority by presence four occupying forces. Agreement each of four high commissioners necessary to give practical effect on country-wide basis to many measures essential to implementation of ERP. Western powers policy is to recognize sovereignty of government and reduce interference by occupation forces to minimum. Policy Soviets is to interfere to fullest extent possible often without regard to control agreement in order to handicap Austria’s efforts at recovery and to neutralize US assistance.

Restrictive provisions in PL 84 seriously handicapped realization of objectives of act. Similar restrictions on application of ERP would probably create greater difficulties in implementation because of open Soviet hostility to ERP, their determination to combat it by all possible means and because of broader scope of ERP. Sufficient latitude must be allowed to administration of ERP in Austria to assure achievement of its basic purpose and over-all US objective.

Under terms of control agreement four high commissioners agreed pool all food both imported and indigenous for use of all Austria. Since Soviet Zone produces most of Austria’s indigenous food stocks any action by US giving Soviets excuse to block deliveries from their zone to Vienna and Western zones would increase burden on US by requiring additional US assistance or would cause privation, unrest and serious political dangers. Fact that quadripartite approval is required for food plan each four week period gives Soviets opportunity to seize upon any apparent discrimination on our part as excuse for illegal action on their part.

We are convinced that assistance to Austria under ERP must be aimed at Austria as a whole and are confident that Austrian Government will cooperate in measures to avoid Soviets funneling off either ERP assistance or productive results of such assistance. We have no evidence of such funneling off of US aid so far, even under relatively relaxed provisions of PL 389.

Recent events and intelligence reports reveal that Soviets are laying plans to sabotage ERP and render it ineffective in Austria. It is important that administrator ERP appreciate situation in order that he may understand peculiar position of Austria in reference to other participating areas and in order that he may realize conditions for applying ERP to Austria in such a way that both its basic purposes and US objectives in Austria can be served. An attempt to administer ERP in Austria as if it were either wholly a sovereign country or wholly an occupied country would defeat these ends.

For your information see recommendations Paragraph Four, London’s 1099, March 17 and Vienna’s comment thereon in 343, March 19.1

Sent Department 423, repeated London for USDel 93.

Yost

1 Neither printed; telegram 1099 recommended that ERP should have special clauses for Austria and should apply to the whole country (740.00119 Council/3–1948). Telegram 343 reported that Austria desired full participation in ERP and suggested the United States discuss Austria’s political and military role in Western European Union with the United Kingdom and France (740.00119 Council/3–1948).

The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State 863.00/4–848: Telegram

[Document 757]

The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, April 8, 1948—3 p. m.

445. Secret conversations between two leading Austrian parties conducted for purpose of achieving greater unity and stability of coalition, have so far yielded agreement on following points: (1) Foreign Policy. No important differences needed to be composed re this issue. (2) Elections which are not to be held until fall of 1949, as required by constitution. (3) Future Austrian army, which is to be based on conscription, with a small nucleus of non-political professional officers and NCO’s.

Although progress so far is gratifying and cooperative spirit of conversations continues, certain important issues are not yet decided: (1) Agricultural prices which People’s Party would raise. Compromise appears to be in sight allowing limited increases on basis subsidies and reduced middle man profits, without raising cost to consumers.

(2) Capital levy on which Socialists insist. Law providing for levy was recently approved by Cabinet but is presently bottled up in parliamentary committee. Gruber has explained that progress to [of] talks slowed down lately hut that both parties are hopeful of reaching complete agreement.

Foreign press reports of above conversations have resulted in Volksstimme exposé April 7 alleging that “new Figl–Schaerf secret pact” exists which demonstrates “complete subjection of Socialists who have become prisoners of reaction”. Volksstimme also claimed conversations took place “under patronage and with active participation of Americans who insisted agreement be concluded before Marshall Plan was signed”. Vice Chancellor Sehaerf, who is also chairman of Socialist Party, issued statement April 7 denying that “pact” exists. “It is natural” Schaerf said, “that two coalition parties conduct current conversations about political problems, but any reports about agreements going beyond such current discussions are without foundation”.

Sent Department 445; repeated London USDel 100.

Yost

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 840.50 Recovery/4–2048: Telegram

[Document 758]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

secret Washington, April 20, 1948—6 p. m.

365. Pass to High Commissioner. About 4 weeks ago Aus Mission, Wash requested to submit 3 months ERP program on basis availability $65 million ECA funds. Promised to have this program ready for submission within few days. Discussions involving this program as well as entire year program have been held with members of Mission, including Leopold and Igler. We are concerned that they lack realization or appreciation of basic principles on which success of ERP is predicated. They apparently believe that US has committed itself to make dollars available to enable Aus to receive all imports shown in Country Study regardless area of trade. Tried to emphasize to Mission that total program in Country Study can be achieved only by common effort all CEEC countries, and that US had made no commitment but will endeavor to finance uncovered deficit at least with Western Hemisphere, and in addition in first quarter of program at least certain imports such as coal and fertilizer from other areas.

In order to prevent break in pipeline Mission was also requested to submit 30 day program based on ⅓ of $65 million. This done and tentatively a 30 day program agreed upon. To date only food items this program authorized for procurement by ECA Administrator. Tentative 30 day program includes in millions of dollars: Food—13.0, coal—4.0, agricultural supplies—2.0, medical supplies—0.3, other—2.6. Breakdown of $8 million given Deptel 310 and rest in Deptel 351.1

In discussion with Mission it was pointed out that amount allocated for food this program almost $3 million more than cost monthly food expenditure under PL 84 and 389 and approval this sum for food does not constitute precedent for future program under ERP funds. Further, pointed out to Mission reason for approval this relatively large sum for food to enable gradual accumulation reserve rather than for immediate consumption on arrival in Aus. Estimated caloric value approx 215 billion after allowing for 3% loss factor, or approx 65 billion calories in excess current US contribution to Aus food plan under 1700 caloric normal consumer ration scale. Dept feels higher food imports should be used for reserve and does not agree with plan brought by Leopold that increased food supplies financed under ERP permit Aus consumption 2100 normal consumer beginning June 1948. We have avoided being drawn into discussion any particular ration scale which Austrians might have, saying it is matter primarily for determination by themselves on basis of indigenous and imported supplies. Mission was told no commitment can be made this time how much ERP funds would be approved for food import, and emphasized that ERP a recovery program and therefore the tendency likely to be not to approve relief type program in which practically entire available fund is used to finance food and fuel. Mission was also reminded that altho ERP funds might enable increased food imports, a substantial increase in consumption level in Aus could come about only by increase in availability indigenous supplies.

Approximately $4 million coal includes 170,000 tons Ruhr coal Apr and 45,000 tons special coal Poland and 20,000 tons coke Czech. May shipment Polish coal provided in PL 389. Pointed out to Mission that this additional Pol and Czech coal and coke not necessarily in addition provision Polish coal already provided from US funds but rather tentative pending agreement on 3 month program when it will be possible determine whether these additional amounts could be financed from available ERP funds. If funds not sufficient, then Polish coal in particular would probably be credited against payment due May 20 for June shipments.

On arrival Leopold requested Dept to instruct High Commissioner to release increased supplies to permit an 1800 calorie ration scale 39th ration period. He was informed that until we had assurance sufficient supplies on hand in Aus, a full pipeline and a firm operating program for several months ahead, we do not believe advisable promise release US supplies at rate higher than heretofore. He stated US supplies on hand and scheduled under PL 84 and 389 sufficient to permit additional release. Dept indicated would request info from High Commissioner. Will appreciate your submitting info all PL 84 and 389 food supplies physically on hand both Austrian and USFA custody, as well as such supplies in pipeline at end 39th ration period. Show also amount supplies available from indigenous and other sources same date. Supplies given Deptel 310 Apr 2 are from ERP funds, therefore, please show time separately when these are estimated to become available for consumption Aus.

Due to short supplies, not believed that raising consumption level in Aus before harvest would be desirable, except for political reasons. If political situation requires it and supplies permit, therefore, Dept would agree to Aus utilization additional US food supplies about 15–20 billion, total consumption US supplies in Austrian food plan would he approximately 165–170 billion calories per ration period. Should it be possible to make these additional supplies available to Aus food plan without drawing on ERP financed supplies for breadgrains before about July 1, and other ERP food items before 43d ration period, and providing sufficient reserve is assured in face of your recently expressed doubts concerning indigenous collections, suggest it be done beginning 41st ration period.

Dept feels strongly that US contribution to Aus food plan be in fixed amounts in terms of calories beginning with 40th ration period rather than by way of making up deficit. Since PL 84 and 389 supplies would permit contributions both on basis 150 and 165–170 billion calories in excess next two ration periods, suggest Aus Govt be notified as early as possible of the amount of supplies it can count on to receive from US for next 2 ration periods. Pls advise what effect above would have on ration scale from 41st ration period to next harvest assuming continuation current rate supplies from indigenous sources.

On putting this procedure into effect would be desirable to give it appropriate publicity so as to relieve US of blame in case short-fall in ration scale if Aus Govt falls down on collection indigenous supplies.

Sagmeister proposal Legtel 4682 to include youth 12–48 years and certain others in employed category for ration purposes estimated to require about one-third food needed to raise ration scale to 1800 present basis of consumer categories. However desirable such change might be on social grounds, appears to us that immediate result would be added strain on US supplies without political benefit which would accrue from raising normal consumer scale to 1800.

No definite arrangement worked out procedure for supplies under ERP financing. For time being, however, at least under 30 day program it will be necessary to assist Aus Govt, and, therefore, will continue present arrangement whereby goods are largely govt procured and shipped to High Commissioner except perhaps for difference that such goods raider ERP may be turned over directly to Aus Govt. Will advise you on further developments procedure.

Lovett

1 Neither printed.

2 Not printed.

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Secretary of State 840.50 Recovery/4–2848: Telegram

[Document 759]

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Secretary of State

top secret Vienna, April 28, 1948.

P–1680. Reference neutralization plan recommended in strategic survey of Austria (economic), October 1947,1 and our cable P–1477, 29 March 1948.1

In restudying this subject account has been taken of important changes and developments since October, especially progress of ERP planning and authorization by Congress. Original idea of offensive economic warfare against Soviet enterprises in Austria through allocations, licensing et cetera is not considered appropriate now. Instead we now contemplate a flexible defensive plan (called “strategic control plan”) designed to minimize Soviet capabilities for exerting economic pressure on Austria and jeopardizing recovery program in Austria.

In view of numerical and political weakness of local Communist Party, Austria is, in some respects, in better position than other important European countries to withstand Soviet pressure. At the same time Austrian position, has one vulnerable spot in that commodities essential for country’s economic rehabilitation include certain critical items, primarily oil, which are currently obtained in whole or in part from enterprises in Austria under Soviet control. All ERP and ECA estimates assume continued availability of commodities substantially at present levels. In view of established intention of Soviets to sabotage European Recovery Program if possible, and in view of the strategic importance of Austria in blocking further Soviet expansion, it is strongly apparent that in Austria means must be at hand to guarantee continued availability of these critical commodities. This applies to oil whether agreement is reached on treaty or not, and to other commodities until Soviets have surrendered control of industrial plants and withdrawn troops.

It is recommended therefore that ECA Administrator be requested to establish emergency 90 day reserves of these critical items as soon as possible and to hold them in readiness in or near Austria for immediate use in case of actual or threatened Soviet failure to continue deliveries from sources under their control in Austria. (Reserves need not necessarily be static or physically stockpiled if administrator can assure availability of emergency supply starting within 10 days, by diversions, by purchase for dollars in nearby areas, or by use of stocks in other participating areas whenever necessary.) It is further recommended that in case reserves are drawn upon administrator be prepared to take immediate steps to assure continued deliveries after 90 day period. Obviously impossible to estimate duration of Soviet failure to deliver.

Funds required for 90 day reserves are tentatively estimated at $5,400,000 on following basis. Total Austrian requirements from foreign and Soviet controlled indigenous sources for commodities in question are estimated at $9,600,000 per quarter. Of this total, imports would provide for $4,200,000 (on basis of portion of Austrian comments of 19 March reference country study, fully supported by USFA and Legation, in which minimum import requirements for these commodities were placed at $16,700,000 for 12 months period), while balance of $5,400,000 is assumed as continuing to be available from Soviet controlled sources in Austria. Breakdown of $5,400,000, which we recommend as initial requirements, is as follows: Oil $4,000,000, chemicals $400,000, ferrous scrap $400,000, machinery equipment and spare parts $200,000 sheet steel $100,000, other items $300,000, total $5,400,000.

It is emphasized that above amounts recommended for these 90 day reserves are over and above any allocations for regular ECA country program for Austria.

In order to preclude Austrian requests for releases of commodities or funds from these strategic reserves to meet shortages arising from ordinary causes, Austrian officials would not be consulted or informed about plan until decision had been taken to draw upon reserves and then only to extent necessary.

Decision to use reserves would have to be left to discretion of responsible US official here, in order to permit necessary flexibility and realization of maximum economic and political benefits from plan.

Full statement of plan and more detailed estimates follow by courier shortly.

Since Soviets may exercise their capabilities for sabotage of ECA program at any time after actual commencement of program, it is essential to have commodities procured and stockpiled at earliest possible moment. Consequently, I recommend urgent discussion of this proposal with ECA Administrator, and immediate approval and implementation.

PolAd concurs and is sending parallel message to State.

[ Keyes ]

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 840.50 Recovery/4–2948: Telegram

[Document 760]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, April 29, 1948—1 p. m.

549. Depts 262, March 22.1 Tentative ECA allocation $65 million.

Austrian proposal for use of $65 million is as follows in million dollars: Food 41 including 4.7 for freight; coal 12; medical supplies 1.2; railroad ties 1.0; agriculture 4.1; industry 5.1; hydroelectric installations 0.6.

In making division given above Austrian Government has indicated its intention to request additional first-quarter allocation of ten million dollars. Their proposed division of ten million dollars increase is as follows in million dollars: food 2 including 0.26 freight; tobacco 0.6; agriculture 2; industry 5.4.

Legation and USFA strongly endorse Austrian request for additional ten million as essential to necessary impetus for successful beginning ECA Austria.

Allocation of additional amounts to agriculture and industry would double allocations for both of these items necessary to increase exports in the case of industry and eventually reduce imports in the case of agriculture. Allocation of $65 million represents almost exactly January–March relief level which did not anticipate any industrial rehabilitation. Believe this increase would contribute considerably to recovery impetus and prestige of program in Austria.

Following comments are in reference to [application] of $65 million: 1. On basis of $65 million, Austria food figure of $36.3 excluding freight nearly corresponds with our yearly recommendation of 150 million.

2. Quarterly coal figure is slightly below original Austrian estimate. Reduction is so small does not materially affect coal supply plans.

3. Proposed figure of 1.2 for medical supplies has our concurrence since this allocation is necessary to assure uninterrupted flow.

4. Provision of one million for railroad ties represents urgent need for track maintenance material which takes precedence over all other transportation needs.

5. Agriculture figure is considered as minimum. Recommend one-half allocation be used for fertilizer, one-fourth fodder (most oil cake) about one-tenth for seeds, with remainder divided among pesticides, veterinary supplies and agricultural machinery. Endorse Austrian position that procurement of larger agriculture machinery should be postponed until next quarter plan.

6. Consider allocation of 5.1 for industry as below minimum requirement for attainment of recovery aspect and necessary export level. Present suspension of Export-Import Bank credits makes increase in allocation for industry most essential. Consider Austrian breakdown of approximately equal division between capital equipment and raw materials sound for first quarter.

7. Austrian figure for electrical equipment justifiable in view of orders already placed with bizone and current negotiations for such equipment now being carried on with bizone.

Following is our recommendation for allocation of additional dollars ten million: 1. Recommend allocation of 1.4 for food (including 0.2 for freight). Austrian recommended that two million be used for establishment of iron food reserve made up mostly of canned goods. We do not concur with iron food reserve but recommend the expenditure of 1.4 toward establishment of regular reserve in order to avoid continuing food crises that have developed in Austria because of lack of reserve.

2. Recommend allocation of 0.6 for tobacco. This is justifiable because this increase over existing low level will be an important morale factor and because of important revenue collect[ed] by Austrian Government from tobacco sales.

3. Increase of allocation to industry by 5.4 considered essential. We ask for priority for this item following food reserve and small amount for tobacco.

4. Allocation of additional two for Agriculture supplies be used equally for fertilizer and fodder.

5. Recommend that reduction of 0.6 from Austrian food figure be used for procurement of agricultural machinery and implements.

Strongly recommend first-quarter allocation be increased from $65 to $75 million. Without this increase amount of funds which can be used for recovery projects will be small and will delay the effective beginning of Austria’s recovery efforts. Any effort of decrease allocation of funds for food in order to increase industrial allocation would result in lowering of ration scale which in turn could result in political unrest, reduction in the rate of labor productivity and would support the present Soviet directed Communistic line that ECA assistance is inadequate and has as its purpose economic enslavement of participating countries. On the other hand, the recommended increase in first-quarter allocation would assure effective commencement of ECA in Austria.

Erhardt

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 663.119/5–1148: Telegram

[Document 761]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

top secret   us urgent Washington, May 11, 1948—7 p. m.

429. For Erhardt. On Export License Screening for Austria (Dept Army cable to Keyes 7 May1 ) following paper proposed by interdepartmental committee for Secy Commerce for purpose of Cabinet discussion. Sawyer, Marshall to examine matter together soonest.

“The Secy Comm requests Cabinet review of the policy to be followed in processing of export license application for Aus from a national security standpoint.

The Advisory Committee to the Secy of Comm. under the Second Decontrol Act has agreed that there are certain contingencies of which account must be taken in the interest of U.S. security: (1) to the extent that U.S. exports to Aus find their way to the Sov Zone they contribute to the economic strength of an area under Sov military control, (2) removals of facilities from Sov controlled plants to Eastern European countries can be made clandestinely, without payment, and in disregard of Aus regulations, and (3) the exposed geographical position of Aus would in the case of war make the Sov seizure of the entire country relatively easy.

On the other hand, U.S. foreign policy objectives require that Aus remain united and within the Western orbit. To be united Aus must be treated as an economic unit. While a certain portion of U.S. exports to Aus must go to the Sov Zone in the interest of a balanced development of the Austrian economy, the amount has been kept to a minimum by the Aus Govt because of the Sov occupation of this area. While unauthorized exports from the Sov Zone to the Eastern European countries are possible, and a Sov seizure of Aus cannot be excluded from consideration, the risks involved seem appreciably less than those which would be incurred if the Aust Govt received the impression that the U.S. Govt is discriminating against Aus as compared with other ERP countries. An Aus Govt which did not feel that it had the full confidence and support of the U.S. would be an easy target for Sov political attack. For foreign policy considerations, it is, therefore, essential that shipments to Aus should be licensed on the same basis as to other ERP countries.

It is recognized that a problem of leakage exists, not only in Aus but in other ‘Border’ countries. This problem may be serious in the case of a limited list of highly strategic items.

It is recommended, as a matter of policy, (1) for the purpose of export control, Aus should be treated like other ERP countries; (it is understood that until review in Aus is established as recommended in (3) below, more careful review in Wash is necessary); (2) that the security aspects of export control to all ERP countries, including Aus, be met without discrimination, by specifying a very limited list of items whose export to all ERP countries would be subject to review by interested Wash agencies; (3) informal, but effective screening of Aus programs shall be made in advance by the appropriate U.S. authorities in Austria in the light of security and foreign policy factors (This review should be made at top levels); (4) a continuous survey of the distribution of imports from the U.S. should be made in Aus by the appropriate authorities.

The question is raised as to whether export licenses for materials and equipt financed for Aus by the Export-Import Bank shall be issued on the basis of the screening given by the Export-Import Bank and other agencies concerned with this loan, or whether selected strategic items should be further screened by this Committee.”

For your info export controls vested in Commerce, therefore Secy Commerce has responsibility for establishing effective controls.

In case Austria as result pressure Dept other interested agencies agreed to informal screening industrial programs (as distinguished from individual export shipments) in theater rather than formal review Wash as believed here this method would avoid raising apprehension Austrians that they were to be afforded unequal treatment with other participating countries in ERP.

Not certain whether better for High Commissioner to undertake responsibility for security screening or to have joint action High Commissioner US Minister and Chief ECA Mission Austria. Request your comments.

State view is that while screening program would tend to channel new capital investment to Western zones, it shld not be used prevent most efficient economic development of Austria as a whole.

Marshall

1 Not found in Department files.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 863.5151/5–1348: Telegram

[Document 762]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

secret
us urgent Washington, May 13, 1948—5 p. m.

434. Eximbank credit agreement Sept 11, ’47, providing for financing of approved chemical raw materials and capital goods, stipulates beneficiary firms must be submitted Eximbank’s prior approval. Creditanstalt submitted list such firms, following four firms being located Sov Zone: (1) A.G. der Voeslauer Kammgarn–Fabrik, Bad Voeslau—b/Wien; 78% Aus, 11% US, 11% Brit ownership; Bleaching, dyeing and printing of cotton and wool fabrics: Credit of $100,000 ($86,000 for dyes, $14,000 miscellaneous chemicals).

(2) Guntramsdorfer Druckfabrik A.G. Wien XXIV, Guntrams-dorf; textile firm, bleaching, dyeing and printing of cotton, cellulose, semi-artificial and all-silk fabrics; Aus ownership; credit of $70,000 for dyes.

(3) AGA Sauerstoffwerke A.G. Wien, Main plant Schwechat, Sov Zone, other factories Florisdorf, Peggau, Asten, Innsbruck, Obereggendorf, Poitschach, Salzburg; Aus Corp with Swedish participation founded 1916; credit of $30,000 for miscellaneous chemicals plus $15,000 for capital equipment.

(4) Rich. Klinger A.G., Gumpoldskirchen; rubber factory, Aus owner; credit of $75,000 for general chemicals plus $10,000 for chemical production equipment. Since export licenses already granted Eximbank authorized issuance letters of credit for $53,000 for materials, leaving balance $22,000 for materials and $10,000 for equipment to be approved.

Depts position, communicated Eximbank, that it is undesirable completely exclude plants located Sov Zone from participating in limited Eximbank credits, Understood by all concerned since Sept ‘47 that small fraction chemical credits would go to Sov Zone plants. In view above and limited amounts involved (of which only $25,000 for capital equipment) Dept not inclined interpose objection above credits. However in view export license screening for Aus (Deptel 429 May 111 ) Dept urgent requests AmLegation’s comments re specific firms and materials above, esp from security standpoint. Since Eximbank holding up several letter-of-credit requests pending Depts opinion your comments required by May 17 latest.

Similar comments desired re Semperit Gummiwerke A.G. in Sov Zone. Eximbank previously approved credit of $625,000 for chemicals etc for manufacturing rubber goods. Aus now request allotting Semperit additional $575,000 for above purposes plus $173,152 for cord production machinery to be used in manufacturing tires. More than 50% already advanced against purchase this machinery by Aus. Eximbank informed that export licenses have been secured. Eximbank refers to AmLegation’s report 29, Mar 10,2 as suggesting additional machinery and equipment be delivered to Sov Zone plants in limited amounts. Aus advise Eximbank that cord production machinery urgently required to replace machinery borrowed from Italy (Pirelli) and since removed. Apparently questionable whether additional raw materials can be effectively utilized unless above machinery is replaced. Your comments above needed by May 17.

Marshall

1  Ante, p. 1396 [Pg. 1396 includes portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761].

2 Not found in Department files.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 663.119/5–1348: Telegram

[Document 763]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Vienna, May 13, 1948—6 p. m.

620. From Keyes and Erhardt. We are in full agreement with views of advisory committee to Secretary of Commerce in regard to export license screening for Austria (Deptel 429, May 111 ). It is of utmost importance from political point of view that Austrian Government not be given impression that Austria is being treated as other than full and equal partner in ERP, and from economic point of view that steps not be taken which would run counter to our efforts to preserve economic unity of Austria. We believe, on basis of experience with US aid programs here, that screening procedure outlined in telegram under reference meets those requirements and will be adequate to prevent any significant diversion of US supplies for benefit of Soviets.

We consider present cooperative arrangements between USFA and Legation will make possible prompt establishment of effective screening body here, to which chief ECA mission should be joined when appointed in order to permit proper coordination with ECA programs. It is believed that committee constituted by these three principal US representatives in Austria will be able to review in advance, from the security and strategic point of view, proposed ECA programs for Austria, Austrian applications for Eximbank and other loans and broad industrial programs of Austrian Government involving imports from US, in such a way as to obviate delay and rescreening at time of actual exports. No difficulty is anticipated in obtaining consent of Austrian Government to such review. Shipments of strategic materials from US not falling under any of above headings will be rare and can be referred to Vienna screening committee at time export license application is presented in case security problem appears to be involved.

Since materials and equipment contemplated under $13,000,000 Eximbank credit have already been very carefully screened in Vienna and by bank in Washington and since they are needed in Austria now for urgent industrial rehabilitation, it is recommended that these particular shipments be approved at once without further screening. [Keyes and Erhardt.]

Erhardt

1  Ante, p. 1396 [Pg. 1396 includes portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761].

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 863.5151/5–1548: Telegram

[Document 764]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, May 15, 1948—5 p. m.

630. Legation strongly supports Department’s position (Deptel 434, May 131 ) that it is undesirable completely exclude plants located in Soviet zone from participating in limited Eximbank credits. This considered important here both to minimize effect of Soviet charges that American aid is being denied to Soviet zone and to avoid increasing the risk of partition.

None of four firms listed first part Deptel 434 are under direct or indirect Soviet control, though 2 or more have in past been threatened with seizure. Unavoidably all have transacted some business with USIA or Soviet personnel, but volume of such business has been relatively small and generally within requirements of Austrian law, and compensation has always been received in money or goods.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Guntramsdorfer is reputable small firm about which no adverse information has been obtained re dealings with Soviets; it does not normally acquire raw materials but merely processes fabrics furnished by others. AGA Sauerstoffwerke is well managed efficient firm whose output is distributed equitably throughout Austria, no significant amount of output being diverted illegally to Soviets. Production figures of Klinger firm show all production is available to Austrian economy.

For all four of above cases Legation confirms Department’s judgment no objection from security standpoint should be made to contemplated exports.

As for Semperit, its two factories are both located in Soviet zone and were seized by Soviets in 1945 without any apparent legal basis. After holding plants several months and removing most of equipment Soviets turned firm back to Austrian Government which placed it under public administration. From time to time suspicions have been heard expressed that Soviets still control firm, but repeated careful investigations by G–2 and economics-finance divisions USACA have so far failed to uncover any real evidence to substantiate them. Instead investigations by G–2 and economics-finance divisions USACA have fact be considered German asset and that it is not under Soviet control or domination. Substantially all of output in 1947 is officially reported to have been distributed in accordance with orders of Trade Ministry. Legation has obtained from USACA industrial experts confirmation that cord production machinery is urgently required for manufacture of tires. Also well established that Austrian economy urgently needs substantial quantities of new tires for essential transportation. At best Semperit will be able to cover only most critical portion of requirements.

Legation therefore recommends approval soon as possible advances and exports to Semperit also under Eximbank agreement. In view of size of aggregate Eximbank credit for this firm and past suspicions mentioned above, this firm will be continuously watched with special care by screening committee being established here and in event any objectionable activities are discovered strong corrective action will be taken immediately. If necessary further advances and exports could be discontinued at once.

Erhardt

1  Ante, p. 1398 [Pg. 1398 includes portions of Doc. 761 and Doc. 762].

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State Vienna Legation Files: Lot 55F74: Box 3160: Telegram

[Document 765]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, June 3, 1948—6 p. m.

703. Vienna press has given considerable publicity to proposal put forward by General Béthouart May 28 in speech before France–Amerique Society in Paris concerning establishment of Austrian “neutrality statute” similar to that of Switzerland 1815 or Belgium 1837. In public comment Socialist Deputy Waldbrunner, whose earlier remarks reported Legtel 641 May 20,1 reiterated belief Austria “cannot take sides in disputes between groups of powers” and “we must categorically refuse adherence to any Eastern Bloc just as we definitely reject adherence to Western Bloc”.

As indicated Legtel 668 May 261 some influential Austrian Socialists, including Deutsch and Waldbrunner, share illusion of Swedish Social Democrats that countries such as Austria and Sweden, while collaborating economically with West in ERP and maintaining strongly Western orientation, can best find security by remaining formally aloof from East versus West alignment and by avoiding political and military ties with either group. Private conversations with Deutsch and Waldbrunner indicate, however, these Socialists are vague and uncertain concerning formula which could realize this objective and, when we suggested to them obvious dangers of this policy, tended to waver or at least to hedge in their adherence to it. They favor international guaranty of Austrian independence and integrity, whether or not in form of “neutrality statute”, but admit that guaranty would probably prove valueless unless reinforced by explicit willingness of Western powers to defend Austria with military force.

“Neutrality” attitude is by no means shared by all Austrian Socialists and has no effect on party’s vigorously anti-Communist domestic policy. Schaerf has not committed himself publicly on this issue but privately takes position that Austria, like Sweden, while not directly contiguous to Soviet Union, is sufficiently close so that any direct adherence to Western Bloc would be considered by Soviets as provocation. He argues Austrian Government must “pretend” to be neutral in East-West controversy in order to persuade Soviets to renew treaty negotiations but maintains this policy purely tactical as Austrian Socialists fully aware that future economic political and military support must come from West. He insists there will be no change in basic foreign policy of Socialists without consultation with US and expresses satisfaction with Grater’s handling of Austrian foreign policy.

Gruber and most People’s Party personalities take realistic line that Austrian security is dependent on closest possible political and military association with Western Europe. Although aware that Schaerf may have been somewhat disingenuous in explanation to us of Socialist line, we are nevertheless of opinion that he will not allow himself to be carried too far in neutrality manoeuvres and that leaders of both parties will be careful to maintain formal coalition unity on this issue, which is so clearly decisive for future of Austria. We will however continue in conversations with Socialist leaders to point out obvious hazards of neutrality policy.

Gruber has condemned Béthouart proposal to us in strongest terms and expressed hope Department might find some opportunity to indicate to French danger of throwingout ill-considered schemes of this kind. Certainly when one associates this proposal with recent approach on Carinthian plebiscite (Legtel 664 May 25)2 French policy toward Austria seems strangely capricious and uncoordinated. Conversation with French political representatives here indicates Béthouart proposal may not have been cleared with Quai d’Orsay and that it may have been designed primarily as insurance against Anschluss rather than with view to stabilizing Austrian position between Soviets and West.

Sent Department 703, repeated Paris 66, repeated Stockholm 8.

Erhardt

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed; in it Erhardt reported a French proposal to resolve the Carinthian border dispute with Yugoslavia by a plebiscite (740.00119 Control (Austria)/5–2548).

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State Vienna Legation Files: Lot 55F74: Box 3160

[Document 766]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, July 9, 1948.

No. 315

Subject: The Security of Austria.

Sir: I have the honor to submit the following statement of the problem of Austrian security. The statement comprises first, a general survey of present conditions and, second, a series of recommendations, for United States policy and action.

I. General Survey

A. Soviet Capabilities. Austrian security is at present largely conditioned by Soviet policy and any survey of this problem must therefore begin with an estimate of Soviet capabilities and intentions in Austria. It is impossible for the Soviets directly to take over the whole of Austria as long as the U.S., British and French forces remain in the Western Zones, without clear likelihood of provoking a general war. It would also be impossible for the Austrian Communists in their present state of impotence to take over even Eastern Austria without Soviet assistance. It might, however, be possible for the Soviets to partition the country and destroy the authority of the Austrian Government in the Eastern Zone by any one of a number of means, such as: (1) a sudden coup carried out openly by the Soviet occupation forces; (2) a sudden coup carried out ostensibly by the Austrian Communists and armed USIA factory guards supported covertly by the Soviets; (3) the gradual and progressive exercise of pressure, sabotage and intimidation leading eventually, if uninterrupted, to economic and political breakdown.

It should be emphasized that the Austrian Government unassisted would at present be unable to resist successfully any one of these three tactics and that, even when its police are adequately armed, it would be able to cope only with the second. It should also be emphasized that the mere presence of small Western forces in Vienna does not guarantee that any one of these tactics would or could be thwarted. Only a clear indication by the Western powers that they are determined to prevent, by economic and political means if possible but by force if necessary, the partition of Austria could give even reasonable assurance that the Soviets would not attempt to exploit their capabilities to this extreme.

On the other hand, it is always conceivable that the Soviets might for tactical reasons, turn to a policy of conciliation in Austria. They could abandon the Yugoslav claims and reopen the treaty negotiations. They could propose the withdrawal or reduction in size of the occupation armies. They could offer to turn back to Austria all or part of the USIA properties and reduce occupation costs. They could make available to Austria considerable quantities of foodstuffs from the satellites and from Russia herself. If they considered such dramatic steps unnecessary, they could still prolong for a further period of months their present policy of exerting oil the Austrian economy and Government a pressure which is harassing and costly but still bearable and inconclusive.

It would obviously be foolhardy to make, solely on the basis of conditions here, any confident prediction of future Soviet policy in Austria, since that policy will be determined largely by over-all considerations. A few comments can, however, be made. First, it seems unlikely that the Soviets would wish to incur serious risk of war over Austria, since it is doubtful that their position here is of such overriding importance to them and since there is reason to believe they expect the country, because of its geographical location and its historic associations with the Danubian states, to fall into their sphere eventually in any case. On the other hand, the projection deep into their sphere of a democratic country with an outspokenly anti-Communist Government and Western armed forces at its capital, must seem to them militarily dangerous and politically outrageous. Furthermore, it could hardly be expected that they would sit quietly by during the coming critical months and permit Austria, without serious opposition, to be integrated more and more closely into the Western European community.

A plausible estimate of Soviet intentions might therefore be: (1) that they would not continue for long the relatively passive policy which they have pursued recently, (2) that they would utilize their extensive capabilities to endeavor to oust the Austrian Government and Western forces from Eastern Austria without war and (3) that they would refrain from pressing their capabilities to the limit only if they were made clearly to understand in time that such action would involve grave risk of war. I believe these conclusions to be valid unless the Soviet Union has already decided either to launch a war in the near future or to follow an over-all policy of conciliation toward the West.

B. Political Conditions in Austria. The Austrian Government and the two political parties which compose it are strongly anti-Communist and pro-Western. They occasionally over-estimate their ability to deal bilaterally with the Russians (some of the Socialist leaders are still attracted to the idea of a “neutral” Austria unattached to either East or West) but they are showing courage and persistence in resisting Soviet pressure. The two parties dislike each other and will eventually revert to bitter hostility, but as long as the Soviet menace remains acute they seem likely to stand together on vital issues. The Communists are a negligible element and will remain so unless it should appear that all or part of the country is likely to be abandoned by the West, in which case they could recruit numerous opportunists. The only serious dangers the Government has to face are (1) Soviet aggression or (2) economic difficulties so grave that substantial numbers of the workers might desert the Socialists for the Communists. It must be emphasized, however, that the Austrian policy of courageous, even aggressive, resistance to Soviet pressure is based on the assumption that the Western powers have, at least for the present, assumed a tacit commitment to defend Austria against Soviet attack or subversion and to provide enough economic assistance to permit the reconstruction of its economy and a subsequent gradually rising standard of living. If this assumption should prove to be ill-founded, the Austrian Government would in an emergency be obliged either to make a right-about face toward the East or to flee to Salzburg.

C. Economic Conditions in Austria. The economic situation in Austria has improved considerably in the last year both as a result of the U.S. aid programs and of hard work by the Austrian people. That the situation is still far from stable, however, is demonstrated by the fact that the normal ration is still only 1800 calories, that shortfalls even on this inadequate ration led to serious unrest among the Vienna workers only three months ago, that deliveries of indigenous agricultural products are still far less than pre-war, that U.S. aid has therefore necessarily been primarily in the form of food so that too little assistance has been directed to essential industrial rehabilitation, and that as a result of this and other factors Austrian exports; are still well below the level necessary to make the country reasonably self-supporting. Real Austrian recovery is therefore still largely dependent upon the successful implementation of ERP (Public Law 472).

D. Western Capabilities and Intentions. It is apparent, if the above analysis is correct, that the maintenance of Austrian economic and political stability depends on the Western powers in at least three vital respects; (1) making clear to the Soviets in time that an attempt on their part to engineer a putsch would involve serious risk of war, (2) supporting the Austrian Government effectively in its resistance to more gradual pressures (e.g., the Marek case) which might in the long run result in subversion or partition, and (3) supplying economic aid on scale sufficient to permit a progressive economic recovery and a decent standard of living. Unless the Western powers, and primarily the U.S., are prepared to follow through on these three points, Austria will continue to be one of the “soft spots” of Europe and Eastern Austria will be open to sudden absorption into the Soviet sphere.

II. Recommendations for United States Policy and Action

A. Maintenance of Political Stability.

1. Take a firm position with leaders of both major parties that the coalition must be maintained.

2. Assist in arming and training the Austrian police. If the Austrian police are prepared to cope with disorders which are not openly supported by the Soviets, the necessity for direct intervention by Western forces will be correspondingly reduced. At the same time discreet support should be given to Austrian preparations for organizing an army in order that the army might be quickly brought into existence in case of termination of the occupation.

3. In accordance with the provisions of the Control Agreement continue to turn over to the Austrian Government all possible functions and authority and to reduce the burdens of occupation. Implementation of this policy is particularly necessary in view of the prolongation of the occupation and the Austrian Government’s efforts to demonstrate to its people that the Western powers are remaining not as conquerors but as protectors of the country.

B. Maintenance of Economic Stability.

4. Carry out the ERP programs in Austria in such a way that the Austrian economy will be made more self-sustaining, Austria will be knit more firmly into the economy of Western Europe and the standard of living will be raised. In order to attain these objectives it is necessary (1) that ERP allocations be adequate, (2) that they contain sufficient provision for industrial and agricultural rehabilitation as distinct from relief supplies, (3) that the special schilling deposits under ERP be utilized for capital purposes rather than be permitted to become a serious fiscal or deflationary burden on the economy, (4) that special efforts be made to develop Austria’s economic relations with OEEC countries, particularly her immediate neighbors—Trizone Germany and Italy.

C. Neutralization of Soviet Capabilities.

5. Observe the Control Agreement and support the Allied Council as a continuing basis for whatever degree of quadripartite cooperation remains. The only reservation which this recommendation requires is that we do not permit the Soviets, through their violation and our observance of the Control Agreement, substantially to improve their position here at our or Austrian expense.

6. Neutralize insofar as possible Soviet economic advantages in Austria (1) by implementing the “strategic control plan” so that there will be available in or near Austria from sources under our control sufficient quantities of key commodities, particularly oil and coal, to check any Soviet effort to blackmail the Austrian Government by cutting off supplies of these commodities, (2) by taking all reasonable precautions that imports from the United States and from elsewhere under ERP are denied USIA industries except where limited amounts of such imports may be needed to assure the supply of vital commodities to the Austrian market, (3) by aiding the Austrians to resist Soviet efforts to remove alleged German assets and war booty from Austria, (4) by observing closely economic arrangements between Austria and the satellites in order to see to it that, while trade with the East particularly in foodstuffs is expanded, Austria does not become wholly dependent on one or more of these countries for any essential supplies.

7. Display toward the Soviets in Vienna absolute firmness on all major issues affecting the position of the Western powers in Austria, the stability of the Austrian Government and the integrity of the country. Only by responding to Soviet probing and pressure with firmness and assurance can we hope to convince them that aggression in Austria involves risk of war and therefore, in all probability, is not worth the candle. However, we should explore all possible alternatives to a stalemate. For examples: Should the Soviets interfere with passenger and freight transport between Western Austria and Vienna, there is a possibility we could operate with Austrian railroads and through Austrian channels. Should the Soviets insist on inspections of military trains there is the British precedent here which accepts it since their trains also carry Austrian civilian passengers. Such compromises should, nevertheless, be a last resort since there is a stronger legal basis, i.e., the Control Agreement and Allied Council decisions for our present policy than exists in Germany.

8. Seize every opportunity to bind Austria more closely, economically, politically and militarily, to the Western European community. As long as Austria is an isolated and exposed fragment projecting into the Soviet sphere, only continued occupation by Western forces and an explicit commitment by the West to maintain its position in Austria will afford even temporary security. Long-term security, in the absence of occupation forces, can only be achieved by association of Austria with Western Europe sufficiently close and concrete to make it apparent that an attack on Austria is an attack on the whole body of Europe. Meanwhile we should explore and, if possible develop, political warfare techniques which will halt Soviet tactics of infiltration and prevent Communists from taking over from inside. (There is an identity of educational and language background of many Austrian Communists with Communists in the satellite states of Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Yugoslavia, reaching back to the Habsburgs. Fortunately, it works both ways. If Tito was educated in Vienna and speaks the Viennese dialect, De Gasperi was once a member of the Austrian Parliament and Vice Chancellor Sehaerf served in the Yugoslav Army.)

9. When progress has been made in implementation of the policies outlined above (especially 2, 4 and 8) to afford a reasonable guarantee of Austrian security, reopen the Austrian treaty negotiations with a view to the evacuation of Eastern Austria by the Soviet Army.

Respectfully yours,

John G. Erhardt

The Under Secretary of State (Lovett) to the Administrator of the Economic Cooperation Administration (Hoffman) 840.50 Recovery/8–2348

[Document 767]

The Under Secretary of State (Lovett) to the Administrator of the Economic Cooperation Administration (Hoffman)

top secret Washington, August 23, 1948.

My Dear Mr. Hoffman : I should like to call to your attention the problems raised by the dependence of the Austrian economy for certain basic industrial items on sources of supply within Austria which are controlled by the Soviet Union. The most important of these commodities are petroleum products. Precautionary measures would appear necessary to prevent the Soviet Union taking advantage of this situation and endangering the success of the European Recovery Program as it applies to Austria.

In estimating the Austrian import requirements under the European Recovery Program it was assumed that certain indigenous production from the eastern zone in Austria would continue to be available to the Austrian economy. However, it should be recognized that Austria is unique among the ERP beneficiaries in that certain important fractions of its indigenous supplies are controlled by the Soviet occupation forces. Since it is the expressed intention of the Soviet Union to sabotage the implementation of the European Recovery Program, the possibility that important supplies may be withheld from the Austrian economy must be carefully considered. Account must also be taken of the possibility that the Soviet Union might seek to extort concessions from Austria in the form of excessively large portions of its limited supplies of raw materials or semi-finished goods as a consideration for delivery by Soviet-controlled sources of other essential supplies.

Accordingly, in the case of the more critical items, the withdrawal of which by the Soviets would result in an immediate detrimental effect on Austrian recovery, it would seem desirable to provide for emergency commodity reserves covering 60 to 90 days requirements. The availability of a reserve would mitigate the immediate effects of such a withdrawal, and afford an opportunity to develop alternative sources of supply. In view of the primary interest of the ECA in this matter it is, therefore, recommended that the ECA take steps to assure the establishment of such a reserve. Preliminary estimates by officers of the Department and the Department of the Army indicate that the funds necessary for this purpose would amount to approximately $5,400,000 for a 90 day reserve of the more highly critical items.

It is essential not to disclose the fact to the Austrian Government or its representatives that such a plan is under consideration. If it should be decided to create such a reserve, its existence should not be revealed in order to avoid Austrian pressure for releases from these reserves.

This letter has the concurrence of the Department of the Army and Officers of the Department and the Department of the Army will be available for consultation at your earliest convenience regarding the details of the problem, and for such assistance as may be necessary in devising a plan for its solution.

Faithfully yours,

Robert A. Lovett

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 663.6531/9–1648: Telegram

[Document 768]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

secret Washington, September 23, 1948—7 p. m.

777. Ur 1078 Sep 16 rptd Rome 63.1 Customs union bet Italy and Austria proposed by Sforza or inclusion Austria in union several Western states is considered desirable long-range objective but specific and immediate public steps toward this end regarded as dangerous course for Austria. Such action at present would doubtlessly postpone conclusion treaty by arousing Soviet fears and suspicions as to Austria’s future international position particularly in connection with its -membership in OEEC and responsibilities under EC Agreement. If Austria attempted to enter customs union during military occupation it would lack full freedom of action to deal with other members union. Soviets would always be in position to obstruct or nullify, at least with respect Austrian areas under their jurisdiction, implementation arrangements entailed by successful operation of union. To extent this occurred and Western areas observed such arrangements outcome would make for division Austria.

We support, however, Austrian and Italian efforts strengthen mutual economic and cultural ties and otherwise progressively develop a cordial understanding bet equal partners which may serve as basis for future customs union and close political association. Agreement Sep 5, 1946 on South Tyrol (Annex IV Italian Treaty) and supplementary arrangements for putting it into effect welcomed as encouraging move this direction. This ultimate goal appears of such importance it would not be advantage to either country to jeopardize its attainment by uncompromising stand on problems concerned with South Tyrol, restitution, trade or in other fields economic collaboration.

Vienna and Rome may convey FonOff in their discretion substance these views as occasion warrants and former should encourage Gruber to make projected visit to Rome.

Lovett

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 840.811/10–748: Telegram

[Document 769]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

secret Washington, November 5, 1948—7 p. m.

858. Urtel 1134 Oct 7.1 Authority hereby given negotiate exit Austrian or German vessels US Zone eastward and for entry eastern vessels US Zone in individual cases where overall advantages outweigh in agreement with USFA, ECA, Legation, and OMGUS where German vessels or use of German Danube involved. Fundamental principle of desirability of reciprocal bilateral agreements remains. Understood authority will be used only in exceptional cases where agreement exists American agencies concerned to advantages for Austrian economy or ECA purposes. Continued consultation and agreement Austrian Govt highly desirable without granting it veto power. Army cabling USFA OMGUS.

Desire Austrian vessels participate but should external assets issue present complications US would not wish delay possibility traffic resumption pending settlement Austrian treaty if other vessels available negotiating purposes.

Considerable care should be exercised that no action be taken involving actual or implied recognition validity Danube Convention adopted Aug. 18, 19482 Belgrade or any Commission or body created under it as US expressed policy remains recognition of continued validity 1921 convention.3

Lovett

1 Not printed.

2 For the text of this Convention see United Nations Treaty Series, vol. xxxiii, pp. 181–225.

3 For the text of the 1921 Convention see League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. xxvi, pp. 175–199 or Department of State, Documents and State Papers, vol. i, no. 4 (July 1948), pp. 263–268.

D. The problems of quadripartite control of occupied AustriaD. The problems of quadripartite control of occupied Austria

[770] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, January 17, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Council/1–1748: Telegram

[771] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, January 17, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/1–1748: Telegram

[772] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, March 24, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/3–2448: Telegram

[773] The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay)

Vienna, April 10, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/4–1048: Telegram

[774] The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, April 14, 1948—noon.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/4–1448: Telegram

[775] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, April 14, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–1448: Telegram

[776] The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, April 15, 1948—8 p. m.

Vienna Legation Files: Lot 54F57: Box 565: Telegram

[777] The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Vienna, April 22, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/4–2248: Telegram

[778] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, May 15, 1948—11 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/5–1548: Telegram

[779] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, May 20, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/5–2048: Telegram

[780] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, May 25, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/5–2548: Telegram

[781] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, June 17, 1948—11 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/6–1748: Telegram

[782] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, June 25, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/6–2348: Telegram

[783] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, June 25, 1948—8 p. m.

740–00119 Control (Austria)/6–2548: Telegram

[784] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, June 30, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/6–3048: Telegram

[785] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, July 17, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/7–1748: Telegram

[786] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, July 20, 1948—noon.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/7–2048: Telegram

[787] The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, July 20, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/7–2048: Telegram

[788] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, July 20, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/7–2048: Telegram

[789] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, August 19, 1948—10 a. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/8–1948: Telegram

[790] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, August 20, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/8–2048: Telegram

[791] The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, August 31, 1948—1 p. m.

740:00119 Control (Austria)/8–3148: Telegram

[792] The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, September 13, 1948.

811.79663/9–1348: Telegram

[793] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, October 4, 1948.

Vienna Legation Files: Lot 55F74: Box 3161

[794] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, October 20, 1948.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2048: Airgram

[795] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, October 29, 1948.

Vienna Legation Files: Lot 55 F 74: Box 3161: Airgram

[796] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, November 12, 1948—7 p. m.

861.20263/11–1248: Telegram

[797] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, November 17, 1948—noon.

863.77/11–1748: Telegram

[798] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, December 8, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/12–848: Telegram

[799] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, December 19, 1948—2 p. m.

740.0011 EW (Peace)/12–1948: Telegram

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/1–1748: Telegram

[Document 770]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, January 17, 1948—3 p. m.

60. Allied Council meeting January 16. No agreement on any subject. US element introduced paper on turn over of additional responsibilities to Austrian Government. Soviets (a) attempted to place Allied Council on record as approving or disapproving changes in Austrian Government, (b) issued the expected blast against Austrian Government for laxness in denazification (coupled with this was attack against three other elements for alleged indulgence of such Austrian laxness), (c) read lengthy statement, reported more fully by USFA, claiming that western allies systematically block demilitarization of western zones “in order to transform western Austria into military base of Anglo-American imperialism.”

Soviet statements were replete with misstatements of fact and deliberately strong language. On denazification Soviets repeated distortions which had only few minutes before been factually refuted by Winterton. Tenor and timing of demilitarization statement make it seem likely it was prepared by or at least specifically authorized by Moscow. Attack against western allies for building up “war potential” of their zones closely parallels propaganda line used in Germany which so far has not been major Soviet topic here.

Some long range significance also adheres to Soviet stand on changes in Austrian Government. Issue was reply to letter of Chancellor announcing appointment of Migsch as Minister of Power, US element consistently took position changes in Austrian Government do not require Council approval but are administrative measures which stand-unless unanimously disapproved by Council. Although in 1945 Council did specifically approve Cabinet list, US took position that February 1947 appointment of Altenberger constituted best precedent. At that time Council merely noted change in government.

Other significant items of agenda were autobahnen and Austrian budget, which are fully reported in USFA telegram,1 as is reception accorded the US proposal for increased responsibilities of Austrian Government.

Erhardt

1 Not printed.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/1–1748: Telegram

[Document 771]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, January 17, 1948—4 p. m.

61. In order that Department may have promptly comprehensive picture of steps taken by High Commission and Legation to adjust US policy in Austria to situation created by breakdown of CFM conference most important of these steps are listed below in spite of fact that majority are being reported separately: 1. Presentation to AC December 16 of proposal for turning over to Austrian Government authority over wide series of functions in which its competence has hitherto been restricted.

2. Insistence by High Commissioner in interview with Chancellor that Austrian Government consult US Government before acquiescing in Soviet unilateral action which affects sovereignty or general economic position of Austria.

3. Commencement of implementation of economic plan foreshadowed in Legation’s despatch No. 3412 of September 181 and USFA’s strategic survey of October 1947.1

4. Establishment of integrated USFA-Legation organization to lay groundwork for ERP in Austria and to insure that implementation of ERP here is correlated with other US objectives, such as that referred to under three above.

5. Initiation, with assistance of Beattie and Oeschner, of intensified campaign for presentation of US views in press and other media of publicity in Austria.

Legation is convinced all these steps will further attainment of US objectives in Austria. As to their possible effect on Soviets, following considerations are submitted.

Basic decision of US to maintain troops in Austria until treaty is concluded and to oppose treaty terms dangerous to Austrian sovereignty has necessarily conditioned Soviet policy here and prevented absorption of Austria into Soviet sphere. On other hand Legation is not of the opinion that less basic US attitudes in Austria have hitherto modified direction of Soviet policy here. We hope, however, that cumulative effect of steps listed above may be to convince Soviets that prolongation of present situation will bring them neither economic nor political profit. While it is conceivable that such conviction might induce Soviets to proceed to more drastic action such as partition, we are inclined to view it may persuade them that agreement on treaty would be more likely than present impasse to produce slackening of US interest in Austria which Soviets must desire.

Leading Austrian officials hope that Soviet attitude toward early conclusion of treaty will be made clear when Soviet proposal on German assets is presented to GEM deputies. Communist Party spokesmen are stressing Soviet interest in early treaty (Legtel 39 of January 132 ) and unverified rumors are circulating here that draft of reasonable and acceptable Soviet proposals has already been submitted to Austrian Communist Party. While it is conceivable that Soviets may already desire early Austrian settlement, Legation believes vigorous implementation steps listed above is best means of stimulating this desire.

Legation’s despatch No. 11 of January 83 sent by air pouch January 14 sets forth in detail Legation’s estimate of Soviet attitude toward partition of Austria (Deptel 24, January 142 ) and our conviction that US should continue to support Austrian unity. Recurrent Communist propaganda here accusing US of intending to partition can be interpreted either as (1) expression of genuine apprehension or (2) laying blame on US for action Soviets propose to take. Soviets are so clearly committed to “sovereign and independent Austria” to which they constantly refer in quadripartite discussions here, that they would presumably feel obliged to shift to US onus for any action which would destroy that sovereignty and independence. Our present judgment on basis of evidence available here, however, is that Soviets do not desire to partition Austria at this time and that their future policy in regard to this question will be determined more by their overall international relations than by developments in Austria itself.

Erhardt

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed; it indicated that local reports tended to refute possibility of partition, but Legation Vienna could not answer for the wider aspects of Soviet policy (740.00119 Control (Austria)/1–848).

2 Not printed.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/3–2448: Telegram

[Document 772]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, March 24, 1948—4 p. m.

366. In view anticipated breakdown Austrian treaty negotiations outstanding question here becomes that of Soviet intentions thereafter. Their capabilities, excluding for present two extremes of armed action against western forces in Austria or sharp shift toward conciliation would seem to offer them choice of following alternatives: (1) continuation and intensification of strategy pursued prior to opening of London negotiations or (2) new strategy aimed at bringing about by one means or other early partition of Austria.

1. As Department is aware Soviets have for some time followed here strategy whereunder obstacles were placed in way of economic recovery of Austria, loot drained away to east and propaganda directed against Austrian Government and western Allies, but no drastic step taken to alter balance of political forces in Austria. This strategy presumably had two objectives: (a) to provide economic benefits to Soviets and (b) to build up Communist strength victory in country as a whole. There have been several indications in recent months that Soviets consider this strategy has reached end its usefulness. Soviet treaty proposals may have been effort to shift attack by bringing about evacuation occupation forces and thereby facilitating application Czech technique to Austria. That effort having failed it seems doubtful Soviets will be satisfied for more than brief period to return to previous inconclusive strategy which has ceased to pay dividends.

2. Only feasible alternative excluding extremes mentioned in first paragraph above would appear to be strategy aimed at consolidation Soviet position in eastern Austria, though considerable choice is open as to both means and tempo. a. First possibility would be direct action by Soviet military authorities toward tightening controls over economic provincial and local government and police administration of eastern zone, destroying authority of Austrian Government in that zone and in Vienna and perhaps ending quadripartite cooperation by withdrawing from AC. This strategy would have disadvantage from Russian point of view that it would require open initiative by Soviets rather than by indigenous “democratic” elements and would enhance difficulty of laying blame for partition on western powers.

b. Second possibility would be action by Austrian Communists supported more or less covertly by Soviets, to spread confusion and disorder in eastern zone and Vienna and ultimately so harass and intimidate Austrian Government that it would withdraw to Salzburg. This strategy would have disadvantage from Soviet point of view that, if western powers provide necessary assistance to Austrian Government weak Austrian Communists might be unable to carry through attack successfully without open Soviet support.

c. Legation inclined to consider most likely Soviet strategy for immediate future, commencing with close of London negotiations to be one which involves preparatory and exploratory steps along lines of both 2 a and b, proceeding at rapidly accelerated rate if effective counteraction does not emerge. While probability seems to favor indecisive probing for present it must be recognized that if Soviets determine at all cost to carry strategy to logical conclusion they could probably bring about de facto partition of country in relatively short time.

In our view most effective short term US action to meet these eventualities would be along lines of three points listed in concluding paragraph of Legtel 343, March 19:1 (1) prompt establishment of food reserve in Vienna to enable US element to assist Socialists in retaining control of trade unions; (2) distribution of arms, including automatic weapons, to Austrian police and perhaps later to other Austrian units (this matter is being currently considered by USFA); (3) issuance of joint statement by three western powers at or shortly after close of London negotiations stating unequivocally that they will remain in Austria until satisfactory treaty is concluded and that they will in meantime take whatever steps may prove necessary to assist Austrian Government in preserving independence sovereignty and unity of country. For longer term we urge every possible step to initiate Austria firmly into all phases of Western European Union.

Sent Department 366; repeated London USDel 74.

Erhardt

1 Not printed.

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay) 740.00119 Control (Austria)/4–1048: Telegram

[Document 773]

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the United States Military Governor for Germany (Clay)1

top secret Vienna, April 10, 1948.

P–1532. Reourad P–1520.2 It is believed that Soviets will soon implement their requirement of demanding identification documents in addition to the regular grey pass when crossing the demarcation line into or leaving the Soviet zone of Austria.

In the event that our military train (Mozart) is stopped the following action will be taken. Entry into train by Soviet representatives will be denied. Passengers will not be permitted to be removed from the train. AGO identification cards will not be shown to Soviet authorities by personnel on military trains. Upon request, the Soviet authorities will be furnished with a list of passengers, copies of official travel orders, a manifest of supplies being transported and the regular Allied Council grey pass for each person on the train. If permission to proceed under these conditions is denied the train will be returned to an area under the United States control land vigorous protest against Soviet action will be made in the Allied Council.

Charges will include: Violation of the agreement between the four governments and covering recommendations thereto prepared by the European Advisory Commission 9 July, 1945; violation of the protocol of the meeting of the Chiefs of Staff of the Commanders-in-Chief, Allied Forces, Austria, 25 July, 1945; violation of agreement of the Executive Committee regarding control of travel of representatives of Allied Forces of Occupation, 25 September, 1945; and violation of unwritten understanding that the United States military train Mozart would not be interfered with and that documentation would consist only of the list of cars and the number of passengers by car and by category. The Mozart has not been interfered with since February 1947. Prior to that time it was boarded and searched, under protest, on a few occasions.

If Mozart ceases to operate, exit from Vienna is possible but difficult by civilian trains rigidly controlled land inspected by Soviet. Grey pass and identification documents are required. Travel by automobile requires grey pass and identification documents. Military air travel is strictly limited at present to contact flying due to the loss of the radio range facilities. We do not have positive control of our airport which is 15 miles inside Soviet territory. Soviets could prevent passage to and from the airport at any time if they are ready to violate the agreement made by the European Advisory Commission 9 July, 1945.

The British position at the moment is different from our own. Their train has habitually been boarded and grey passes demanded. Recently passports for civilians have been demanded and shown. British will object to furnishing individual identification documents of military personnel in uniform under any category of travel. In the case of British train, if Soviets insist on identification of the military, they will return it to an area under British control.

The French have no train and do not object to furnishing individual identification for either military or civilian personnel.

I will keep you informed as situation develops. Pol Ad concurs.

[ Keyes ]

1 The JCS copy of this telegram indicates that it was a personal message from General Keyes as Commanding General of U.S. Forces in Austria to General Clay as Commander in Chief of U.S. Forces in Europe. It was repeated for information to the Department of the Army with the request that it be passed to the Department of State and to the Military Attaché in London for the U.S. Delegation.

2 Not printed.

The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/4–1448: Telegram

[Document 774]

The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent
niact Vienna, April 14, 1948—noon.

476. From Keyes and Yost. We consider that Soviets might be less likely to carry increasing restrictions on movements of allied personnel in Austria to extremes which they have in Germany if US deputy in London were able within next day or two to suggest to Soviet representative that imposition of such restrictions at this time is not conducive to favorable progress of treaty negotiations. He might point out that should Soviets carry restrictions to lengths which they have in Germany, such action might well be taken to indicate an intention to partition Austria, Such intention would, of course, render useless negotiations on treaty.

In view of apparent Soviet eagerness to keep treaty negotiations alive and even to reach agreement, there would seem to be reason to believe that such an expression of opinion by US might help to prevent Soviets from pushing to extremes restrictions on Allied movements here.

We would appreciate having Departments and US delegation’s reaction to this suggestion. Alternatively approach to Soviets might be through diplomatic channels in Washington or Moscow but consider action should be taken promptly if it is to achieve purpose. We are considering statement along these lines if and when question of travel restrictions comes before Allied Council possibly at April 16 meeting but believe it would be even more effective if made in London or through diplomatic channels.

Sent Department 476, repeated London USDel 111. [Keyes and Yost.]

Yost

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 740.00119 Council/4–1448: Telegram

[Document 775]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

top secret   us urgent Washington, April 14, 1948—4 p. m.

344. Keyes and Yost Eyes Only. For consideration here in light comments Vienna, Berlin and Moscow, Dept is telegraphing you draft communication1 for possible presentation Moscow (urtel 476 Apr 142 ). In Berlin greatest Soviet pressure is against US whereas it appears from Vienna Situation Report No. 42 primary pressure Vienna at present time is upon Brit. US expects Brit support re Berlin and will foe willing to furnish them our support re Vienna. Consequently we feel initiative in any protest re Vienna should come from Brit whom we should be ready to back up. Unless Brit or USDel strongly favor action, we question desirability raising matter transit rights in London treaty discussions at present time or US taking lead in Allied Council.

Sent Vienna as 344; rptd London as 1312 Ausdel 15 for Reber Eyes Only.

Lovett

1 Transmitted in telegram 402, April 14, to Moscow, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/4–1448). For the text of this draft, see telegram 1423, April 22, to London, p. 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], and footnotes thereto.

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State Vienna Legation Files: Lot 54F57: Box 565: Telegram

[Document 776]

The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent
niact Vienna, April 15, 1948—8 p. m.

485. From Keyes and Yost. We strongly endorse proposed joint approach to Moscow concerning Berlin and Vienna situation (Department’s 345 April 141 ). We consider approach should be made at earliest possible moment in hope that it may prevent Soviets from imposing further restrictive measures which, once taken, they might find difficult to withdraw.

Our only suggestions re text of communication aré following: (1) that in view of increasing Soviet pressure here, Vienna be associated with Berlin in opening sentence and throughout text wherever appropriate, rather than being mentioned only in penultimate paragraph; (2) that a new penultimate paragraph be added referring to guarantee contained in 1945 EAC Agreement of “free and unimpeded access” from Vienna to Allied airdromes at Tulln and Schwechat, since separation of these airdromes from Vienna zones of occupation represents vital communications factor which does not obtain in Berlin. Recently imposed Soviet restriction on traffic to and from these airdromes emphasizes importance of our dealing with this point immediately.

Sent Department 485, repeated Berlin 31, Moscow 13. [Keyes and Yost.]

Yost

1 Not printed; see telegram 1423, April 22, to London, p. 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], and footnotes thereto for the text of the note which it transmitted.

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff 740.00119 Control (Austria)/4–2248: Telegram

[Document 777]

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

top secret
priority Vienna, April 22, 1948.

P–1621. From USFA signed Keyes for action to JCS pass to State from Keyes info to CINCEUR, USDel London. Reference recent Soviet restrictions on travel in Austria, the following is submitted.

A. Following letter received by United States Deputy Commissioner from Soviet Deputy Commissioner: “In order to supplement our conversation which took place on 7 April, 1948, I can inform you of the below enumerated rules regulating the traffic of the military and civilian nationals of the powers of occupation, on the routes Vienna-Enns, Vienna-Semmering and Vienna-Tulln airfield.

“1. All civilians, nationals of the powers of occupation, proceeding across the line of demarcation at Enns and Semmering and also on the route Vienna-Tulln airfield, must present the ‘grey’ allied pass and an identification document proving that the allied grey pass was issued to the very person presenting it.

“2. All military personnel proceeding through Enns and Semmering and also to the Tulln airfield, whether individually or as a group formation, will be allowed to proceed as before, upon presentation by them of the ‘grey’ allied pass.

“3. The procedure applicable to the movement of the United States military trains, remains unchanged.”

This letter has the effect of: (1) Removing requirement of additional identification other than grey pass for military on Linz-Vienna road; (2) leaves status of Mozart “as is”; (3) requires grey pass for military personnel traveling to and from Tulln airfield. Net effect is that only additional requirement imposed on United States is the use by all personnel of grey pass for travel to and from airfield.

United States position: (1) Our stand is that “free and unimpeded access” to the airdromes as given us by paragraph 5 of the EAC is legally sound and defensible; that this agreement was made at top governmental level, and is not subject to change or restriction by Allied Commission or any other agency below that level. (2) We feel that the legal justification will be insufficient to continue operation of Tulln airdrome if and when Soviets decide to demand grey passes and bar passage to airdrome without such passes. The implications here are loss of Pan American terminus Vienna and loss air support United States garrison Vienna.

Following courses of action are open to us if road block again put in operation: (a) Adhere, in and out of Allied Council, to our stand that EAC agreement grants free and unimpeded access for the armed forces and officials of United States element and refuse to permit showing of grey pass. In such event we will, if Soviets persist on enforcing their regulations, most probably lose the use of Tulln airdrome. This will cut Vienna off by air except for L–5 liaison aircraft. (b) Continue protest in Allied Council but authorize use of identification paper other than grey pass to military personnel and United States civilian employees traveling to and from Tulln; require other civilians to show passports, (c) During the period of protest in the Allied Council, in conjunction with the British, to keep Tulln airdrome operational by furnishing grey pass to the minimum essential military personnel.

Our stand will be that the EAC agreement gave us free and unimpeded access to the Tulln airport for our armed forces and officials of the United States element. We will interpret this to mean that for members of the armed forces the uniform will be sufficient identification. For military or civilian employees of the United States element, if moving in a government vehicle, the markings on the vehicle itself or possibly a trip ticket would be sufficient identification. For other personnel a passport or other means of identification may be demanded by Soviet.

I am continuing correspondence with the Soviet High Commissioner on this matter.

For your information, the following (are the positions, as we understand them, of the other elements: Soviet position: Soviet demands for passes on the roads to the airdromes are based on the principle of the inherent right of each zone commander to act unilaterally in matters involving security. Whether Soviet yield or not is dependent on overall policy or instructions from above. British position: I have talked with British High Commissioner land their position is essentially the same as ours. British are adamant that their military personnel will not show any means of identification traveling to and from Schwechat airfield. Officials in civilian clothes will show British identification papers on demand. They propose to send their civil servants in special car or bus and also refuse to allow personnel in charge of transportation to carry grey pass though they will allow individual civil servants to show any other means of identification they may have in their possession. Foreigners and other British nationals will show only passports. British base their decision on grounds that paragraph 5 of EAC agreement gives their armed forces and officials “free and unimpeded access” to Schwechat airfield; that this agreement made at top governmental level is not subject to change, ratification or restriction by Allied Commission or other agency below that level. French position: Maintains that paragraph 5 of the EAC grants free and unimpeded access to their airdromes. PolAd concurs.

[ Keyes ]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/5–1548: Telegram

[Document 778]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, May 15, 1948—11 a. m.

627. It is unmistakable that Soviet attitude has improved during last three weeks. Travel restrictions imposed early April have been either abandoned or are not being enforced. As previously reported, Soviet behavior at meetings of AC and subsidiary bodies has been notably less aggressive and there has been unusual reluctance to press or exploit issues which normally would have been subject of bitter attacks on western powers, In conversation between US and Soviet deputy high commissioners reported USFA cable P–1784 May 13,1 Zheltov was especially friendly. His reference to Smith-Molotov note exchange and desirability of extending to Vienna cooperative attitude therein expressed was particularly interesting.2

We are not yet [in] position to judge whether this sudden shift is purely local development or reflects broader policy. It may be that Soviets, still eager to reach agreement on Austrian treaty, decided on basis of statements in Vienna and Washington that their high pressure tactics here might jeopardize that agreement. On other hand prompt reference to Smith-Molotov notes by Zheltov who is top Soviet political figure in Austria may indicate that shift in strategy here is carefully coordinated part of broader program. Even in latter case, however, there would certainly be no evidence here that shift, if it has occurred, involves slightest relinquishment of any important Soviet objective or indicates more than possible intention to pursue those objectives by slightly less provocative means.

Sent Department 627; repeated London for USDel 153; Moscow 19

Erhardt

1 Not printed.

2 The Smith-Molotov notes are published in the Department of State Bulletin, May 23, 1948, pp. 679–683.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/5–2048: Telegram

[Document 779]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, May 20, 1948—2 p. m.

639. Austrian Government today delivered formal protest to Allied Council over action of Council May 14 in approving 600 million schilling occupation costs for year 1948, to be divided equally among four occupying powers. This sum amounts to 10.50% of Austrian budget though since US share is not paid actual percentage is smaller.1 Austrian diplomatic representatives being instructed to deliver similar protest directly to governments of four occupying powers. Note to Council also request moratorium on payments pending conclusion of treaty discussions.

Legation informed that government considers occupation costs excellent issue to dramatize Austria’s present position and demonstrate to Austrian public zeal of government in face of threatened breakdown of treaty negotiations. Government was apparently taken by surprise by action of Council in prescribing occupation costs for whole year rather than single quarter and Gruber informs us that considerable irritation was manifested at Cabinet meeting yesterday over failure of Western Allies to “consult” Austrian Government before taking action (Austrians have never been consulted in past on fixing of occupation costs).

In letter to me May 152 Gruber expresses deep concern of government over decision which involves payment of 150 million schillings to Soviets. He states US-Austrian agreement on occupation costs was one of political highlights of last year and “Austria, therefore, expected the US in view of their strong position to oppose energetically any reassessment of occupation costs”. Letter continues “fact that such a decision should have been taken without previously consulting competent Austrian author[ities] could easily lead the Austrian people to believe that also in the Western countries the ideas still persist which originally governed the occupation and that they go on considering themselves as a military authority with regard to Austria. There are various other signs in support of this view which I will eventually deal with later on”. Gruber adds “May I suggest that the necessity will arise soon for the Austrian Government and the Western powers to define the intentions of the occupation policy allowing for the march of time and taking especially into due consideration the new international situation created through Austria’s participation in the organization of the 16 nations.”

As Department is aware both British and French have previously made clear their inability to forego occupation costs and US has, therefore, not been in position to support Austrian Government on this issue. Moreover, British have insisted and we have concurred that four occupying powers should each receive equal share of total prescribed costs. Sum approved by Allied Council was compromise between higher Soviet and lower US figure and agreement was reached only after prolonged negotiations commencing last January among four high commissioners.

Sent Department 639, repeated London USDel 155.

Erhardt

1 Documentation on the U.S. renunciation of its share of the occupation costs on June 21, 1947, is printed in Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 1167 ff.

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 740.00119 Control (Austria)/5–2548: Telegram

[Document 780]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

secret Washington, May 25, 1948—5 p. m.

471. As suggested Legtel 639 May 20,1 Kleinwaechter has approached Dept re AC decision May 14 fixing amount and share of occupation costs for 1948. He was specifically instructed by Gruber to emphasize and support here protests made by Austrian Govt in Vienna. Kleinwaechter accordingly handed us aide-mémoire along same general lines as Austrian note to AC (Legtel 649 May 21), note handed to you (Legtel 652 May 23), and Gruber’s letter of May 15.2

An oral answer was given Kleinwaechter that: (a) Action of AC in assessing amount of occupation costs at 10.5 percent and distributing sum equally among four Elements represented in our opinion a distinct step forward in ameliorating burden occupation through sizable reductions both of total occupation costs and of share allotted to Soviet Element; (b) this result was only basis on which agreement could be reached after protracted negotiations by four High Commissioners since January, and US had tried throughout these negotiations to have amount of occupation costs set at lower figure whereas Soviets had constantly insisted on higher figure; (c) inability of three Western powers to take joint position in this matter made it difficult to oppose Soviet demand for continued prescription of occupation costs; (d) Brit and French may well feel that if circumstances beyond their control require maintenance their forces in Austria the latter should bear a portion of the financial burden involved since Austria at least benefits through the protection afforded by presence of Brit and French forces; (e) newly assessed occupation costs do not necessarily mean loss to Austrian Govt since expense of providing own protection through maintenance Austrian armed forces would probably amount to as much as 7.9 percent of budget, the sum to which, total amount of occupation costs reduces after deduction of US share reimbursable in dollars under pay-as-you-go program; (f) US has consistently endeavored from beginning to bring about progressive reduction of costs of occupation and will continue to do so in future.

Kleinwaechter was also informed that no further answer would be made here inasmuch as US representatives in Vienna would deal with protests made there. While we realize that this action on part of Austrians is symptomatic of their increasing restlessness at prospect of treaty impasse and continued occupation, we are somewhat surprised by this evidence of failure to appreciate US efforts in their behalf. Dept is also concerned by this manifestation of growing tendency of Austrians to hold US responsible for developments in or with respect to their country (even though these may represent quadripartite actions) which do not fully accord with Austria’s hopes or desires. We would have no objection in this case to informing Austrian Govt that since US pays for its occupation costs in dollars the notes of protest in question are primary concern of other Allied powers although US will continue to work in every feasible way to reduce burden of occupation.

Marshall

1  Supra.

2 None printed.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/6–1748: Telegram

[Document 781]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, June 17, 1948—11 a. m.

764. British here under instructions from Foreign Office re taking line with Austrians that latter should be cautious in dealing with Soviets at this time and should avoid “provocation” which might induce Soviets to retaliate against Austrian Government or western representatives here. British Minister spoke to me and British First Secretary spoke to counselor yesterday in this sense and said they had impression Gruber is leading his colleagues in government into rather dangerous campaign of pillorying Soviets by barrage of protest notes and public statements. British fear this may further “isolate” Soviets or may cause them to abandon quadripartite cooperation and resort here to tactics being pursued in Berlin. British Minister is seeing Gruber on this subject today.

Gruber had received advance notice of this British attitude and spoke to us yesterday about it with some concern. He expressed view that Soviet policy toward Austria is decided in Moscow in light of over-all situation and that their basic decisions would not be substantially affected by behavior of Austrian Government and western representatives here, except that signs of weakness or uncertainty on part of either of latter might cause Soviets to miscalculate firmness of Austrian attachment to west and to take aggressive action in mistaken belief there would be no serious repercussions. He therefore felt it of utmost importance that Austrian Government and western representatives here show firm front to Soviets in order that latter might be under no illusions as to nature or resistance that would be offered to aggressive action on their part. He expressed hope that if Department concurs in this view it might find some opportunity to dissuade British from what he considers their dangerously overcautious attitude.

While recognizing that Gruber’s policy of reacting firmly and sharply to each instance of Soviet pressure involves certain dangers and that occasionally an Austrian Minister may be unnecessarily provocative (i.e. Migsch speech, Legtel 760 June 161 ), we consider Gruber’s analysis of situation to be sounder and more realistic than that of British. Moreover it is obviously confusing and somewhat disheartening to Austrian Ministers who are Showing considerable courage in a very exposed situation, when British and also French (ReLegtel 703 June 32 ) blow hot and cold in regard to their attitude toward Soviets in Austria. If Department perceives no objection we shall take this line in our conversations with British and French political representatives here.

Sent Department 764; repeated London as 172 Paris as 82.

Erhardt

1 Not printed.

2  Ante, p. 1401 [Pg. 1401 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765].

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 740.00119 Control (Austria)/6–2348: Telegram

[Document 782]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

secret Washington, June 25, 1948—8 p. m.

562. For Erhardt and Keyes. Circumstances of Marek’s arrest (urtels 787, June 19, 791 and 792, June 21, 802, June 22, and P–1998, June 211 ) and nature of Austrian protest on Migsch. case (P–2013, June 232 ) make necessary strongest support in AC of Austrian position and condemnation of Soviet practices as contrary to all existing international agreements. This support should take into account entire general pattern of Soviet activities analyzed in your despatch 256, June 42 and center on unilateral threat to Austrian Govt in recent Soviet arrests in order to prevent Soviet’s concentrating on any particular ministry. In formulating policy in future, Dept would appreciate clarification whether action taken in AC March 18 on notifying Austrian Govt of arrests constitutes tacit recognition of Soviet right to make arrests.3

Marshall

1 None printed. Marek, a high-ranking Austrian political police official, was arrested by Soviet authorities on June 17 because of alleged involvement in anti-Soviet espionage activities.

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

3 Legation Vienna replied in telegram 828, June 29, not printed (740.00119 Control (Austria)/6–2948), that the right of any of the four powers to make arrests, when the security of its forces was threatened, had never been questioned.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 740–00119 Control (Austria)/6–2548: Telegram

[Document 783]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

secret Washington, June 25, 1948—8 p. m.

563. For Erhardt and Keyes. Recent events in Austria have accentuated different of approach among occupation powers reported in urtel 703, June 3,1 concerning Béthouart’s proposal now explained by Paris 3321, June 23; urtel 764, June 17,2 concerning Brit fears that Austrian action may isolate fourth element and London’s 2779, June 243 on provocative nature of Austrian policy. We concur completely with your recommendations and with views expressed by (general Keyes to Galloway in P–1997, June 19.4 No break can be made in consistent policy of opposing all encroachments by Soviets on Austrian sovereignty and no indication given that Austria does not enjoy full support of Western Powers in maintaining its national independence and personal security of members of its Govt. We consider that AC is at this time most effective place where protest can be made and that Austrian Govt should be encouraged to take initiative in order to strengthen its position with Austrian people.

In protesting Soviet activities and in formulating policy Austrians should proceed with caution and ascertain extent of joint support which can be given by Western States. Gruber should be so advised in order that Austrian Govt policy may utilize maximum support of Western States but avoid action to which Western States cannot give full support.

Sent to Vienna as 563, repeated to London as 2419 and Paris as 2315 adding you may use foregoing in discussion at FonOff.

Marshall

1  Ante, p. 1401 [Pg. 1401 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765].

2 Telegram 3321, not printed; it reported that Béthouart’s proposal was his own and did not reflect French policy (863.00S/6–2348). Telegram 764 is printed ante, p. 1424 [Pg. 1424 includes portions of Doc. 780 and Doc. 781].

3 Not printed.

4 Not printed; in it Keyes reported that he also felt that uncontrolled Austrian attacks on the Soviet Element were undesirable, but pointed out that the Western Powers were frequently reluctant to raise issues which the Austrian Government had not already protested (740.00119 Control (Austria)/6–1048).

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/6–3048: Telegram

[Document 784]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, June 30, 1948—2 p. m.

831. From Keyes and Erhardt. In spite of occasional wavering of British and French representatives here, particularly latter, we consider there will be little difficulty in maintaining united front on vital issues among three western elements in Vienna. Reference Deptel 563, June 25 (received June 281 ). Recent example of solidarity is stand on Marek case taken by three Western High Commissioners in AC June 25. General Keyes’ strong statement had been discussed in advance with Galloway and Béthouart. Some differences of approach do inevitably occur, as for instance British willingness and our refusal to permit Soviet inspection of military trains proceeding along authorized corridors, but these differences do not affect basic policy. In this connection General Keyes denies claim by Dean (London’s 2779, June 242 ) that he was “more or less in agreement” with recent démarche made by British to Gruber.3 Legation believes this démarche originated with Foreign Office rather than with British representative here. Problem therefore in our opinion lies in inducing London and Paris to support consistently and firmly policy laid down in first paragraph Deptel 563.

We have advised Gruber along lines of concluding paragraph Deptel 563. We fully concur that Austrians should ascertain extent of western support before laying down broad lines of strategy and should consult with western representatives at every stage of developments. This is their present practice. We are sure Department will agree however that this practice cannot, without resulting in many cases in dangerous delay, be carried to point of obtaining advance agreement of each of three western governments before reacting to individual instances of Soviet pressure.

Sent Department 831, repeated London as 181, Paris as 90. [Keyes and Erhardt.]

Erhardt

1  Supra.

2 Not printed.

3 See telegram 764, June 17, from Vienna, p. 1424 [Pg. 1424 includes portions of Doc. 780 and Doc. 781].

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 740.00119 Control (Austria)/7–1748: Telegram

[Document 785]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

secret Washington, July 17, 1948—3 p. m.

641. Sov note on Berlin1 refers twice to Vienna and international agreements concerning Austria, linking Austria with Germany in justifying Sov blockade. We would appreciate your evaluation of these references and your analysis of possible basis for a blockade of Vienna. Although possible Sov action would undoubtedly be based on legal position and charge of violation of international agreements by western states, could such instances as Sov complaints reported in SO–15417 July 152 on air transport difficulties (P–2117 July 142 ) be utilized by Sovs as cause for aggressive action?

If you consider Sov blockade likely, Dept requests your and Keyes’ recommendations for counter-action and for steps which might be taken to forestall or delay such a move.

Marshall

1 The Soviet note of July 14 is printed ante, p. 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579].

2 Not found in Department files.

2 Not found in Department files.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/7–2048: Telegram

[Document 786]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

confidential Vienna, July 20, 1948—noon.

923. Mention of Vienna in Soviet note on Berlin1 may be veiled threat to commence similar restrictive measures against western Allies in Vienna. Your 618 July 14.2 However, in Austria Soviets confronted with two separate and distinct problems: 1) partitioning country and assuming full administrative control of their zone, and 2) driving western Allies from Vienna. Second objective could only be accomplished after achievement of first, but first need not necessarily involve second. Soviets in order to increase pressure on western powers could thus for instance undertake only gradual measures of partition of Austria.

If Soviets actually commence blockade of western Allies in Vienna, we believe such measures can only be effective if Soviets simultaneously deprive Austrian Government of means to import supplies for Vienna and Soviet Zone. It difficult to see therefore how Soviets in event of blockade could avoid also assuming eventual administrative control in their zone, either directly or through puppet regime. Complete partition of Austria would thus also involve graver breach of international agreements, notably of control agreement which considerably postdates Potsdam.

We incline toward belief that in view obvious primary Soviet interest in German problem, Soviets may hesitate to partition Austria outright at this time, since by doing so they would in effect be resorting to overt action of very kind for which they blame western Allies in Germany. Moreover if Soviets are attempting to force new conversations on overall settlement of German problem, blockade of Vienna at this time could hardly advance them toward such objective while obviously also making Austrian agreement virtually impossible. For this reason we also believe blockade of Vienna would constitute final proof Soviets do not desire German unity but are concerned only with partition of Europe and full integration eastern half into Soviet bloc.

While fully aware possibility blockade of Vienna exists, we consider significant the almost total absence of local indications so far that Soviets intend resort to such measures. Soviet and Communist newspapers here are not drawing parallels between Berlin and Vienna. With exception of one newspaper article alleging that ERP attempts to link Austria to western Germany (Legtel 885, July 103 ) there has been no propaganda recently which could be interpreted as preparing partition. Moreover the most recent occasion that might have afforded pretext for partition, signing of ERP agreement July 2 has passed without Soviets loosing expected full fury of their propaganda against it. (Although agreement was not discussed in AC July 16 it still likely Soviets will raise issue next session.)

Soviet strategy here, however, apparently not yet fixed. High Commissioner General Kurasov and Acting Political Adviser Koptelov were absent from AC meeting July 16 and reportedly are in Moscow. Definite indication of Soviet policy may only appear after Kiselev returns to Vienna. Meanwhile fact that Austrian treaty negotiations are still pending may also be major factors in Soviet deliberations about Austrian policy. Consequently question might profitably be considered whether feelers can be stretched out to determine possibility of reconvening deputies in London. In our opinion such opportunity might be afforded either at forthcoming Danube conference or through Austrian proposals similar to those recently submitted for Department’s consideration, although direct approach with face-saving formula on Yugoslav demands might be preferable.

Erhardt

1 See footnote 1, p. 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579].

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/7–2048: Telegram

[Document 787]

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Vienna, July 20, 1948.

P–2155. State Department cable Marshall to Erhardt, 17 July number 641 is reference.1 It is our opinion that references to Vienna in Soviet note on Berlin represent not an immediate threat of blockade in Vienna but a warning to western powers that Soviets might apply such measures in Austria at a future date if it would serve their interests.

Possibility of Soviets extending Berlin blockade to Vienna should be gauged in light of degree to which such an extension would further Soviet objectives in (1) Germany, (2) Austria and (3) Europe in general. We assume Soviets to have one of two objectives: (1) To force western powers to conference table with view to obtaining general Settlement for a unified Germany and a unified Austria, under the terms of which Soviets would participate in the control of the Ruhr and United States and United Kingdom would be forced to withdraw troops from European continent, and (2) to drive western powers from Berlin and thereby complete split of Germany. These objectives may be alternatives, with number one as primary.

If Soviet aim is unified Germany, extension of blockade to Vienna would serve only as additional pressure to bring western powers back to conference table, possibly for both German and Austrian treaties. In this connection, they undoubtedly will consider the advantages to them of dividing our effort to maintain both Berlin and Vienna with resultant possibility of our failure to maintain one or both. Although effect of such pressure must appear very great to them, they will hardly overlook fact that such measures would only serve to bring about splitting of Austria, which they have not heretofore deemed desirable. This would not be the case if Soviets restricted themselves to merely threatening blockade of Vienna. Tactical value to Soviets of threat merits serious consideration. This may be purpose of dual reference to Vienna in Soviet note. Additional important consideration in this connection is ERP, particularly in regard to Austria. Application of blockade to Vienna would wreck ERP program in Austria and, in conjunction with Berlin blockade and attendant tension and confusion in Europe generally, discourage private as well as public United States investments in Europe. If Soviets are determined to take consequences of show-down in Berlin, which could lead to war, ERP could be wrecked entirely.

If, however, Soviets have actually given up hope of both German and Austrian treaty settlements and are now committed to policy of final division of Europe, extension of blockade to Vienna would be logical tactical move and may be anticipated at any time. It is possible, however, that Soviets could give up hope for German settlement without giving up on Austria.

There have been many indications that Soviets have thus far preferred to regard Austria and Germany as separate problems. This was particularly apparent when Soviets failed here to implement travel restrictions along Berlin pattern last April. There were indications at that time that the same restrictions were only half-heartedly implemented and were subsequently dropped entirely. It appeared then that Soviet authorities locally may have pointed out to Moscow the bad effect such restrictions would have on treaty negotiations then in progress. Fact that restrictions were not imposed following breakup of treaty conference indicated, however, that policy of dealing separately with Austria and Germany was being pursued. There has since then been no evidence either of a change in this policy or of Soviet intentions to blockade Vienna although capability is ever present.

Legal pretexts for extending blockade to Vienna no doubt exist, but not on German scale reference instances cited in State cable No. 641. Soviets have frequently charged western powers with violation of quadripartite agreements, but issues have been comparatively minor and in no case has reaction been comparable to that excited by the steps taken by the western powers to set up a provisional western German government, or by the introduction of the currency reform for the western zones. Emphasis on “separate action” by western powers “in western zone of Germany” in Soviet note is pertinent. There is no comparable basis for a similar legalistic argument with regard to Vienna. The same applies to Soviet note reference to currency reform. Austrian currency reform was accomplished with quadripartite agreement. Circumstances surrounding breakup of Austrian treaty conference also less extreme than those attendant upon breakup of Foreign Minister’s conference on Germany. Fact remains, however, that Soviet delegation to Austrian treaty conference felt that it had been served with ultimatum, and this may have persuaded Soviets to change basic policy with regard to Austria.

The likelihood of a Soviet blockade of Vienna cannot be estimated from the current local situation. There are no indications of Soviet intentions to institute blockade, and there are no serious disagreements in the Allied Commission for Austria which involve allegations of unilateral action by western powers in violation of quadripartite agreements. However, since Soviet action could be taken without prior warning, likelihood of blockade still must be considered a possibility particularly if Soviets choose to consider agreements on occupation of Germany and Austria as a single agreement, or if they should announce the application of ECA in Austria as a violation of quadripartite agreements. It is believed that steps which might be taken to forestall or delay blockade are limited to those which could be taken at United States Government level since our situation in Vienna does not provide us opportunity for retaliation or other counter-measures.

In view of foregoing, we feel that probabilities favor earliest possible resumption of Austrian treaty negotiations as best means of averting extension of blockade to Vienna. If overtures were made they would, at least, force Soviets to show their hand on their real objective. Assuming opportunity given for resumption of treaty talks without loss of prestige, Soviet refusal would indicate new policy for final division of Europe and elimination of western enclaves in Berlin and Vienna, PolAd concurs.

[ Keyes ]

1  Ante p. 1427 [Pg. 1427 includes portions of Doc. 784 and Doc. 785].

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/7–2048: Telegram

[Document 788]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, July 20, 1948—6 p. m.

928. Question of probability Soviet blockade of Vienna was discussed in our 923 July 20.1 Present message deals with possible pretexts and countermeasures as required by Deptel 641, July 17.2 Refer also USFA telegram to JCS P–2155, July 20.3

Soviets in Austria have wide choice of pretexts for partition, all of which, however, would lack plausibility and propaganda appeal “of arguments in Soviet note of July 14 on Germany. Among such pretexts might be following which are also in line with recent themes of Soviet propaganda here: (a) Allegation that ERP agreement of July 2 violates control agreement and contravenes quadripartite agreements on separation Austria from Germany;

(b) Allegation of warmongering and anti-Soviet military preparations (largely by DP’s) in west Austria;

(c) Allegation of espionage against Soviet occupation forces by west intelligence, possibly coupled with charge that such activities conducted through Austrian Government agencies.

Other allegations might concern repatriation of DP’s extradition of war criminals, air activities, denazification, arming of police in British zone, discrimination against Soviet zone in coal and electricity allocations.

Of above arguments only the first appears at all likely although several might be combined. None could of course justify violation of Moscow declaration and abrogation of EAC agreement July 19454 and control agreement June 1946. Countermeasures against blockade or partition would have to take place on governmental level or by way of retaliatory action elsewhere since our position in Vienna permits of no more effective opposition to Soviet encroachments than that offered in Berlin.

Erhardt

1  Ante, p. 1428 [Pg. 1428 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786].

2  Ante, p. 1427 [Pg. 1427 includes portions of Doc. 784 and Doc. 785].

3  Supra.

4 See Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. iii, p. 365.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/8–1948: Telegram

[Document 789]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, August 19, 1948—10 a. m.

1006. Question of legality of Marek arrest (Deptel 695, August 111 ) has two separate aspects: 1. Possible Soviet violation of British jurisdiction in international zone during month of June 1948.

2. Possible Soviet violation of Control Agreement by arrest of government official. 1. Although indications exist Marek was called to Soviet office in international zone and there detained, no positive proof of this is available. Moreover, pressing this aspect is believed unprofitable, since by implication it might appear to concede Russians the right to arrest officials in international zone during month of Soviet chairmanship or in Soviet zone at any time.

2. No specific provision exists in Control Agreement which prohibits arrests of Austrian officials. Legal argument of Western Allies in ACC [ AC ] meeting June 25 centered essentially around Article 3 of Control Agreement which defined primary task of AC as “assisting freely-elected government to assume as quickly as possible full control of affairs of state in Austria.” Soviets in AC August 13, on other hand, pointed out that Articles 2 and 5 granted Commanders in Chief the right “to take necessary measures for protection and security of their forces.” This argument is, however, deficient since Article 2 allows action by individual high commissioners only “to maintain law and order” whereas Article 5 allows direct action for “protection and security of Allied Forces” to be taken by Allied Commanders collectively rather than individually.

Legal arguments are thus rather inconclusive though it is obvious frequent arrests of Austrian officials violate spirit of Moscow Declaration and Control Agreement. US position in AC therefore has been: (a) To emphasize violation of spirit rather than letter of international agreements;

(b) To expose probable Soviet intention, through weakening morale of Austrian officials, to foster Communist subversive activities, and

(c) To press proposals for a specific procedure on arrests of government officials.

Replying balance of specific question urtel: 1. Kiridus arrest2 took place at Soviet check point on demarcation line, but clearly inside Soviet Zone.

2. Minor government officials have in past been arrested by other occupation powers. For instance, US in June 1947 arrested Director of Salzburg police on charges falsification of US denazification questionnaire and sentenced him seven years jail. Upon review sentence was reduced to 18 months suspended.

3. Possibility exists Soviets will use Marek testimony not only to incriminate others in Ministry of Interior but also to distort his relations with US officials to create impression of espionage. As pointed out Legtel 792, June 21,3 Marek could in no way be considered US agent although he maintained contact with USFA.

Vigorousness of western and particularly US reaction to Marek and kiridus arreste may have caused Soviets to reconsider or delay any further steps they contemplated against Ministry of Interior. Publication of evidence against Marek, for instance, which was forecast June 19, has not yet taken place. Possible Soviets may be awaiting anticipated developments in overall east-west relationships before deciding whether to utilize Marek case merely as warning to Austrian intelligence agencies or to exploit it as pretext for major attack on Interior Ministry. In any case Department will, of course, recognize that, while western representatives will exhaust every capability of quadripartite machinery to check Soviet kidnappings (French proposal for new procedure governing arrests by occupation power is still formally before AC and British are considering presenting additional proposal), AC is in last analysis powerless to prevent unilateral Soviet action of this kind. Soviets will always justify such action on basis security of forces as did Zheltov in AC August 13 (see PC–156663 ). Proposed new procedures are almost certain to be rejected by Soviets and any effectiveness which airing of subject in AC may have depends largely upon degree of Soviet susceptibility to public opinion.

In view of fact we have no effective means of preventing kidnapping Austrian officials in Soviet Zone or in international zone during months of Soviet AC chairmanship, we would favor presentation of matter to UN if it should prove that western protests in AC have been fruitless and if further arrests of Austrian officials such as Marek, as distinguished from kidnapping of minor intelligence agents, should take place. It cannot be emphasized too strongly that continued kidnapping of high-ranking officials would be likely so to undermine morale of bureaucracy that Austrian administration in Soviet Zone, including their zone of Vienna, could become Marek shadow with substance of power resting in hands of Soviet authorities. Such development could go far toward effective partition of country without formal outward changes having taken place.

USFA and Legation will follow situation closely with view to submitting recommendation if and when we believe submission to UN becomes advisable. There is little doubt full Austrian support of such move could be obtained.

USFA concurs.

Erhardt

1 Not printed.

2  Franz Kiridus, an Austrian Gendarme official, was arrested by the Soviet element on July 22, 1948.

3 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/8–2048: Telegram

[Document 790]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, August 20, 1948—3 p. m.

1016. Soviet rerouting telecommunications channels Deptel 697 August 121 puts them in position to sever communications between Vienna and US and British zones by cutting two cables and to monitor all calls between Vienna and zones, USFA headquarters here has standby radio facilities ready in case Soviets act.

Although language does not specifically refer to telecommunications, we believe words “other traffic” in Article Four (A) of control agreement are broad enough to apply and that Soviet action can be held to constitute violation of that article. Director General of Austrian Post and Telegraph protested by letter to Soviets and has received reply which Austrians now studying. It is contemplated Chancellor will submit question to AC but probably not until next month when we have chair. Whether or not Austrians present matter USFA expects to pursue it in AC, though there is of course little chance of obtaining satisfaction from Soviets.

Erhardt

1 Not printed.

The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State 740:00119 Control (Austria)/8–3148: Telegram

[Document 791]

The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, August 31, 1948—1 p. m.

1037. Discussion in AC August 27 of proposed resolution restricting Allied police and judicial authority over Austrian citizens (this resolution already discussed some dozen times in AC bodies without result) brought out once again following Soviet attitudes: 1. Soviets will not agree that any Soviet citizen, even though not member of armed forces, should be subject to Austrian jurisdiction.

2. Soviets will not sanction principle that Austrian authorities may call on occupation forces for assistance in maintenance of law and order.

3. Soviets will not hand over to Austrian authorities for detention before trial or for punishment after trial and conviction any Austrian or other person subject to Austrian jurisdiction accused of an offense against occupation power.

4. Soviets will not consent to Austrians assuming full control over arming Austrian law enforcement agencies. In view complete disagreement on these essential points resolution was returned to Internal Affairs Directorate for further study. Although little chance of concrete results, US element will continue to press these proposals as one means of keeping Marek case and Soviet kidnapping activities before public (reLegtel 1006 August 19 1 ).

Another significant point discussed by AC was statement of Soviet representatives at previous EXCO meeting that since there was no quadripartite agreement on Soviet sponsored demand for full report on UN” and German property in international zone of Vienna, “Soviet element reserves the right to act as it may see fit”. When US High Commissioner protested against this threat of unilateral action, Kurasov lamely referred to article second of control agreement, to which General Keyes was immediately able to reply that international zone is not in Soviet zone and that there was no “absence of action” in this case since duly appointed quadripartite commission had long been dealing with this problem. Soviets thereupon subsided but more may later be heard of alleged “right” of unilateral action when quadripartite agreement cannot be obtained.

Yost

1  Ante, p. 1433 [Pg. 1433 is part of Doc. 789].

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Secretary of State 811.79663/9–1348: Telegram

[Document 792]

The High Commissioner in Austria (Keyes) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Vienna, September 13, 1948.

P–2399. Further to our P–2295 dated 18 August,1 received here during the last two weeks three different letters of protest2 from Soviets regarding alleged violations by United States aircraft over Vienna–Praha corridor. Each letter of protest covered 15 day period and contained approximately 18 alleged violations. Conference held between chiefs United States and Soviet air divisions in effort to determine exact times and places of violations. As result Soviets submitted list of times of alleged violations which was carefully checked against actual flights made by US aircraft. Results indicate Soviets do not have accurate means of determining United States flights over Praha–Vienna corridor and that list of alleged violations included “approved”, “disapproved” and “urgent missions”, as well as flights which did not use Praha–Vienna corridor but which flew Vienna-Linz corridor. Apparently Soviets attempting to establish record of alleged violations for some reason, as yet undetermined. Answer being sent in reply to “violation” letters to the effect that, after carefully checking data submitted by Soviets against records of United States aircraft flights made during the period indicated, United States aircraft were not involved. Further, the reply will state that United States aircraft are flying and will continue to fly strictly in accordance with the provisions of existing agreement for air traffic, over the occupied zones of Austria, ALCO/P(46) 87,3 Will advise you any further developments.

[ Keyes ]

1 Not printed.

2 None found in Department files.

3 Not printed; the text of this agreement can be found in Allied Commission for Austria, A Handbook (Vienna, n.d.), pp. 38–39.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State Vienna Legation Files: Lot 55F74: Box 3161

[Document 793]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]

confidential Vienna, October 4, 1948.

No. 434

Sir: I have the honor to refer to my despatch No. 61 of January 29, 1948,1 concerning the status of denazification in Austria and to report that denazification is still very much an issue between the Soviet Union and the Western Powers in the discussions of the Allied Council for Austria.

On April 22, 1948, the Austrian Parliament passed a constitutional law concerning the termination of the atonement measures provided in the National Socialists Law (Constitutional Law 25/47) with respect to young persons. This law is known popularly as the Youth Amnesty Law. On June 6, 1948, the constitutional law concerning the early termination of the atonement penalties provided in the National Socialists Law for less implicated persons became effective. This law is popularly known as the Amnesty Law for Less Implicated Nazis. Five copies of each of these laws are forwarded as enclosures.

The Austrian Parliament passed both amnesty laws after the Allied Council had unanimously recommended such legislation to the Austrian Chancellor. In this same communication from the Allied Council was the further suggestion, included because of Soviet insistence, that further, more aggressive steps be taken by the Austrian Government to prosecute implicated Nazis. Chancellor Figl replied to this suggestion that the prosecution of implicated Nazis was proceeding satisfactorily and it was not necessary to take further action in this connection.

Since the Soviet element expressed dissatisfaction with this answer, the question of the effectiveness of the prosecution of implicated Nazis was referred to the Legal Directorate of the Allied Council which, in turn, asked for the opinion of the Internal Affairs Directorate. Eventual consideration of the problem devolved on the quadripartite Denazification Bureau of the Internal Affairs Directorate.

A straightforward consideration of this problem has proved to be impossible owing to the larger conflicts that exist between the Soviet Union and the Western Powers. No one of the Western Powers’ representatives could ignore the possibility that the Soviet element hopes to use the question of the prosecution of implicated Nazis as a means of attacking the efficiency and integrity of the Federal Austrian Government. As the discussion progressed it became apparent that the Soviet element was using this opportunity to attack the Austrian Government as such and to obtain a strongly worded condemnation of the Austrian denazification procedures which they could use as a weapon of propaganda.

It therefore became necessary for the Western Powers to ignore the specific question before them in the Denazification Bureau. They were compelled to defend the Austrian Government against an attack of some bitterness and violence from the Soviet element. Since the Soviet element wished to introduce a resolution which distorted the facts and gave the impression that the Austrian Government was actively conniving to protect Nazism, the Western Powers’ representatives felt compelled to ignore the minor errors of the Austrian Government in prosecuting implicated Nazis which do exist and to concentrate on answering the Soviet charges against an Austrian Government whose continued existence we desire.

Specifically, an attempt was made to answer the Soviet charges and send forward a resolution to the Allied Council which would neither censure nor praise the Austrian Government. Since there are many instances where Austrian prosecution of implicated Nazis has not met with our approval, it was not considered that we could endorse their conduct of this prosecution. On the other hand, we could not join the Soviet Union, in an immoderate and unwarranted criticism of the Austrian Government which would serve long-range Soviet policy.

All attempts to compose differences failed and at Soviet insistence their resolution censuring the Austrian efforts at the prosecution of implicated Nazis was sent forward separately. Unfortunately, the Western Powers’ representatives also found they had areas of disagreement. The French decided that, while they would not condemn the Austrian conduct in general, they would forward a separate resolution criticizing the performance of the Peoples’ Courts, the five separate tribunals located in each zone of occupation and in Vienna, which try denazification cases. The British and American resolution merely acknowledged the receipt of the Chancellor’s communication. Our position was that no comment and no action was necessary.

On Friday, September 11, the question was again on the agenda of the Allied Council meeting. As was anticipated, the Soviet Union took the position that the Austrian Government was not enforcing the denazification law as it concerned implicated Nazis. They proposed that all implicated Nazis whose cases had been pending for three months or over be confined to camps. The Western Powers have taken the position that further deliberation on this problem be postponed until a special denazification report from the Austrian Government is received and studied. It is therefore apparent that the issue of denazification will continue for some time as a focal point of Soviet sound and fury since it offers an excellent subject for their developing theme that Austria is conniving to maintain fascist elements within its public life and that the Western Powers do not oppose that policy. The Austrian report on denazification and the discussion of that report by the Four Powers will be covered by a future despatch as the events unfold.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

John G. Erhardt

1 Not printed.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2048: Airgram

[Document 794]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, October 20, 1948.

A–451. Our despatch no. 390, August 31, 1948.1 The request of the Austrian Democratic Union to form a political party was discussed again by the Allied Council on October 15. Further study of this question in the Political Directorate brought to light no new information. The U.S. and British representatives maintained that it was necessary to determine whether this group actually commands sufficient support to justify recognition, whereas the Soviets claimed that any party should be recognized whose program does not contradict the Allied Council decision of September 11, 1945, that is does not advocate Nazism, hostility to the allies, or other undemocratic doctrine. The French representative in the Political Directorate reversed his previous position and supported the Soviets.

In the Executive Committee all elements supported the positions of their representatives in the Political Directorate, but in the Allied Council the French once again reversed themselves and refused to support the Soviet resolution recommending recognition of the Democratic Union unless more information were obtained about the Nazi background of the party leaders. The British and U.S. representatives said very little, merely maintaining that nothing new had been brought to light by the Political Directorate in the restudy with which it had been charged and that there was no need to discuss the question further. The Soviet member, after vain attempts to induce the western members to argue the point, closed with a prepared statement denouncing the hypocritical attempt of the Anglo-Saxons to safeguard reaction by denying fundamental liberties. The question was dropped, although the Soviets reserved the right to bring it up again.

Press comment on the Democratic Union October 16 and 17 was marked by a lack of clarity as to the issues involved, as in the comment on the previous Allied Council discussion of the question. The U.S. and British representatives had not been forced in either meeting to affirm their support of the doctrine that small splinter parties should not be recognized; thus the newspapers did not mention this general position. The Socialist Arbeiter Zeitung, whose reaction was most important and which, after the previous AC discussion, carried a lead editorial calling for an end to allied interference with Austrian political parties, had merely a brief notice stating that the three western powers desired more information. The People’s Party in Kleine Volksblatt had a rather ambiguous editorial on the general question of new parties, which argued that they are undesirable and a danger to stable government and at the same time that they can get no support and thus will have no effect. The Soviet Oesterreichische Zeitung made the most of the issue, devoting its main headline and a front page article to it on the 16th and a lead editorial on the 17th. However, the paper missed its best point and took the orthodox line that the U.S. and Britain would have been willing enough to recognize a Nazi or reactionary party, leaving the impression that the Democratic Union is in some way particularly “democratic” in the eastern sense. It is precisely a reactionary and even Nazi party which would endanger the People’s Party and which the Socialists have shown the most inclination to flirt with. The Communist Volksstimme launched the only effective barb with its headline “Americans protect the OeVP from Dissolution in a Breach of the Austrian Constitution.”

Thus public opinion does not seem to have reacted very unfavorably to the first western effort to stop the formation of a, political party. The only consequence of our position which may possibly be unpleasant is the reaction of the Socialist party leaders. After the first AC discussion of the Democratic Union the Socialists protested to the French and British and informally to a member of this Legation. However, they have not since then taken a strong stand on the question, and a representative of the British Legation who spoke to Socialist leaders after the AC meeting of October 15 felt that they did not intend to press their opposition to the western position. On October 16 Minister of the Interior Helmer spoke informally to a member of this Legation and asked him the reason for the U.S. position. He was told of information which this office has received of contacts between the Democratic Union and the Soviet element. It should be noted here that the U.S. position was not originally taken because of these contacts, which, while considered a possible eventuality, were not at that time definitely known to exist. Minister Helmer was interested in this fact and finally agreed that as long as parties are not completely free in Austria it would not be advisable to recognize this group, which might eventually be used to sell out non-Communist votes to the Communists.

Erhardt

1 Not printed.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State Vienna Legation Files: Lot 55 F 74: Box 3161: Airgram

[Document 795]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

confidential Vienna, October 29, 1948.

A–473. Reference Department’s A–250, October 13.1 Austrians continue to feel deep concern and even bitterness over occupation costs. In presenting budget to Parliament October 27 Finance Minister Zimmermann pointed out that no provision was made therein for occupation costs and that, if costs were levied next year, imposition of a special occupation tax would be unavoidable.

Gruber raised question with us again yesterday and urged that U.S. endeavor to persuade British and French to renounce occupation costs, thus isolating Soviets on this issue. He went so far as to ask that U.S., regardless of attitude of the other Powers, make Allied Council action impossible by refusing to concur in fixing costs. He was not deterred by argument that Soviets would in that case find some means of levying and collecting costs unilaterally, contending that such action would be no more harmful economically than costs as presently levied and would place Soviets in very unfavorable propaganda position. Gruber also maintained that British and French establishments here, particularly the latter, are unnecessarily large, that French Army in Tyrol serves no useful purpose, that number of French dependents here is grossly excessive and that both French and British still have far too much personnel engaged in civil affairs. He concluded by recurring to oft-repeated theme that it is outrageous that Austria should, three and one-half years after end of war, and through no fault of its own but simply by reason of failure of the Great Powers to agree on Austrian treaty, still be obliged to bear occupation costs.

In discussing problem with Gruber, we repeated considerations set forth in Deptel’s 471, May 25 and 598 July 9,2 and maintained U.S. position as stated by Assistant Secretary Saltzman to Minister Zimmermann. However, Department must expect, in view of bitter Austrian feeling on this subject and of additional weight which may be imposed by occupation costs on already over-burdened budget, that continued efforts will be made to induce Western Powers to renounce these costs and that, if efforts are unsuccessful, Austrian public opinion, needled by such devices as an occupation tax, will be increasingly agitated against the occupying powers. The U.S. Element, in spite of not being directly involved, can hardly escape sharing to some degree the resulting ill feeling.

Erhardt

1 Not printed.

2  Deptel 471, p. 1423 [Pg. 1423 is part of Doc. 780]. Deptel 598, not printed; it informed Vienna that the U.S. position on occupation costs remained as it was set forth in Deptel 471. (740.00119 Control (Austria)/6–1748)

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 861.20263/11–1248: Telegram

[Document 796]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, November 12, 1948—7 p. m.

1232. Series of recent arrests and kidnappings by Soviets have considerably increased feeling of insecurity among Austrian officials and people generally. Announcement by Ministry of Interior that 286 Austrians had been seized by Soviets during 1948 alone and 152 of these not released, followed within few days by dramatic arrest of Ottillinger,1 fatal leap of Austrian from window of Kommandatura and several other lesser kidnappings have created perceptible nervous tension which is reflected in press and is noticeable in our contacts with Austrian Ministries. Ross case2 has contributed to this feeling by giving impression that even Americans are not immune to this brutal treatment and that it is impossible to call Soviets to account.

While we believe most of these cases arise from actual or suspected involvement of persons concerned in espionage (using word in broadest sense), there can be little doubt Soviets fully aware of secondary advantages to them arising from this form of intimidation. If continued without effective hindrance, results are likely to be (1) increased subservience to Soviet pressure by Austrian officials in Eastern Zone including many in Vienna; (2) decline in cooperation at lower level with Western elements for fear of reprisals; (3) general lowering of administrative efficiency with resultant unfavorable effects on ERP implementation.

While protests will be made in AC and elsewhere, and full treatment is being given by Austrian press, Soviets have shown they are not seriously disturbed by such measures. Fact is there is no effective means of stopping kidnappings as long as Soviet forces remain in Austria.

Sent Department 1232, repeated Paris 166 for Bohlen.

Erhardt

1  Margarethe Ottillinger, Chief of the Planning Section of the Austrian Ministry for Property Control and Economic Planning, was arrested by the Soviet element on November 5, 1948.

2 On the night of October 30, 1948, Irving Ross, an American ERP official, was Reaten to death by Soviet soldiers in Vienna.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 863.77/11–1748: Telegram

[Document 797]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Vienna, November 17, 1948—noon.

1239. Austrian appeal in conversations between Figl and Zheltov (Legtel 1182, October 28 and 1193, November 2 and to ECA 164, November 12)1 to reduce current Soviet demands for 540 locomotives and 5575 freight and passenger cars has met adamant and apparently final refusal. Cabinet therefore decided yesterday to forward to AC text which it had held up pending outcome negotiations with Soviets. Minister of Communications2 simultaneously announced reductions railway traffic to emergency basis effective November 22.

Difference of opinion among both Austrian and USFA legal experts regarding legal justification Soviet claim will probably cause protest to be based primarily on economic effect and equity. None of stock now demanded by Soviets is Austrian mark but substantial proportion German. Many of these used during Anschluss within Austrian division Reich railways and may have been constructed in Austria. Regarding non-German stock, Hungary alone owes Austria about 14,000 units and removal non-Austrian cars leaves Austria in unfair bargaining position. After removal present Soviet demanded stock, there will still remain 715 locomotives and 3541 freight and passenger cars, some of which clearly Austrian, marked “CCCP” Soviet war booty mark. Presumably Soviets regard these also as subject to removal and subsequent demands are to be expected. Austrians therefore consider protest on general principles essential and we believe US element should give strongest support to such protest. Must be noted, however, that last winter Soviets removed 75 locomotives and about 2600 cars in spite vigorous protest by Austrians in AC.

As to economic effects, USFA experts incline to feel loss of locomotives (only 140 serviceable) not too serious but loss of cars considerably more so. Before Russian demand Austrian railways were filling freight car orders 80 percent or under. Removal 3500 serviceable cars would reduce performance at least another 10 percent. In Soviet zone alone effect much more marked as removal would comprise 3500 out of 15,000. Situation further aggravated by heavy seasonal demands for movement potatoes and sugar beets. All present Austrian stock obsolete and suffering from lack of maintenance during German occupation. These facts offset argument that in some categories Austrian rolling stock, including however damaged units, actually slightly greater than pre-Anschluss. US position in supporting protest weakened by fact that OMGUS has demanded and refused postponement delivery 890 US Transportation Corps cars, of which about 150 already delivered. Demand technically correct but most unfortunate at this time. Furthermore, whatever may be reasons, only 1,000 TC cars were acquired by Austria under surplus property credits, whereas far greater proportion (including 890 now demanded) have been assigned under similar credits to German railways. In response inquiry ECA Washington, Vienna ECA mission with Legation assistance and concurrence, reported situation recommending at least postponement delivery TC cars. USFA made strong request along this line to OMGUS which was categorically denied.

Erhardt

1 None printed.

2  Vinzenz Übeleis.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 740.00119 Control (Austria)/12–848: Telegram

[Document 798]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

secret   us urgent Washington, December 8, 1948—7 p. m.

922. Note from Aus Leg Nov 301 re effects of occupation costs established by AC resolution 14 May 1948. Aus Govt not able make payments for 1948 amounting 448 million schillings mil occupation 220.9 civilian occupation. Payment would involve new taxes or injurious financial measures endangering economic progress to date. Since no improvement in financial situation in sight inclusion occupation costs in 1949 budget appears impossible. Note states unanimous decision by AC on 1949 would be evidence fact that four powers consider Aus responsible for occupation and make necessary great financial sacrifices. Aus Govt requests US vote against imposition of occupation costs for 1949 as incompatible with Allied policy. Hope expressed High Commissioner would present this view in discussions with other commanders and prevent any unanimous agreement on this subject. Aus Govt requests immediate reply since Parliament at present considering budget.

No reply will be made by Dept until recommendations are received from you and Army, particularly in light following questions. Is action proposed by Aus Govt desirable at this time in view effort maintain quadripartite organization in Aus and to obtain quadripartite agreement on Treaty? Will occupation costs 1949 impose burden endangering present rate economic progress? Can agreement be reached with Brit and Fr High Commissioners on joint favorable action this matter? Have Sovs collected occupation costs for this year?

Dept would appreciate receiving recommendations soonest.

Lovett

1 Not printed.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 EW (Peace)/12–1948: Telegram

[Document 799]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, December 19, 1948—2 p. m.

1303. Deptel 919 [922], December 8.1 Following considerations seem most important in deciding position US element on occupation costs.

(1) Quadripartite approach most desirable if agreement substantially to reduce burden on Austrian economy can be reached.

(2) Austrian Government would have extreme difficulty meeting occupation costs 1949 and could probably do so only (a) by levying new “occupation tax” which would have harmful political repercussions or, (b) by cutting out certain essential expenditures now provided in “ordinary budget”. (Expenditures contemplated “extraordinary budget” can presumably be made only by release ECA counterpart schillings.)

(3) Soviets, unlike British and French, have not repaid currently from military occupation funds advances made by Austria for civilian occupation costs (rents, etc.) and are now in arrears 194 million (of which 85 incurred this year) for these advances. Agreed principle equal treatment for occupation powers therefore violated in practice.

(4) As of last June three powers had schilling bank deposit totalling 738 million plus allotment of 45 million for 1948 occupation costs. These amounts presumably somewhat reduced now but obviously very large schilling advances still available to three powers.

(5) Established practice of AC is to reduce occupation levy progressively each year. For this principle to be effective 1949 may be necessary to abandon practice basing levy on percentage Austrian budget and also to determine costs quarter by quarter rather than for entire year.

(6) In view large US contribution to revival Austrian economy and high interest in Austrian financial stability, US has substantial concern in reducing occupation costs to minimum.

In light these considerations US authorities Vienna intend pursue following course: (a) discuss informally with British and French (who have already raised question with USFA), stressing six suggested lines above; (b) avoid taking initiative, but express willingness discuss question quadripartitely whenever invited; (c) endeavor reach quadripartite decision reducing substantially burdens occupation costs along lines indicated paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 above; (d) reconsider position if eventually confronted with alternatives either blocking quadripartite agreement or lending US sanction to AC decision inconsistent with US economic and political objectives.

In considering latter question, if it should arise, important to note high Austrian officials state government would prefer have free hand to bargain with each of three powers individually rather than be confronted with binding AC decision. As stated above we consider quadripartite approach preferable up to certain point but will wish to drive good bargain for Austria and to reconsider our position if good bargain appears unobtainable.

This is an agreed USFA and Legation cable.

Pass to Department of Army.

Erhardt

1  Supra.

IX. United States participation in the negotiations for an Austrian treatyIX. United States participation in the negotiations for an Austrian treaty1

1 Previous documentation on this topic is presented in Foreign Relations, 1947, volume ii .

Contents

A. The preparations for the resumption of meetings of the Deputies for Austria of the Council of Foreign MinistersA. The preparations for the resumption of meetings of the Deputies for Austria of the Council of Foreign Ministers

[800] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, January 21, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/1–2148: Telegram

[801] Proposal by the Soviet Delegation to the Council of Foreign Ministers on German Assets

London, January 24, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 113: CFM (D)(L)(48)1

[802] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, January 26, 1948—5 p. m.

740.0011EW(Peace)/1–2648: Telegram

[803] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, January 27, 1948—5 p. m.

740.0011EW(Peace)/1–2748: Telegram

[804] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, January 28, 1948—6 p. m.

740.0011EW(Peace)/1–2848: Telegram

[805] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Williamson)

Washington, January 29, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 247

[806] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, February 3, 1948—7 p. m.

740.0011EW(Peace)/1–2748: Telegram

[807] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, February 5, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/2–548: Telegram

[808] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, February 5, 1948—3 p. m.

740.0011EW(Peace)/2–548: Telegram

[809] Memorandum by the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson) to the Secretary of State

Washington, February 6, 1948.

740.0011EW(Peace)/2–648

[810] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, February 6, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/2–648: Telegram

[811] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, February 7, 1948—7 p. m.

740.0011EW(Peace)/2–748: Telegram

[812] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, February 11, 1948—9 a. m.

863.00/2–1148: Telegram

[813] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, February 14, 1948—noon.

740.00119 Council/2–1448: Telegram

[814] Memorandum of Informal Tripartite Discussion of the Soviet Proposal on German Assets in Austria by the Second Secretary of the Legation in Austria (Gannett)

London, February 17, 1948.

740.00119 Council/2–1748

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/1–2148: Telegram

[Document 800]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, January 21, 1948—5 p. m.

74. Soviet attitude on treaty continues to be subject of intense and diverse speculation here.

As reported Legtel 61, January 17,2 unverified rumors allege Soviet proposal on German assets already submitted to Austrian Communists and that latter have been instructed by Moscow to take line in propaganda that Russia and Russia alone is prepared to make treaty along reasonable lines. Rumors borne out to some extent by Communist propaganda that “Soviet Union is only power that wants to give Austrian treaty really assuring freedom and independence” (Volksstimme, January 21) and that other parties are opposing treaty because they desire western imperialist control of Austria.

In contradiction of Communist line concerning reasonableness of impending Soviet proposals, rumors allege that quid pro quo for treaty will be Austrian commitment to conclude with eastern neighbors economic agreements whereunder bulk of Austrian raw materials and manufactured products would be allocated for delivery to east, thus drawing Austria into Soviet economic bloc.

In conversation recently between Herz of Legation and Ernst Fischer, latter expressed optimism over concluding treaty in 1948 because Austrian Government will find “it worth heavy price to get occupation troops out of Austria.” He added it would be worth heavy price to get troops out even without treaty and expressed view Soviets might withdraw troops in absence of treaty if it were made worthwhile and if general situation in Europe quieted down.

Gruber informed us that, while he is cognizant of those rumors, he has no confirmation of their accuracy. He considers, however, that if Soviets did submit this proposal in advance to Austrian Communists, it would be a favorable sign as indicating Soviet intention to offer “deal” which they thought had serious chance of acceptance. Gruber believes Soviets will submit some sort of proposal to London soon but also feels that, even should proposal provide real basis for agreement, Soviets will drag feet in negotiations in order to prolong present uncertainty which gives them additional leverage over Austrian Government in connection with current Soviet unilateral pressures.

Legation believes Soviets may well find it advantageous to submit in London proposal which does not shut door on settlement, which can be used in propaganda to portray Russian generosity and which, as Gruber suggests, can provide basis for long drawn out negotiations during which Austrian Government, and possibly western Allies, might be reluctant to resist vigorously Soviet pressures in Austria. If this analysis of Russian intentions proves correct, it would appear that sound US reaction would be, while showing perfect willingness to negotiate on basis of any reasonable Soviet proposal, to insist that Soviets can demonstrate their sincerity only by eliminating from proposal any provisions infringing on Austrian sovereignty and by permitting negotiations to be brought to rapid conclusion.

Erhardt

2  Ante, p. 1412 [Pg. 1412 includes portions of Doc. 770 and Doc. 771].

Proposal by the Soviet Delegation to the Council of Foreign Ministers on German Assets CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 113: CFM (D)(L)(48)1

[Document 801]

Proposal by the Soviet Delegation to the Council of Foreign Ministers on German Assets

secret London, January 24, 1948.

The Soviet Union shall receive: 1. (a) Oil Extraction
Concession rights to oil production areas equivalent to two thirds of the current production of oil in Austria, as well as property rights to all buildings, plant, equipment and other property forming part of these production areas, in accordance with the lists and the map annexed to the Treaty.
(b) Oil Prospecting
Concession rights to two thirds of all undeveloped areas in Eastern Austria that are German assets to which the Soviet Union is entitled in conformity with the Potsdam Agreement and which are in its possession at the present time, in accordance with the list of concessions and the maps annexed to the Treaty.

2. The period of validity of the concessions defined in paragraph 1 for prospecting and for the extraction of oil shall be fifty years.

3. The Soviet Union Shall receive oil refineries having a total annual production capacity of four hundred and fifty thousand tons of crude oil, in accordance with the list annexed to the Treaty.

4. The Soviet Union shall receive those undertakings concerned in the distribution of oil products which are at present at its disposal, in accordance with the list annexed to the Treaty.

5. In respect of D.D.S.G. (Danube Shipping Co.), the Soviet Union shall receive the assets, including ships, located in Hungary, Bulgaria and Rumania, and likewise a share (25%) of the assets of D.D.S.G. which are located in Austria itself.

6. The Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, the United States and France cede to Austria their property rights to all former German assets in Austria, with the exception of those assets which are specified in paragraphs 1, 3, 4 and 5 of the present proposal, and Austria, on her part, undertakes to pay the Soviet Union within two years two hundred million American dollars in freely convertible currency, and to pay to the United Kingdom, the United States of America and to France —— million American dollars within —— years.

7. All former German assets which have come into the possession of the U.S.S.R. shall not be subject to alienation without the consent of the U.S.S.R.
Undertakings covered by the definition of assets abovementioned shall operate in accordance with Austrian legislation, on condition that Austria shall not raise any difficulties in regard to the export of the profits or other income in the form of output or freely convertible currency.
The foregoing German assets shall be transferred to the U.S.S.R. free from any obligations which have accrued up to the date of the actual transfer of the said assets to the U.S.S.R.

8. Any disputes which may arise in connexion with the application of the provisions of the Article covering German assets in Austria shall be settled by means of bilateral negotiation between the interested parties.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.0011EW(Peace)/1–2648: Telegram

[Document 802]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, January 26, 1948—5 p. m.

84. Sober reflection may change the picture but first reaction to Soviet Treaty proposals among Austrian officials is one almost of jubilation. Two points which encourage them are (1) Soviet proposals indicate desire to bargain and not to slam door on negotiations; (2) Soviets are willing to give up claims to all Austrian industry except oil and shipping.

Gruber expresses chief concern about oil settlement particularly: (1) whether Austria will continue to be dependent on Soviets for domestic needs and (2) implications of 50 year exploration rights. These aspects are being given careful study by Austria this week.

Two hundred million dollar payment does not appear to trouble Austrians unduly, though they hope it may be possible to bargain Soviets down to 150. Gruber takes position that it is politically preferable to pay in dollars rather than in goods, for latter might serve to knit Austria economically into Eastern block, whereas, former will oblige Austria to export chiefly to west in order to repay whatever loans she might receive to assist her in meeting Soviet claim. Gruber recognizes that dollars would have to be provided by Western countries, chiefly by US and that it might be impossible to obtain US Government funds for this purpose. He hopes, however, that if US Government should on over-all political grounds give its blessing to cash settlement, it might be possible to raise money on commercial markets with certain Austrian industries mortgaged as security.

Gruber urges that US press forward with London negotiations as rapidly as possible in order that Soviet intentions can be promptly determined and period of uncertainty, disadvantages of which to morale of Austrian Government have been emphasized in several of Legations’ recent telegrams, brought to an end. On other hand, Gruber recognizes that if Soviets do prove ready to make acceptable settlement, it may prove necessary for over-all political reasons to delay conclusion or at least implementation of settlement until ERP has gone into effect.

Austrian reactions to Soviet proposals are obviously still somewhat half-baked. Significant points, however, are following: (1) that Austrians are pleased and optimistic; (2) that they feel US interest in freeing Austria from Soviet influence and attaching it to western orbit is sufficiently strong so that some way will be found to provide necessary dollars; (3) that disappointment and disillusionment would therefore be very great, with corresponding political repercussions, if settlement should fall through due to US refusal to make or facilitate necessary financial arrangements.

Legation comments on Soviet proposals and Austria’s attitude will follow shortly.

Erhardt

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State 740.0011EW(Peace)/1–2748: Telegram

[Document 803]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

secret London, January 27, 1948—5 p. m.

313. Embitel 281 January 24 to Department, No. 1 to Vienna.1 We discussed Soviet proposals Austria with. Dean and Marjoribanks ForeignOffice who stated: 1. French have proposed tripartite talks before deputy meeting London. Foreign Office approves and suggests US delegation arrive three or four days in advance for such talks.

2. Soviets presented maximum figures which they thought would be regarded as serious and which provide bargaining point from which they can climb down.

3. Possible Soviets also think in broader political terms and desire to maintain Four-Power contact at this time.

4. Soviets should be requested present maps mentioned paragraph 1 (a) and (b).

5. Foreign Secretary Bevin much interested in Austrian question but is absent from London. Proposals being referred him and his views expected shortly which, if they vary from Foreign Office views, will be communicated to Embassy.

In these and other talks it was apparent Foreign Office is somewhat puzzled as to US attitude. That is: Whether US seeks definite solution with Soviets and will work toward that end, or whether Department is convinced no such solution is possible and is only going through motions. Embassy suggests Department, in talks with British Embassy at Washington, discreetly clarify this point. Marjoribanks feels, and intimates he is voicing Bevin’s view, that it is possible come to genuine solution with Soviets.

Embassy would appreciate information soonest when US delegation will arrive London.

Sent Department 313; repeated Vienna 2.

Gallman

1 Not printed; for text of Soviet proposal dated January 24, see p. 1448 [Pg. 1448 includes portions of Doc. 800 and Doc. 801].

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.0011EW(Peace)/1–2848: Telegram

[Document 804]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, January 28, 1948—6 p. m.

93. Legtel 84, January 26.1 Legation submits following comments in regard to Soviet treaty proposals.

Proposals do not clearly reveal whether Soviets (1) have fundamentally altered their policy regarding Austrian treaty and now wish to reach early settlement or (2) merely wish to prolong negotiations and shift onus to US for failure to reach settlement, though we feel balance of present evidence lies slightly on the side of (1).

Following signs point to (1) Adoption of horse trading approach rather than that of defining German assets should accelerate negotiations; most of Soviet proposals are for first time precise, and therefore helpful for real exchange of views; carrying out of provisions along these general lines, if once agreed to, should be relatively simple; and above all abrupt relinquishment of all share in Austrian industry except oil and shipping is important substantive concession. Reality of concession made is indicated by fact Ginsburg estimated admissible German assets eastern Austria had aggregate value around $700,000,000 as compared with value of oil and DDSG assets now demanded amounting to possibly $200,000,000 and a $200,000,000 lump sum payment, totaling in all $400,000,000.

Principal sign pointing to (2) is that payment of $200,000,000 obviously impossible without US assistance, and it is realized here US Congress will be reluctant to appropriate large sum for payment to USSR, especially in view dispute over reparations out of current production in Germany. However if Soviets intended to have agreement on Austrian treaty breakdown because of US unwillingness to advance dollar payment, they should have asked higher price than $200,000,000 since, according to certain allied diplomats here, Soviets run substantial risk that US Congress may be willing to advance $150,000,000 to $200,000,000 to push back Soviet sphere of influence or that other solutions will be devised.

It is conspicuous Soviets have held to former positions on acquiring assets free of outstanding debts, freedom to export profits or output of enterprises acquired, on bilateral settlement of disputes, and on safeguards against nationalization. However these points are of secondary importance in a proposal of this limited type, and assuming some concessions or limitations obtained in negotiation, e.g., ceiling on export of profits or output, they would in themselves create no danger of crippling or undermining Austrian economy or jeopardizing political sovereignty.

Department will note that by these proposals Soviets recover tactical advantage in part. Even if these purely economic proposals should be agreed upon, treaty could still be blocked on questions of Yugoslav border, demilitarization, denazification or other matters.

Clear here that $200,000,000 demand crucial issue, since agreement will depend on Soviets’ willingness to negotiate on amount and specific terms and on US willingness to seek workable solution. Austrian and world opinion it is said here will judge Soviet and US aims by their attitudes on this point. Various devices for reaching agreement suggest themselves, e.g., whittling down figure, extending two year period, payment in goods, payment through processing of materials furnished, financing of payment by US loans payable through delivery of needed goods to ERP countries, financing of payment by commercial loans possibly secured by pledge of unclaimed German assets in eastern or western Austria. Such arrangements as these, and others to be developed later, all taken together, should make it possible arrive at agreement if both major parties are fundamentally willing. Attention is called to fact that termination of military occupation and release of many so-called German assets now under Soviet seizure would undoubtedly permit substantial increase in total production and exports of Austrian economy, possibly equaling or exceeding dollar payments.

In any event all Austrians, including Renner, Gruber, Sehaerf and other political leaders, take position Soviet offer should be taken seriously and maximum effort made to reach reasonable settlement.

Sent Department 93, repeated London for USDel 6.

Erhardt

1  Ante, p. 1449 [Pg. 1449 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Williamson) CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 247

[Document 805]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Williamson)

Washington, January 29, 1948.

Participants: Mr. E. J. Barnes, Second Secretary, British Embassy

Francis TV Williamson, CE

Harold C. Vedeler, CE

Mr. Barnes called to present the official view of the Foreign Office on the recent Soviet proposals on German assets in Austria which will be discussed at the forthcoming meeting of the Deputies in London.

The British Foreign Office considers that the percentages of oil production, prospecting, and refining claimed by the Soviets are much too high and should be brought down by negotiation. Mr. Barnes pointed out that the Soviet demands in this respect were approximately twice those envisaged in the original French compromise offer.

The Foreign Office also considers that the demand for the sum of $200 million, payable within two years, is preposterous, and could not be seriously considered by the Western powers except as a maximum figure which the Soviets expect to be whittled down; that it might be desirable to press for an Article which would enable the Austrians to pay any lump-sum in goods and in services over a long period of time rather than in hard currency.

The Foreign Office takes exception to the provisions of the Soviet proposals for the export of capital and products from the Soviet-held oil enterprises, and considers that the last paragraph on the bilateral settlement of disputes is unacceptable.

In general, the Foreign Office was pleased by the fact that the Soviet proposals were presented within the same framework as the original French offer. Mr. Barnes pointed out that the proposals represented a decrease in the demands made originally by the Soviets in the Austrian Treaty Commission in Vienna. The Foreign Office stressed the fact that the Soviet demands were the maximum which could be even examined as a serious proposal and considered that they should be discussed seriously, but that hard bargaining would be required to prevent legalisation of any extensive Soviet foothold in Austria.

I pointed out to Mr. Barnes that the Department was in full agreement with the general observations presented by the Foreign Office concerning the extent of Soviet claims.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.0011EW(Peace)/1–2748: Telegram

[Document 806]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, February 3, 1948—7 p. m.

359. Reembtel 313 Jan 27.1 Please bring following preliminary views on Soviet proposals German assets Austria to attention Dean and Marjoribanks:

We consider preliminary talks before Deputies’ meeting desirable to reach agreement on basic policy problems involved in Soviet proposals. Tentative plans call for departure USDel Feb 11, arrival London approximately Feb 16, allowing minimum 3 days for conversations. Various questions will be submitted BritEmb here next week for transmission FonOff.

US willing discuss Soviet proposals along with French proposals or any others which may be offered to solve German assets question. Any agreement reached on compromise basis German assets must be contingent on satisfactory agreement other issues in treaty. If satisfactory progress is made on Art 352 we intend propose discussion other unagreed Arts. This decision based on assumption Soviets are willing negotiate on Austrian treaty. We have no definite idea on precise Soviet objectives but consider submission definite figures and decrease in demands from Vienna figures Summer 1947 may indicate desire to negotiate. We question the utility prolonging negotiations if Soviets do not recede from maximum positions contained in proposals.

US cannot agree to any settlement which provides extensive economic foothold by Soviets in Austria or which involves Austrian assumption of obligations to Soviets which results in economic integration of Austria in East European bloc. Similarly, no agreement can be accepted which involves redemption of cash obligation by US Govt or Austrian debt to Soviets beyond Austrian capacity to pay within reasonable period.

Re para 5 Embtel 318 please assure FonOff US seeks definite settlement which is consistent with all international agreements respecting Austria. US genuinely interested in obtaining a satisfactory settlement and conclusion treaty permitting full exercise Austrian sovereign rights. We remain skeptical motives behind Soviet action in submitting proposals until these motives are displayed in course negotiations. We will not prolong negotiations on percentages of property interests if there is no apparent hope for settlement on all treaty issues, thus permitting Soviets to shift onus on Western States for failure to obtain treaty.

Marshall

1  Ante, p. 1451 [Pg. 1451 includes portions of Doc. 803 and Doc. 804].

2 Article concerning German assets in Austria.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/2–548: Telegram

[Document 807]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

urgent
secret Vienna, February 5, 1948—2 p. m.

130. Following are comments on possible Soviet motives in submitting new treaty proposal.

If objective is merely to prolong negotiations and shift onus to US for failure to reach settlement, question of Soviet motivation presents no problem. Soviet tactic of delaying final decisions through this means would seem wholly plausible pending clearer view of results ERP and US election trends.

If, however, Soviets now actually wish to reach early settlement, fundamental alteration of strategy is involved, and new conception of Soviet motivation called for. May be noted in passing that Gruber is inclined to consider offer genuine and to characterize it as first step in major shift in Soviet policy which he believes certain to result relatively soon from ERP (if carried through effectively) and from overall US policy of firmness.

Whether or not one accepts this optimistic view of broad picture, there can be no doubt Soviets have suffered substantial political losses in Austria in past year. Soviet Union has become increasingly odious to mass of Austrian people; Communist Party continues insignificant faction; USIA (Administration of Soviet Enterprises in Austria) firms, mismanaged by Soviets, starved of raw materials by Austrians and with equipment rapidly obsolescing, have certainly proved less profitable than was anticipated; US aid continues to have increasing economic and psychological effect; Austrian leaders, encouraged by US element, and proving more and more recalcitrant to Soviet demands, are using AC as vehicle of their resistance.

Department will recall several recent Soviet retreats in Austria, notably final approval of currency conversion (at a price) and cancellation of oil price increases.1 Austrian Communist Party has suffered several important reversals, notably removal of Communist secret police chief, failure in trade union election, resignation of old [only] Communist Cabinet member and removal of Fischer as editor of Coalition newspaper.

It is, therefore, conceivable Soviets may have been persuaded by unfavorable developments here and elsewhere in Europe to make, or at least prepare ground for, major shift in strategy for Austria which would involve termination of four-power military occupation and pursuit by more indirect means of long-term objective domination of country. Such means might be either internal political and trade union sabotage based on Communist Party, similar to tactics in France and Italy, or external armed pressure based on Yugoslavia, similar to tactics in Greece.

Chances of Soviet success along these lines do not appear bright. First would suffer from extreme weakness Austrian Communist Party, strong democratic orientation trade unions, and diminished ability of Soviets after evacuation to intimidate Austrian officials. Second tactic would be made unattractive to Soviets by indicating at appropriate time that US troops in Germany and Trieste, either with or without UN sanction, would be available to defend Austrian sovereignty.

On glance [balance?] we consider that, while Soviets might well be correct in believing their present Austrian policy a failure, they would be mistaken to suppose termination four-power occupation would increase their capabilities here. Only abandonment or failure ERP and collapse resistance to Communism in Western Europe would be likely to bear out such Soviet calculation re Austria. On other hand, it is believed here withdrawal of Soviets from Austria would be interpreted in several critical European countries as major victory for west and would substantially further over-all US and European interests.

Sent Department 130; repeated Moscow 5.

Erhardt

1 For documentation on the currency conversion see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 1208–1220; documentation on the cancellation of the oil price increases in January 1948 is in Department of State file 863.51.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.0011EW(Peace)/2–548: Telegram

[Document 808]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, February 5, 1948—3 p. m.

131. Legation’s 130 February 5.1 Further pursuing question of possible Soviet motives in Austrian treaty proposals, one possibility to be anticipated, in case London negotiations bog down, is that Soviets may seek settlement on basis partition of Austria, either proposing such settlement themselves or more probably trying to create situation where it seems only practical solution.

Department will appreciate this specious compromise would in reality be major Soviet victory, since it would enable USSR to establish control over vital democratic stronghold of Vienna, communications and information center and traditional point of leadership in southeastern Europe. There is no real parallel with Germany as regards partition, since Austria has well established national government, legislature, and administration, and no Ruhr in western zones. Only apparent advantage for west in partition of Austria would be safeguarding Italian frontier and Alpine passes, and this result can be obtained without partition, either on present basis or through presence US troops Bavaria if all Allied forces are withdrawn Austria.

Sent Department 131; repeated Moscow 6.

Erhardt

1  Supra.

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson) to the Secretary of State 740.0011EW(Peace)/2–648

[Document 809]

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson) to the Secretary of State

secret Washington, February 6, 1948.

Problem:

To determine US policy in the discussions of the Deputies for the Austrian Treaty to begin in London on February 20.

Background:

The Austrian treaty has previously been discussed at meetings of the CFM in London and Moscow and at the Treaty Commission in Vienna.1 The forthcoming meeting in London will discuss the question of German assets in Eastern Austria which were assigned to the Soviet Union by the Potsdam Agreement. These discussions will be based on the French and Soviet proposals which provide a framework for settlement of this question by assigning to the Soviets certain ownership interests in the oil industry and Danube shipping, and provide for a lump-sum payment by the Austrian Government to the Soviets in satisfaction of all remaining Soviet claims to German assets. The Soviet proposals claim approximately double the properties and payments originally envisaged under the French proposals and exceed the figures agreed informally by representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, and France as the limit to which the Western States might go in meeting Soviet demands based on the Potsdam Agreement. The figures in the Soviet proposals, however, are less than the claims made in the Austrian Treaty Commission which met in Vienna in 1947, and, if accepted, would involve a Soviet renunciation of claims to and present control of many economic enterprises in Austria in return for a lump-sum settlement.

A tabular comparison of the French and Soviet proposals represents what the Soviet Union would receive in final settlement of their claims under Potsdam: FRENCH SOVIET

Oil Extraction: Concessions corresponding to 50% of current production. Concessions corresponding to ⅔rds of current production.

Oil Prospecting: Concessions for rights to ⅓rd present producing areas in Eastern Austria. Concessions for rights to ⅔rds of undeveloped areas in Eastern Austria.

Oil Refining: Capacity for annual production of 250,000–300,000 tons. Capacity for 450,000 tons annual production.

Distribution: Facilities now under Soviet control. Facilities now under Soviet control.

Danube Shipping: All DDSG assets in Hungary, Rumania, and Bulgaria. All DDSG assets in Hungary, Rumania, and Bulgaria, and 25% share of DDSG assets in Austria.

Lump-Sum Payment: $100 million, spreading over 10 years, starting at such time when Austria’s minimum needs have been met. $200 million in convertible currency payable within 2 years.

Recommendations:

In the forthcoming negotiations it is recommended that the US Deputy be guided by the following basic policy: 1. To adopt the basis and method of the French proposals as the basis for a settlement with the Soviets on the German assets question.

2. To maintain that the figures contained in the French proposal are the maximum which are consistent with the aim of restoring and maintaining Austria’s independence, but to negotiate the differences between the French and Soviet proposals if it appears that a final settlement can be reached by a modification of the figures in the French proposal.

3. If an increase is necessary in the figures of the French proposal, to assure that the Soviets are not given a monopolistic control over any Austrian natural resources, that Austrian domestic needs are not unduly restricted, and that the supremacy of Austrian law and the rights of non-discrimination are guaranteed.

4. That no obligation be assumed by the Austrian economy in meeting a lump-sum payment to the Soviets which is beyond Austria’s capacity to finance successfully without substantial financial aid by any other signatory to the treaty. Provisions should be made to enable the Austrians to have sufficient time before assuming payments to meet their minimum financial requirements, and to have the option of paying either in currency or in goods.2

5. Any agreement on the German assets question should be made contingent on agreement on all other unresolved issues in the Austrian treaty so that it would be an integral part of the final settlement of the Austrian treaty as a whole.

6. To be prepared, in conjunction with the British and French, to renounce the right of the United States under the Potsdam Agreement to claim its share of the German assets in Western Austria in order to strengthen the bargaining position of the Western States.3

1 The Council of Foreign Ministers met in Moscow March 10–April 24, 1947, and in London November 25–December 15, 1947; the Austrian Treaty Commission met in Vienna May 12–October 11, 1947. For documentation on these meetings see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, pp. 139 ff., 676 ff., and 577 ff.

2 Marginal note beside paragraph four: “This should not be used as a device to funnel U.S. aid through Austria to Soviets. L[ovett]”

3 Added at the end of this memorandum was: “OK as amended by Mr. Lovett. G. C. M[arshall].”

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 740.00119 Control (Austria)/2–648: Telegram

[Document 810]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

secret Washington, February 6, 1948—7 p. m.

105. From the Secretary for Erhardt and Keyes. I consider this session of Deputies as decisive in determining whether settlement of Austrian treaty can be reached at an early date, permitting termination of military occupation and restoration of full independence to Austrian Govt. Preliminary discussions with Brit and French are necessary prior to meeting of Deputies in order that Western States may have a clear idea of the implications of the Soviet proposals and a clear and coordinated policy if the Soviets are inclined to negotiate their proposals with a view to a settlement acceptable to all Govts concerned. I hope a settlement can be reached which assures Austria’s political and economic independence and does not place burdens on the Austrian economy which are inconsistent both with our international agreements and with the requirements of peaceful reconstruction.

I realize the difficulties in reaching such a settlement and the Austrian impatience to bring to an end military occupation and zonal division of their country. At the same time, US public opinion would be reluctant to accept a settlement at such a price as to place Austria in a position of dependence on the Eastern European bloc or impose any charge on the Austrian economy beyond its capacity to finance successfully. These questions must be discussed with Brit and French and a clear understanding reached on all issues prior to the Deputies’ session.

For these reasons I recommend that you proceed London, preferably by Feb 17 to discuss with Reber the problems involved in the negotiations and to join in preliminary talks with Brit and French. I leave to your discretion length of time it will be necessary for you to remain London. If Soviets adopt an active policy in Austria, simultaneous with London conference, designed to swing Austrian Govt to support of their proposed settlement or to blame Western powers for any possible breakdown in negotiations, your return may be necessary to prevent development of a political situation adversely affecting US interests. You will best be able to determine how long you may wish to remain in London.

I should appreciate an early reply so that necessary arrangements may be made in London.

Marshall

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.0011EW(Peace)/2–748: Telegram

[Document 811]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, February 7, 1948—7 p. m.

155. Following is summary of paper by Gruber outlining Austrian judgment of Soviet treaty proposals:

Paper opens with argument that Soviets, because of failure of their policy in Austria and because of unfavorable developments in Europe generally during past year, are now genuinely desirous of concluding treaty if offered economic bargain they consider satisfactory.

Paper then discusses whether there would be danger to Austria, from either security or economic point of view, in concluding treaty now. Paper denies security danger on following grounds: (1) Com munists now removed from Austrian administration, (2) peasantry satisfied by sound distribution of land, (3) peasants and workers represented by two principal parties working closely together, (4) Austria has large military reserve of trained manpower, (5) US army will remain in Bavaria, (6) Austrian federal structure safeguards security even in unlikely case of “putsch” in Vienna, (7) closer union of west European states indirectly strengthens Austrian security.

On economic side paper maintains: (1) Austrian economy has sound basis and can be restored if foreign aid continues two to four years, (2) Austrian economy now not dependent upon Danube basin because of lack of wheat in Danube countries and lack of surplus goods in Austria. No dependence of Austria on east will exist during ERP period and even later will not be sufficient to threaten Austrian independence, (3) program of European customs union creates new possibilities for Austria, (4) military evacuation following treaty will stimulate Austrian economy and facilitate closer union with west.

As to international repercussions, Gruber argues conclusion of Austrian treaty would be first important success of “Marshall policy” and would stimulate collaboration of west European states. Also effect on Czechoslovaks of evacuation of Austria might be decisive.

Paper cites favorable features of Russian proposals as follows: (1) Soviets prepared to abandon Austrian economy as political weapon in exchange for economic compensation. (2) Russian claims not reparations but repurchase by Austrians of important industrial units. Austrians get with exception of oil, full sovereignty over their economy. (3) This involves considerable step in advance even over original US proposals which recognized Soviet right to considerable number of industries in Austria. Furthermore value of German assets in east Austria before 1938 does not differ substantially from medium [median?] sum between French plan and Russian proposals.

Gruber urges following modifications of Soviet proposals be sought in negotiations: (1) essential oil needs of Austrian domestic market be safeguarded by either (a) altering proposed percentage turned over to Soviets, (b) enabling Austrians to limit exports, or (c) “by such juridical formulation as to secure Austrian requirements”.

(2) As to lump sum settlement, figure must be lowered, period of payment must be prolonged, all credits granted by Russian state bank to USIA (Administration Soviet Enterprises in Austria) industries must be covered by settlement. (3) As to means of payment Gruber suggests: (a) payment in goods over ten to fifteen years; (b) payment in cash by loan from west which would be repaid over ten to fifteen years from production of former USIA industries; (c) raising of lump sum through emergency contributions from Austrian population and commercial credits from various sources secured by mortgages on Austrian industries; (d) turning over to Soviets Austrian properties in eastern European countries (value about one hundred million, dollars); (e) combination of above possibilities.

In annex to Gruber paper appears table of rough estimates as to extent production of USIA industries could be raised after Soviet withdrawal and used as basis either for payment in kind to Soviets or repayment of loans from west. Estimate concludes that 1947 USIA production valued about $61 million could under Austrian administration be in short time increased to about 109 million of which about 35 million could be exported annually.

Erhardt

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 863.00/2–1148: Telegram

[Document 812]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, February 11, 1948—9 a. m.

167. Both Socialist and Peoples Party leaders have emphasized to us their belief that while conclusion of acceptable treaty and prompt withdrawal of all occupation forces is definitely in Austrian interest, nevertheless Austrian security could be readily threatened by Soviets or satellites after withdrawal of western allies. To counter this threat they urge that US prior to withdrawal issue public statement similar to that made by President December 13 on Italy1 expressing our continued concern in maintenance of security and independence of Austria. In view of importance Austrian leaders attach to such statement and influence which our willingness or our unwillingness to make it might in long run have on firmness of their resistance to Soviets, Department may wish to consider, as one element affecting its attitude toward conclusion of treaty at this time, whether or not it would be prepared at appropriate moment to recommend issuance of statement of this kind.

Sent Department 167, repeated London for USDel 9, Moscow 8.

Erhardt

1 For the text of the statement, see Department of State Bulletin, December 21, 1947, p. 1221.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 740.00119 Council/2–1448: Telegram

[Document 813]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, February 14, 1948—noon.

502. For USDel. Following suggested to representatives Brit and French Embs here as subjects US believes desirable to consider in tripartite discussions on German assets question prior to initial session Deputies for Austria: 1. Whether Brit and French are prepared to go ahead with French proposal as basis of settlement with Soviets on German assets question?

2. If it appears final settlement can be reached, what are maximum percentage concessions which Brit and French would make in effecting compromise falling somewhere between French proposal and Soviet proposal with reference to: (a) oil production; (b) oil exploration rights; (c) refining capacity, and (d) DDSG?

3. Qualifications concerning oil to ensure largest measure Austrian sovereignty and to limit Soviet economic influence in Austria: (a) duration of concessions for exploration and production; (b) extent of immunity from nationalization of Soviet oil properties; (c) conditions under which Soviet Union may remove exportable production with provision for satisfaction of Austria’s domestic requirements.

4. Redemption obligations: (a) maximum amount; (b) period over which redemption can be spread; (c) optional arrangements as to form of payment, including payments in currency, in kind, and in value added to non-indigenous raw materials; (d) initial moratorium period.

Marshall

Memorandum of Informal Tripartite Discussion of the Soviet Proposal on German Assets in Austria by the Second Secretary of the Legation in Austria (Gannett) 740.00119 Council/2–1748

[Document 814]

Memorandum of Informal Tripartite Discussion of the Soviet Proposal on German Assets in Austria by the Second Secretary of the Legation in Austria (Gannett)1

secret London, February 17, 1948.

Mr. Marjoribanks opened the meeting by noting that the US Delegation had submitted a draft agenda for the Tripartite discussions (actually formulated by the British from the US note regarding holding Tripartite discussions),2 and that the UK Delegation had proposed certain additions. He suggested that three informal meetings be held prior to the Deputies’ meetings.

Mr. Marjoribanks indicated his desire to discuss the provisions of the Soviet proposal and the proposed agendas. Mr. Reber stated that he preferred to defer for the moment discussion of these topics, but indicated his readiness to examine the Soviet proposal briefly paragraph by paragraph in order to determine whether each delegation understands it in the same manner and to formulate questions to be put to Mr. Koktomov for clarification; this was agreed. In the course of this exchange Mr. Marjoribanks noted that the Soviet proposal in general conforms to the framework of the French proposal, but that objectionable features include: 1) the figures specified, 2) the time limit of the oil concessions, 3) the time provision regarding the lump-sum payment, 4) the extraterritorial provisions, and 5) the bilateral negotiation of disputes. Mr. Marjoribanks added that he was prepared to discuss the Soviet proposal along with the French proposal and that in the UK view arguments to counter the Soviet position would have to be based on the necessity of reestablishing a free and independent Austria and Austria’s ability to pay a lump-sum while remaining a free state, rather than upon a definition of German assets. Mr. Reber said that the US Delegation is prepared to accept the French proposal as the principal term of reference and to examine the Soviet proposal as a modification, which must, however, have regard to Austria’s viability and to its ability to pay a lump-sum without placing a substantial burden upon any other country. General Cherrière noted that the aim of the French proposal—to remove Soviet claims to German assets in Austria—had been blunted by the provisions in the Soviet proposal, especially those regarding DDSG and the lump-sum payment, and suggested that the Soviet Delegation should be asked to state what it considers to be the advantages of its proposals over the French proposal.

Regarding the meaning of the Soviet proposal and questions for clarification, the following points were noted:

Paragraph 1

First subparagraph—Request list and map mentioned therein. What does “current production of oil in Austria” mean—concessions for areas in Eastern and Western Austria or just in Eastern Austria? The US Delegation noted the desirability of a cutoff date to prevent over-exploitation by the Soviet of properties to be returned by them.

Second, subparagraph—Request list and maps mentioned therein. What do the references to Potsdam and to areas presently in Soviet possession mean?

Paragraph 2

What would be the form of the concession contacts and under what conditions would they be forfeitable?

Paragraph 3

Request list mentioned therein. What date does the word “having” refer to?

Paragraph 4

Request list mentioned therein.

Paragraph 5

It was generally agreed that this paragraph indicates Soviet interest in physical assets as opposed to shares. The UK suggested requesting from the Soviets a list of what they have in mind, and the US noted the desirability of a cut-off date.

Paragraph 6

Mr. Reber stated that the Soviets should be asked how they expect Austria to pay a lump-sum under the conditions set forth in their proposal. General Cherrière said that in this regard the three Western powers would have to decide before the Deputies meet what they are going to do with regard to their claims to German assets in Austria, particularly the form of renunciation, in view of provisions of the Paris Reparations Agreement. It was agreed to pass over this point for the present.

Regarding method of payment, there was general agreement initially to stick to the provisions of the French proposal providing for payment over a ten-year period to commence two years after the effective date of the treaty, and to examine other methods of payment than that set forth in the Soviet proposal. General Cherrière stated forcefully his view that the treaty should clearly provide in what form payment should be made in order to avoid danger of Soviet pressures and interference in the Austrian economy.

Paragraph 7

Request clarification regarding: 1) the phrase on alienation (does alienation refer only to assets confirmed to the USSR by the treaty), 2) the phrase “Austria shall not raise any difficulties.…”

It was generally agreed that Austria should be permitted to satisfy its minimum requirements, especially for oil, before Soviet production could be exported. General Cherrière noted that there is a difficult problem regarding the method in which the Soviets would be paid for the oil they produced which would be consumed within Austria.

Regarding the last subparagraph—Does the Soviet provision regarding the liability of assets to be confirmed to the USSR by the treaty refer to liabilities incurred before or after the Potsdam Declaration? Who would assume liabilities incurred since the Potsdam Declaration attached to assets taken over by the Soviet authorities in Austria during the present occupation but not to be confirmed to the USSR by the treaty? What is the date of transfer of assets involve in this subparagraph?

Paragraph 8

It was agreed that there is no question regarding the Soviet intent in this paragraph.

The meeting adjourned until February 18, 1948, 11:00 A. M., at which time the two agendas are to be discussed.3

1 The discussion was held at the Foreign Office. Present for the United States: Samuel Reber, Deputy, Lt. General Geoffrey Keyes, John G. Erhardt, Francis T. Williamson, Covey T. Oliver, Raymond Goldsmith, Lt. Colonel Edwin Kretzmann, John C. deWilde, Michael P. Gannett; for the United Kingdom: James A. M. Marjoribanks, Deputy, W. H. Lawson, M. F. Cullis, Colonel S. H. C. Lorie, F. A. Vallat, A. E. Abbott, C. M. Leitch and A. W. Southam; for France: General Paul Cherrière, Deputy, Robert Luc and C. Maisonnier.

2 Not printed. The note contained the same points transmitted in telegram 502, supra.

3 Two more Tripartite meetings were held on February 18 and 19, at the British Foreign Office. The first continued the discussion of the Austrian Treaty while the second considered Germany. The substance of this memorandum remained the basis of Tripartite policy.

The meetings of the Deputies for Austria, February–May 1948The meetings of the Deputies for Austria, February–May 1948

[815] Editorial Note

[816] The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

London February 20, 1948—11 p. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2048: Telegram

[817] The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

London, February 27, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2748: Telegram

[818] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, March 3, 1948—11 a. m.

863.00/3–348: Telegram

[819] The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

Washington, March 4, 1948—11 a. m.

740.00119 Council/2–2748: Telegram

[820] The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

London, March 6, 1948—1 p. m.

740.00119 Council/3–648: Telegram

[821] The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

Washington, March 7, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/3–648: Telegram

[822] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, March 10, 1948—noon.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/3–1048: Telegram

[823] The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

Washington, March 10, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Council/3–1048: Telegram

[824] The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

London, March 11, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Council/3–1148: Telegram

[825] The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

London, March 12, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Council/3–1248: Telegram

[826] The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

London, March 17, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Council/3–1748: Telegram

[827] The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

London, March 18, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/3–1848: Telegram

[828] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber)

Washington, March 18, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Council/3–1848: Telegram

[829] The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at Paris

Washington, March 26, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Council/3–2648: Telegram

[830] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, March 31, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Council/3–3148: Telegram

[831] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

Washington, March 31, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Council/3–3148: Telegram

[832] The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

London, April 1, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–148: Telegram

[833] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

Washington, April 2, 1948—9 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–248: Telegram

[834] The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

London, April 3, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–348: Telegram

[835] The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

London, April 5, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–548: Telegram

[836] The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

Bogotá, April 7, 1948—11 p. m.

710.J/4–748: Telegram

[837] The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, April 9, 1948—noon.

800.515/4–948: Telegram

[838] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

Washington, April 10, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–1048: Telegram

[839] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Bogotá

Washington, April 10, 1948—4 p. m.

710.J/4–1048: Telegram

[840] The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

London, April 14, 1948—8 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–1448: Telegram

[841] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, April 14, 1948—4 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–1048: Telegram

[842] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

Washington, April 16, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–1048: Telegram

[843] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, April 21, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–2148: Telegram

[844] The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

London, April 28, 1948.

740.00119 Council/4–2848: Telegram

[845] The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

Washington, April 30, 1948—5 p. m.

740.00119 Council/4–3048: Telegram

[846] The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

London, May 6, 1948—2 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–648: Telegram

[847] The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

Washington, May 6, 1948—7 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–648: Telegram

[848] The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

London, May 8, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–848: Telegram

Editorial Note [Document 815]

Editorial Note

The Austrian Deputies of the Council of Foreign Ministers met forty-seven times (meetings 64–111) at Lancaster House, London, from February 20 to May 6, 1948. The meetings began at 10:30 A. M. and their Chairmanship rotated among the four Deputies starting with the U.S. Deputy, Samuel Reber. The British delegation was led by James A. M. Marjoribanks, Assistant Head of the German Political Department of the Foreign Office, and included M. F. Cullis, Austrian Expert in the German Political Department, and A. W. Southam, Director of the Economic Group of the British Element of the Allied Commission for Austria. The French delegation was led by General Paul Cherrière, French Deputy High Commissioner for Austria, and included Robert Luc, First Secretary of the French Embassy in the United Kingdom. Pierre de Leusse replaced Cherrière as French Deputy for meetings 88–100 and he was in turn replaced by Marcel Berthelot for the last eight meetings of the Deputies. The Soviet delegation was led by Nikolai Petrovich Koktomov, Counselor of the Soviet Embassy in the United Kingdom, and included E. D. Kiselev, Political Adviser to the Soviet High Commissioner in Austria, and G. A. Kulagin, Chief of the Economic Division of the Soviet Element in Austria. The U.S. delegation was led by Samuel Reber, Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs, and included Lieutenant General Geoffrey Keyes, U.S. High Commissioner in Austria, and John G. Erhardt, U.S. Minister in Austria.

Documentation on the meetings of the Deputies, including the minutes of the meetings, records of decisions, telegraphic accounts of the meetings from Reber, and documents sent to the Deputies by the Austrian and Yugoslav Governments, are in Department of State Lot M–88, Box 113. Copies of the telegraphic accounts of the meetings are in file 740.00119 Council.

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/2–2048: Telegram

[Document 816]

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

secret London February 20, 1948—11 p. m.

665. Delsec 1 1560. Austrian Deputies at 64th meeting (first of present session) commenced discussion of Soviet proposal.

2. US representative noted 4 governments now agreed in principle on a practical settlement thus ending discussions of definition, but stated agreement on assets question must be consonant with Austria’s ability to pay and at same time fulfill pledge to restore Austrian independence with viable economy. Agreement on assets must be conditional upon agreement on other unagreed articles. He stated Soviet contribution, together with French proposal, offers good basis for discussion.

3. British representative (Marjoribanks) stated implementation of Potsdam must not prevent reestablishment of an independent Austria, as provided in Moscow declaration, by imposition of intolerable burden on Austrian economy. He noted that agreement on frontiers, reparations and military provisions is vital for Austria’s future independent existence. No agreement can be reached on assets until status of other unsolved issues is known.

4. French representative (Cherrière) noted Soviet counterproposal differs considerably from French proposal, particularly paragraphs 5 and 6. He requested clarification of paragraphs 5 and 6 reasons for abandoning French suggestion regarding payment of lump sum in kind over period of years along lines of Italian treaty. He held agreement on assets key to agreed treaty, and stated FrDel is guided by (1) respect for international agreements regarding assets, and (2) desire for practical workable solution, in which regard French proposal was offered as an overall settlement involving balance between constituent parts. Regarding DDSG, he asked on basis what agreement SovDel asks for assets in western zones.

5. Soviet representative (Koktomov) stressed importance in Soviet view of conclusion of treaty, and belief that agreement on assets question should precede agreement on other questions, citing emphasis placed on assets at previous discussions and US position in deputies report to Ministers (London December 15)2

In reply to French representative, Soviet representative stated Soviet proposal was offered in place of unacceptable French proposal and not as an amendment. Soviet representative held Italian treaty provisions not pertinent because Austria, unlike Italy, is not obliged or asked to pay reparations to USSR, but merely to transfer German property. He added that sufficient reference had been already made to damage suffered by USSR during war not to require repetition.

Regarding DDSG Soviet representative stated Soviet proposal is for transfer to USSR of 25 percent of DDSG assets in all of Austria, and in reply to French inquiry reference basis for this provision pointed out that although USSR is entitled to all German assets in eastern Austria it is prepared to deny itself great part of these in order to reach agreed treaty.

6. British representative asked Soviet representative how he proposes selection of DDSG assets indicated in paragraph 5, and whether lists are contemplated as in case of oil. Soviet representative replied lists are possible solution but held question not one of principle but of practicability and hence to be settled following agreement on principles.

7. Next meeting February 21 to continue same discussion, paragraph by paragraph.

Sent Department 665, repeated Vienna 5; Vienna pass to USFA, repeated Paris 58, Moscow 28, Berlin 21.

[ Reber ]

1 The Delsec series of telegrams, sent through the facilities of Embassy London, were from the U.S. Deputy for the Austrian Treaty Negotiations, Reber. Similarly, the Ausdel series, sent to Embassy London, were for the U.S. delegation to the Austrian Treaty Negotiations.

2 The reference here is presumably to document GEM (47) (L) 15, December 2, 1947, Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. ii, p. 798.

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/2–2748: Telegram

[Document 817]

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, February 27, 1948—9 p. m.

771. Delsec 1588. From Reber to Lovett. In discussion with General Keyes and Erhardt before their departure for Vienna, we agreed that conclusion of an acceptable Austrian treaty at this time would be desirable from a political and economic point of view insofar as Austria is concerned, and would not involve any risk concerning implementation of ERP in Austria. On the other hand, serious question was raised whether conclusion of treaty at this time is desirable from a strategic viewpoint. General Keyes points out that withdrawal of troops would involve surrender of strategic advantages to US. Presence of occupation forces in Austria keeps intact an unbroken front from Italy through Austria and Germany to the North Sea. Secondly, presence of troops prevents overt acts of aggression against Austria.

Information obtained in meetings of deputies to date does not permit an exact analysis of Soviet objectives in submitting proposals on German assets or an evaluation of the full impact of Soviet remarks on Austrian economic and political independence. Discussions have progressed, however, to a point where negotiation of specific points in Soviet proposal will soon take place. I consider it essential that our position be fully agreed prior to a major development in the London negotiations. Furthermore, the strategic question involves entire approach to Austrian treaty as established in February 6 memo1 which serves as our basic instruction.

We did not conclude that efforts to obtain an Austrian treaty should he abandoned, but suggest that a decision on the strategic considerations involved should be made in Washington where relationship of the Austrian situation to our overall strategic interests in Europe and to the recent developments in Czechoslovakia2 can be adequately weighed. Could this aspect of the problem be given appropriate consideration in Washington? I would appreciate an early reply.

Sent Department 771; repeated Vienna for Keyes and Erhardt 13.

[ Reber ]

1  Ante, p. 1457 [Pg. 1457 includes portions of Doc. 808 and Doc. 809].

2 For documentation on the Soviet takeover in Czechoslovakia see volume iv .

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 863.00/3–348: Telegram

[Document 818]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, March 3, 1948—11 a. m.

268. Recent conversations with Austrian leaders on treaty questions in light of Czechoslovak coup have underlined importance of military and air clauses.

While recognizing Austria would never offer prolonged resistance to full scale war launched by USSR or neighboring satellites, Austrians of both major parties are confident of country’s ability, under certain conditions, of offering prompt and effective resistance to bandit raids and limited guerrilla warfare on frontiers. They believe Austrian defense force could be organized and placed in combat condition in three or four months, and USFA agrees this should not be impossible considering recent military training and experience of young men. Numerical strengths provided for in agreed Paragraph One of Article 171 considered adequate.

Conditions which Austrians have mentioned as necessary to ensure country’s security include (1) Austria’s freedom to equip its defense force with arms and equipment (2) availability of continued supplies of arms, et cetera, from abroad or otherwise, and (3) some evidence of US intention of coming to Austria’s assistance in case fighting should develop to war proportions.

Deutsch in particular, who organized Austrian Army after first war, emphasizes primary importance of adequate arms. He does not appear aware that at Moscow Soviets sought in Article 17 to require Austria to confine itself to weapons and equipment of Austrian manufacture, in Article 26 to forbid it to use German war material except in restricted quantities and for only one year, and Articles 26 and 272 to restrict Austrian production of war material. It would seem essential, if all other provisions of treaty were agreed upon, to secure elimination of at least Soviet Paragraph Three of Article 17.3

USFA concurs.

Sent Department 268, repeated London USDel 49.

Erhardt

1 The paragraph under reference limited Austria to an army of 53,000 men and an air force of 90 aircraft and 5,000 total personnel.

2 For the text of Articles 26 and 27 see the Unagreed Articles of the Draft Austrian State Treaty, pp. 1517 [Pg. 1517 is part of Doc. 857] and 1518 [Pg. 1518 is part of Doc. 857].

3 Paragraph three of Article 17 restricted Austria to those airfields necessary for civil aviation and the Austrian Air Force.

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London 740.00119 Council/2–2748: Telegram

[Document 819]

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

top secret   us urgent Washington, March 4, 1948—11 a. m.

746. Ausdel 1. For Reber. Army desires JCS to assess from military standpoint desirability of Austrian treaty which would entail US troop withdrawal (DelSec 15881 ). Reply expected 3 or 4 days.

Since discussions likely to be protracted Dept favors continuation of negotiations in meantime but on basis of US bargaining position greatly hardened by Czech example. All factors will have to be weighed from standpoint safeguarding Austrian political and economic independence, which will necessitate taking strictest stand on issues involving any form of extraterritorial privilege. Keeping in mind that US still retains rights to German assets, Dept believes line taken should aim at most nearly equitable treatment of all foreign holdings in Austria. In general we are disinclined to consider concessions beyond French proposal. From Vienna telegrams you will note evolution certain sections Austrian opinion caused by Zecho developments. You will be informed further.

Marshall

1  Ante, p. 1468 [Pg. 1468 includes portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817].

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–648: Telegram

[Document 820]

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact London, March 6, 1948—1 p. m.

899. Delsec 1614. From Reber. Dept will note from Delsec 1615, March 51 on 72d meeting that critical phase of discussions has now been reached. Soviet representative has sought to establish that Soviet proposal is marked concession and clear proof of Soviet desire to obtain agreement Austrian treaty, while continued support of French proposal by western powers in spite of Soviet rejection in December indicates that western powers do not desire treaty. Soviet representative has avoided stating that USSR will not negotiate differences. It is now clear that he will not make first move, but is endeavoring to demonstrate that other delegates have taken step backward thus securing considerable tactical and propaganda advantages in Austria.

French and British have been trying continuously get a lead from USDel on concessions which might be made to meet Soviet position and keep negotiations from breaking down. Under instructions in Deptel 571, February 192 however I do not feel that I am authorized to carry “probing” to point of taking lead on any upward revision, either with French and British or in quadripartite meeting.

Since Dept desires discussions to continue pending JCS decision (Deptel 746, March 43 ) and since impasse may develop at stage when Soviets have tactical and propaganda advantage, I recommend that I be authorized to use proposals of February 11 memo on oil and DDSG.4 If compromise along these lines could be suggested at next meeting by one of western delegations we might possibly shift to Soviet representative burden of demonstrating his asserted desire to reach agreement. At same time our continued adherence to February 6 memo on lump sum and supremacy of Austrian law would serve to prevent any possible development toward compromise from outstripping JCS decision as well as affording a sounder basis for western position on completion of treaty.

Sent Niact to Dept as 899, repeated to Vienna as 19; Vienna pass to USFA.

[ Reber ]

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed; it allowed the U.S. delegate to negotiate within the limits of the February 6 memorandum (p. 1457 [Pg. 1457 includes portions of Doc. 808 and Doc. 809]) and instructed Reber to adhere as closely as possible to the French proposal on German assets. The delegation was to refer all concessions to the Department for final approval. (740.00119 Council/2–1948)

3  Supra.

4 Not printed; the memorandum under reference outlined the maximum concessions on German assets as follows: the right of the Soviet Union to 58% of Austrian oil production, 50% of the exploration rights, 50% of the refining capacity, and 25% of the DDSG in the Eastern Zone of Austria (740.0011 EW (Peace)/2–1148).

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London 740.00119 Council/3–648: Telegram

[Document 821]

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

top secret
niact Washington, March 7, 1948—7 p. m.

793. Ausdel 2. For Reber. As you are probably aware from Army cable to Milattaché London,1 JCS has given opinion that from military point of view treaty which would involve troop withdrawal is undesirable in light of newest Soviet action in Europe. In formulating earliest decision which must take full account of both political and military factors, we would appreciate any supplementary views you, Keyes and Erhardt may wish to offer next day or so.

In the meantime with considerations in mind put forward in Delsec 1614, Mar 6,2 Dept authorizes you to use proposals in Feb 11 memo3 on oil and DDSG for a compromise offer by one of Western delegations. Re DDSG you should understand offer should not foreclose any possible US claim to German assets in company. You should remain firm in accordance with Feb 6 memo on lump sum settlement and supremacy of Austrian law and should also insist that all disputed issues arising from interpretation of Article 35 after coming into force of treaty should be settled in accordance with Article 574 or otherwise by quadripartite agency. These three issues with reference to German assets problem seem best tactical ones to choose for defensible position in interest of preserving Austrian political and economic independence.

(Sent London 793; repeated Vienna as Depts 197 Personal for Erhardt and Keyes Eyes Only)

Marshall

1 Not printed. For the opinion of the JCS see telegram 844, March 10, to London, p. 1474 [Pg. 1474 is part of Doc. 823].

2  Supra.

3 Not printed. For a summary of the proposals in the February 11 memo see Delsec 1614, supra (footnote 4).

4 Article 57 provided that any dispute over the interpretation of the Treaty should be settled by direct negotiations between the interested parties, or failing that should be referred to a Commission of the two states and a mutually acceptable third state; if the two parties could not agree on the third state, they could request the Secretary-General of the United Nations to appoint the third party.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/3–1048: Telegram

[Document 822]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, March 10, 1948—noon.

296. In light of international developments of last two weeks and their repercussions on Austrian public and leaders, we feel unable to express assurance that should all occupation forces be withdrawn following conclusion of treaty, Austria could successfully resist Soviet encroachments (reDeptel 197, March 71 ). Sovereignty and independence under those circumstances would be decisively conditioned her exposed and isolated position and by lengths to which Soviets have shown they are ready to go.

We believe that from political point of view treaty is still desirable but only if fulfillment of following conditions are guaranteed before evacuation of troops: (1) that western economic aid to Austria through ERP or otherwise is uninterrupted and is adequate to permit continued recovery (2) that Austria is brought into full participation with Whatever measures of economic and political collaboration may emerge in Western Europe during next few months and (3) that Soviets by one means or another understand, as they now presumably understand, from presence of our troops here that effort on their part or their satellites to take over Austria after evacuation would result in immediate counteraction on part of western powers.

We consider that Austrian political leaders are substantially in agreement with this point of view and realize that withdrawal of western forces under present circumstances is not only unlikely but undesirable. While they continue publicly to urge conclusion of treaty official position now emphasizes rearmament to preserve independence frontier guarantees and rejection of extraterritoriality.

Chief reason why government continues unofficially to support treaty is fear that failure now may lead to partition of Austria. While consensus of opinion appears to be that Soviets would prefer not to partition largely because they are reluctant to consolidate our position in western zones, it is widely felt that in case of further failure to agree on treaty draft toward partition might in present atmosphere prove irresistible. There is no doubt that Soviets can swallow up eastern zone of Austria at any time they so desire and this is risk we inevitably run by prolonging [military] occupation. This risk seems less, however, than greater hazard of possible loss of all Austria in case of premature evacuation of western powers.

Sent Department 296, repeated London for USDel 56.

Erhardt

1 Same as telegram 793, supra.

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London 740.00119 Council/3–1048: Telegram

[Document 823]

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

top secret   us urgent Washington, March 10, 1948—6 p. m.

844. Ausdel 3. Reber (Eyes Only) Following are conclusions of JCS opinion, endorsed by Secretary of Defense,1 which is based largely on same general considerations Delsec 1588:2

“(a) From the military point of view it is undesirable that a peace treaty, involving the withdrawal of occupation forces, be concluded with Austria at this time.

“(b) If it is determined that the political and economic considerations involved are overriding and that an early conclusion of the treaty is desirable, provision should be made whereby the occupation forces are not withdrawn until such time as the Austrians have organized, equipped and trained a security force reasonably adequate to perform the tasks envisaged in the treaty.

“(c) Regardless of the trend of treaty negotiations at the present conference, Austria should be permitted to begin now the organization of her armed forces.”

Soviet attitude in discussions to date makes it appear unlikely that treaty can be obtained which will adequately guarantee Austrian political and economic independence. This, together with JCS opinion, gives us two reasons for believing that settlement can not be achieved which will protect Austria and western Europe against communist expansion. We have demonstrated reasonable willingness to negotiate by authorizing concessions requested Delsec 1614.3 The paramount, guarantees on which we must insist include the supremacy of Austrian law, quadripartite arbitration of disputes and lump-sum settlement, as outlined Ausdel 2.4 Re latter you will understand it may not be a question of actual sum but observance of requirements laid down in approved Feb 6 memo. Dept leaves to your discretion how these points can best be brought out in future discussion. If negotiations on Article 35 break down on these issues, which we consider essential to Austrian independence, we trust our action will be understood by public opinion in Austria and elsewhere.

We endorse JCS recommendation c above and envisage it might be used as basis of possible proposal in ACC Vienna, which if agreed by western powers could be notified to Deputies meeting in connection with current treaty talks. Please discuss this matter with British and French.

Dept requests you consider whether time is not approaching when we should make our over-all position respecting Article 35 clear in the discussions. US is committed to Moscow Declaration and Potsdam assets agreement.5 Under latter we enjoy equal rights with others but realize effort must be attempted to achieve treaty in which assertion of rights of four powers will not militate against Austrian independence, without which treaty would have no meaning. US considers Austrian independence so essential to European pacification that it has carried large financial burden in Austria for over 2½ years whereas Soviets have continuously weakened Austrian economy. Present Soviet stand is completely unreasonable and reflects upon nature Soviet interests in Austria and their good faith.

Re Delsec 1626,6 we note from Vienna’s 284, Mar 7,6 that Gruber’s thinking is not dissimilar to our own in allowing Austrian Govt greater autonomy under occupation in event no treaty is obtained. We would wish to consider this further after receiving views of Keyes, other western delegations, as well as Austrian Govt. (Sent to London as 844; repeated to Vienna as 216 eyes only Keyes and Erhardt).

Marshall

1  James V. Forrestal.

2 February 27, p. 1468 [Pg. 1468 includes portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817].

3 March 6, p. 1471 [Pg. 1471 is part of Doc. 820].

4 March 7, p. 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 820 and Doc. 821].

5 For the text of the Potsdam assets agreement see Foreign Relations, The Conference of Berlin (The Potsdam Conference), 1945, vol. ii, p. 1506.

6 Not printed.

6 Not printed.

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–1148: Telegram

[Document 824]

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, March 11, 1948—6 p. m.

1010. Delsec 1632. From Reber. The present position re Austrian treaty discussions may be summarized as follows:

Soviet representative is consistently taking position that submission of Soviet proposal in January proves desire on part of Soviet Government to conclude treaty and its willingness to make concessions. On other hand, re-iterates that refusal of western states to accept all provisions in Soviet proposal demonstrates unwillingness to reach an agreement and their lack of sincerity. While avoiding clear-cut refusal to negotiate any points of his proposal, it seems clear that he nevertheless is not prepared to recede in any acceptable degree but is working to try to place responsibility for lack of progress on other delegations, particularly UK and US in order to apportion blame in event possible failure negotiations.

After endeavoring unsuccessfully to elucidate further precision of Soviet proposal thereby establishing its impact on Austrian economy, we have consistently maintained that any settlement must be based on our obligations both under Moscow and Potsdam and enable an independent Austria to survive with sociable [viable?] economy which in our opinion is not possible under the present Soviet proposal. Within the framework of these principles and the stipulations of the February 6 memo, including supremacy of Austrian law, arbitration of disputes and lump sum settlement based on Austrian capacity to pay, we have indicated our willingness to consider possible modifications of these sections and have tried to demonstrate the sincerity of our purpose by our willingness to make suggestions and to agree to discuss any points. The British and French have followed a similar course of action with, of course, some difference in emphasis. British delegation, for example, is more rigid in its insistence upon defining specific properties which allows opportunities for Soviets to pretend to believe British reluctant to make progress.

Although it cannot yet be deemed a certainty, I do not consider that there is any present possibility of agreement in these discussions. As stated in Delsec 1626 March 8,1 Soviet unwillingness to consider any adjustment must however be brought out with more clarity before any suggestion for concluding meetings can be entertained. This remains the opinion of French and British delegations, although British are inclined to force the issue. I can agree provided the opportunity is carefully selected. In the event of break we recommend that extreme care be taken in the formulation of realistic political and economic policy providing a greater degree of autonomy for Austria which will help to prevent any possible combination of Socialist and Communist forces in Austria and will render more difficult partition of Austria by Soviets. It is recognized however, that the longer the occupation the greater the risk of partition.

In general, we concur with recommendations contained in Vienna’s 296, March 102 and the suggestions put forward by British in regard to arming Austrian gendarmerie (reference MA telegram 70–898 March 73 ). It is difficult for us here to see, however, what further steps can be taken in order to carry out JCS recommendation “C” contained in Deptel 844 March 104 as undoubtedly Soviets through ACC could block any further progress. Matter will, however, be discussed with British and French at earliest opportunity.

Austrian Socialists now in London have expressed grave concern over food situation and fear results of any gap between interim aid shipments and ERP help.

Sent to Department 1010, repeated to Vienna for Keyes and Erhardt (Eyes Only) 26.

[ Reber ]

1 Not printed.

2  Ante, p. 1473 [Pg. 1473 is part of Doc. 822].

3 Not found in Department files. For documentation on the arming of the Austrian gendarmerie and army see pp. 1356 [Pg. 1356 includes portions of Doc. 728 and Doc. 729] ff.

4  Supra.

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–1248: Telegram

[Document 825]

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

secret London, March 12, 1948—2 p. m.

1019. Delsec 1633. From Reber. Gruber last night handed me a memorandum1 outlining the views of the Austrian Cabinet on recent events in Czechoslovakia and their effect upon the present treaty negotiations. The Cabinet conclusions are that the Austrian Government is in a position to maintain internal peace and order and, short of a general war, to insure the integrity of Austrian frontiers, provided (a) that the police and gendarmerie are furnished modern equipment and (b) that the military clauses of the treaty are satisfactorily settled to insure full liberty in the selection of arms permitted by Annex II of the treaty.

Whereas the Austrian Government still considers the speedy conclusion of the treaty desirable, it is nevertheless of the opinion that no concessions should be made regarding the essential elements of an acceptable settlement which are: (1) agreement on military clauses as above, (2) at the time of signature of the treaty, at the latest, the Austrian Government to be authorized by the Allied Council in Vienna immediately to start preparations for the formation of the federal army, (3) the economic clauses to be formulated in such a way (a) as to secure the oil requirements of a domestic market (b) in stipulating the yearly installments so as to give due regard to Austria’s over-all political and economic situation and not to endanger the economic existence of the country, (4) food requirements to be assured for the immediate future. Copies of this memorandum being airmailed.

Gruber explained that, although his Government still hoped for a successful outcome for the present negotiations, the position taken by the Soviet representative did not, in their opinion, indicate that this was likely. If the conference broke down because of the insistence of the western powers upon adequate guarantees for Austrian independence, this would be understood in Austria. He did express the hope that, before a final break this time, one further effort should be made to have the Soviets express themselves in regard to the remaining clauses of the treaty so that their position on the whole treaty could be understood and appreciated. In the event of such a failure he again urged, as in Vienna’s 284, March 7,1 that the western occupying powers, preferably jointly, agree with the Austrian Government on a coordination of policies in the western zones which would give the Austrian Government greater authority and return to it as many of the remaining functions still exercised by the occupation forces as feasible.

Sent Department 1019; repeated Vienna 27.

[ Reber ]

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–1748: Telegram

[Document 826]

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent
niact London, March 17, 1948—2 p. m.

1086. Delsec 1638. From Reber. At tripartite meeting western deputies last night it was agreed that after restating our positions at tomorrow’s meeting, from which no deviation will be made in the absence of concrete evidence of Soviet willingness to negotiate, a concerted effort should be made to force Soviet representative to set forth what concessions, if any, his Government is prepared to make at this time. French deputy will take the lead in describing extent of alterations he is willing to make in his proposal as follows: 53% of oil extraction, 42% of oil exploration rights, 420,000 tons refining capacity, utilization of port facilities in Vienna in addition to DDSG assets in satellite states, 15 million dollars of Austrian assets in satellites in addition to 100 million dollars lump sum payable in two cash installments of 25 million dollars and five installments of 10 million dollars payable in goods, installments to start one year after ratification. British and US will restate position as outlined most recent meetings and give sympathetic reception to new French initiative. If Soviet [representative] unwilling to make positive contribution adjournment of the discussions of Article 35 until he had time to receive further instructions from Moscow will be proposed and intervening period can then be devoted to brief consideration of the remaining un-agreed treaty issues. If after resumption of discussions of Article 35, probably early next week, no change in the Soviet position is indicated we will have at that time to state that the Soviet attitude demonstrates no agreement is possible except on their terms and to consider terminating these negotiations, since it seems unlikely that Koktomov will be prepared to make more than a token advance.

I assume that US position described in report of our Delegation Austrian Treaty Commission dated October 14, 1947,1 should govern this Delegation in its discussions of the other articles. With respect to Article Two guaranteeing Austrian independence, the French Delegation is now of the opinion that a quadripartite guarantee of this nature is meaningless, since quadripartite consultation is required and the Soviets would be in a position to block effective action. I agree and suggest we should be prepared to drop our insistence upon this article in return for agreement to eliminate the requirement national manufacture of Austrian armaments. I should also appreciate being informed whether the establishment of the IRO machinery makes any change necessary in respect to Article 16, or whether the article is still considered essential in a treaty.

Sent Department 1086, repeated Vienna 32, Vienna pass to USFA.

[ Reber ]

1 Not printed; this report may be found in State Department file 740.0011 EW(Peace)/10–147 and in the CFM files, Lot M–88, Box 64.

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/3–1848: Telegram

[Document 827]

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, March 18, 1948—7 p. m.

1125. Delsec 1642. From Reber. Today’s meeting Austrian deputies indicated, as previously foreseen, that Soviet [representative] prepared to make token concessions only for purpose of keeping discussions going. In tripartite meeting this afternoon, it was agreed no further concessions can be offered by US at this stage negotiations and that attempt should be made to proceed discuss other articles of treaty during which we would, as suggested in Vienna’s telegram 64, March 18,1 attempt to direct attention Austrian opinion to Soviet intransigeance on other clauses. This effort may well be blocked by Soviet [representative’s] refusal to consider other articles until further progress has been made in settlement German assets question. To this end he may be even prepared later to make some further token concessions in respect say of lump sum, possibly to reduce Soviet demands to 150 million, thereby rendering disagreement on this article alone more difficult for western powers.

These tactics on his part render decision concerning JCS recommendations (reDeptel 844, March 102 ) even more urgent.

Sent Department 1125; repeated Vienna 35 for Keyes and Erhardt Eyes Only.

[ Reber ]

1 Not printed.

2  Ante, p. 1474 [Pg. 1474 is part of Doc. 823].

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) 740.00119 Council/3–1848: Telegram

[Document 828]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber)

secret
us niact Washington, March 18, 1948—8 p. m.

971. Ausdel 6. For Reber. Delsec 1638 Mar 171 . In view position maintained by Soviet representative in treaty negotiations so far, we concur fully in your proposed course looking toward termination meetings possibly next week. New French suggestions for property items and lump-sum settlement regarded favorably as indication tripartite approach but believe this should represent approximate maximum concession to be offered by three powers. In event termination discussions on Art 35 without agreement considered desirable review all unagreed Arts at sufficient length to call attention again to our position, and wherever possible a tripartite position, on each outstanding issue. It is hoped that before this might be undertaken an approach may be made to French with view to substantial modifications of their proposals for military restrictions in Art 27 on certain research and development, manufactures and stockpiling of materials. Present overall situation in Europe may prove effective argument with French in effort to eliminate their present alignment on this question with Soviets as against Brit and US.

In general Dept stands by policy on disputed Arts set forth as US position in report of USDel ATC Oct 14, 1947. As to French view and your suggestion concerning Art 2,2 Dept would readily withdraw support of para 2 relating to consultation in event of threat to the political or economic independence or territorial integrity of Austria. However, continued insistence on inclusion of para 1 is believed desirable as of possible advantage vis-à-vis public opinion in reflecting efforts of three Western powers to obtain treaty preserving independence of Austrian State. If first para is included in final treaty, it might have some value for building legal case in event possible future aggression against Austria, although it is realized indirect aggression may be the greater threat.

Art 16 in form presented ATC Report is so vitiated as compared with our original proposal on displaced persons Dept would not insist on its retention. If any Art of this character is to be included, we should hold to our present position regarding substance paras 1, 4, and 7.3

In order to lay stress on our consistent efforts to obtain a treaty assuring establishment and preservation of Austria’s independence, we still believe it desirable for USDel to issue a comprehensive statement before termination of proceedings on reasons for the breakdown, summarizing policy which we have steadily followed on the basic issues of the treaty and referring to our constant endeavor to obtain an Austrian treaty since May 1946. Concur in general with Vienna’s USDel to London 64 Mar 184 just received here.

Sent London as 971 Ausdel 6; rptd Vienna as 250.

Thorp

1  Ante, p. 1478 [Pg. 1478 includes portions of Doc. 825 and Doc. 826].

2 For the text of Article 2 see the Unagreed Articles of the Draft Austrian State Treaty, p. 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857].

3 For the text of Article 16, including the paragraphs under reference, see the Unagreed Articles of the Draft Austrian State Treaty, p. 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857].

4 Not printed; it suggested that emphasis be placed on Articles 25 and 26 if the negotiations broke down since Soviet intransigence would be more apparent on the military clauses than on the German assets where the issues were complex. Legation Vienna also supported the necessity for including Article 2 as a guarantee of Austria’s future independence. (740.0011 EW (Peace)/3–3148)

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at Paris 740.00119 Council/3–2648: Telegram

[Document 829]

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at Paris

secret
us urgent Washington, March 26, 1948—6 p. m.

977. Please pass immediately to Reber. Dept believes there is no likelihood of obtaining settlement at this time consistent with Austrian independence and it agrees with you that protracted continuance of present London discussions would be fruitless. (Delsec. 16481 ). Your suggestion re insistence on a review of general treaty problem, including assets and other questions, seems to offer best means of improving US position in connection with termination negotiations at an early date. While US may have to take initiative by leading off, Dept considers it most desirable that a tripartite position be presented as a whole, with other western delegations not only supporting but developing US views. We favor the proposal you communicated to us by telephone that some elements of the discussions could be continued in Allied Council Vienna or possibly other quadripartite body in or attached to Allied Commission.

Sent to Paris for Reber as 977; to London for Reber as 1068; to Vienna for Keyes and Erhardt as 281.

Marshall

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 740.00119 Council/3–3148: Telegram

[Document 830]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

top secret   us urgent Washington, March 31, 1948—5 p. m.

295. For Keyes and Erhardt only. Following is main part of text of message by telecon from USDel, London:

“At this morning session Soviet Delegation made a major concession on lump sum reducing amount to 150 million payable in six years. It is evident that we cannot immediately pass to consideration of other articles of treaty without further negotiations on Article 35 which will demonstrate especially to Austrian people willingness of other three delegations to make concessions essential to conclusion of Austrian treaty. In our opinion Soviet proposal, which is intended to Strengthen Soviet position in Austria will make it impossible for US to break off treaty discussions on German assets issuer. In our opinion it is important for us to recapture the initiative lost to the Soviets today and we urged this course of action with the French and British this afternoon. Both of them are reluctant however to make any real concession at this stage from previously announced positions. Marjoribanks in particular insisting that our present tactics have proved successful in eliciting a real concession from Soviets and we have only to stay firm in order to obtain more. We feel in order to regain initiative we should make some rather spectacular counter proposal of our own and are considering proposal along following lines: 1. Acceptance in principle of 150 million lump sum on condition a. Further lengthening period of payment.

b. Waiver by Soviet Union of all other claims such as Gosbank claims and German creditor claims against enterprises transferred to Austria.

c. Clarification and definition of Austrian obligation to transfer net profits and other income of Soviet oil and shipping enterprises in Austria.

d. Abandonment of all reparation claims against Austria in accordance with Article 34.

e. Waiver of all claims to interest on outstanding part of lump sum.

f. Transfer to Austria of all enterprises other than retained oil and shipping properties on day treaty enters into force.

2. Offer to transfer to Soviets 58 percent oil production, together with approximately sufficient existing (note that this would mean refining capacity as increased by Soviets since 1945) capacity to refine this amount, and 50 percent exploration areas.

Such offer would in our opinion have effect of either (1) forcing Soviets to make further concessions leading to agreement in principle on Article 35 with agreement that details be worked out by Allied Commission in Austria, or (2) showing up Soviet unwillingness to make further concessions, in which case we would have made most convincing demonstration to Austrian people of our willingness to reach agreement and free them from burden of occupation. In case of (1) we would proceed to discussion of other articles of treaty, maintaining our position on Article 2 (territorial integrity) and Article 5 (frontiers), Article 17 and 27 (restrictions on armament) and Article 34 (reparation). Insistence on our position on these Articles would be generally understood in Austria and will create firmer basis for suspension of negotiations whereas failure to yield on Article 35 would impair US position in Austria.

In discussing some such form of initiative with British and French this afternoon British propose without making significant concessions of their own to prolong negotiations to elicit more Soviet concessions.

They argue against propaganda value of Russian proposal and fail to appreciate unlikelihood of Soviets after scoring this success, making another concession in the near future. French appreciate force of our arguments, but inclined to sound out willingness of Soviets to make concessions on other parts of Article 35 before making any concessions on our part and even then disposed to make more cautions and limited concessions. We consider, however, that piddling concessions now would create bad impression and that unwillingness on our part to take dramatic step forward would be exploited by Soviets in Austria. Moreover, we believe delay in making concessions on our part would deprive such concessions of major part of their propaganda value and would in end serve no useful purpose.”

“Request your comments soonest repeating same to USDel London.2

Lovett

2 Legation Vienna in telegram 413, April 2, not printed (740.00119 Council/4–248), suggested that if the Russians really wanted the Treaty they would concede more, but advised that some concrete gesture be made by the United States on Article 35.

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London 740.00119 Council/3–3148: Telegram

[Document 831]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

top secret
niact Washington, March 31, 1948—8 p. m.

1116. Ausdel 9. For Reber. Dept inclined to favor position falling between French reaction and AusDel’s suggestions given in telecon Mar 31.1 Not believed here that counter-proposal would lead to speedy agreement in principle re Art 35 and on reference of details to AC. On contrary, believe that specification of conditions suggested by AusDel, together with additional conditions set out below, will require further discussion at London on all important points in Art 35. While Dept of opinion that basic US position on Aus treaty would be best served by emphasizing differences on such matters as frontiers, reparation and military clauses, Dept does not believe it would be advisable to give any appearance of summary disposition of Art 35. Also feared here that raising issue at this time of reference details to AC might be regarded as deliberate Western effort to combat and delay negotiations.

For same reason, Dept opposed to US Del’s suggested condition re abandonment all reparation claims because feared this would make US vulnerable to Soviet counter-blasts to effect that this condition reveals US unwillingness to conclude agreement on Art 35.

In view foregoing, Dept believes AusDel statement on Soviet proposal should be along following lines:

USDel finds in difficult to see how Austria could pay more than $100 million, particularly in light of Sov attitude on other parts of Art 35 and other arts having an economic impact on Austria, but is prepared to study the possibility of a somewhat larger figure as a part of an entire settlement of problem of German assets in Austria, provided: 1. Austria has option to pay all or any part of obligation in goods or services on Ital formula.2

2. Six-year period for payment is preceded by a two-year period of grace to permit re-establishment of Austrian economy upon a basis which would materially assist Austria in meeting the obligation.

3. Soviet Union waives all Gosbank and German creditor claims against enterprises to be returned to Austria (assumed that Sov Union assumes all indebtedness incurred by enterprises to be retained since date taken into Soviet possession).

4. In addition to clarification and definition of net profits and other income, Sov Union to recognize obligation to leave available in Austrian economy a portion of Sov oil production determined by applying proportion of Sov oil production in Austria over total Aus oil production to an agreed estimate of Austria’s minimum requirements for petroleum products.

5. Time period exploration rights may remain outstanding before production to be substantially shorter than concession period for production.

6. Art 35 formula is accepted by Soviet Union as full and final settlement of all its claims against Austria re German assets.

7. It is understood unpaid balance of lump-sum does not draw interest (believe this should be used only if Soviets have raised point).

8. Clearly understood that, except as specifically stated otherwise in Art 35, Austrian law applies.

9. Satisfactory provision is agreed for settlement of disputes, i.e., Art 57.

In addition to above statement re lump-sum, USRep may say that USDel might consider higher figures (within terms of your previous instructions) than those previously suggested by it re oil production and exploration provided satisfactory solutions are found to problems regarding Austria’s minimum requirements and export of profits. May also state that USDel would consider adding another refinery to Korneuburg and Voesendorf if knew more about Soviet desires and capacity figures.

Sent to London as 1116 Ausdel 9; reptd to Vienna for Keyes and Erhardt only as 298.

Lovett

1 Quoted in telegram 295, supra.

2 According to Article 74 of the Italian Peace Treaty, Italy had to pay $100,000,000 to the Soviet Union over a period of seven years; all or part of this obligation could be met by goods and services.

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/4–148: Telegram

[Document 832]

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent London, April 1, 1948—3 p. m.

1301. Delsec 1651. From Reber. Analysis of current Soviet tactics in making concessions on lump sum and attempt to center discussion on this one aspect of their proposal on German assets demonstrates importance of forcing Soviets to discuss other unagreed issues in treaty. USDel’s telecon proposal was designed to do this and to forestall any prolonged wrangling on specific points in Article 35. In Austrian opinion, lump sum question has assumed symbolic importance as the test of settlement, only equaled by frontiers and military clauses. Failure of western states to make equivalent move on this question will increase feeling in many Austrian quarters that western states do not desire treaty.

USDel considers therefore, that telecon proposal would have following advantages as a tactical move: 1. It would be a dramatic proof to Austrians that US is willing to reach agreement. At same time, USDel considers that its proposal is not “a summary disposition” of Article 35 since it is our intention to reach agreement on percentages and figures of oil settlement, to provide an approach to solution of DDSG, and to fix lump sum subject to necessary reservations before turning Article 35 to AC for further elaboration of detail.

2. It would place Soviets in position of accepting a liberal settlement of assets question and prevent a return in deputies to interminable and profitless discussion of “principle.”

3. It is only device foreseeable at this time for turning discussion to other articles, requiring Soviets to state position on other aspects of Austrian sovereignty and independence, which in USDel’s view have equal importance with provisions of Article 35.

4. Agreement in principle on Article 35 with appropriate reservations along lines of Deptel 11161 and transference of discussion to another forum would force Soviets to give specification to demands in terms of properties involved and precise exemptions from Austrian law. USDel considers that such a discussion would not only be valuable in defining in detail Soviet objectives in Austria but, taking place in Vienna in consultation with Austrian Government, would also curb Austrian ardor to assume any obligation whatsoever to get rid of Soviet troops. Discussion would provide a guide for any future bilateral agreement which Soviets will undoubtedly demand for implementation of settlement. At same time, discussion of details in AC would still permit Four Power control of assets discussion. Similarly, reference to AC will not be interpreted as US unwillingness to conclude agreement provided a step forward is made here to meet Soviet demands and discussion is continued in London on other unagreed articles.

5. In terms of previous instructions and views of USFA and American Legation Vienna, this proposal would still permit the continuation of military occupation as security force in Austria and would give renewed authority to AC in associating it with Austrian treaty settlement.

In view of these considerations, as well as approach of Soviet figure to maximum position outlined in February 11 memorandum,2 USDel would appreciate review of instructions in Deptel 1116 taking into account Austrian question as a whole since we are convinced that continued discussion on gap between Soviet and western positions on Article 35 alone will ultimately provide political advantage in Austria only for Soviets. USDel requests authority depending upon outcome of talks with British and French to enable it either to agree to 150 million lump sum payment in one gesture or to propose another specific figure. French deputy has shown inclination to move in latter direction. We consider that an exact position is preferable to an expression of willingness to increase sum provided SovDel accepts various conditions, which as today’s meeting has (again demonstrated, SovDel will not discuss until agreement is reached on sum and time limit.

Sent Department as 1301, repeated to American Legation Vienna as 48.

[ Reber ]

1  Supra.

2 Not printed. For a summary of the maximum position see Delsec 1614 March 6, p. 1471 [Pg. 1471 is part of Doc. 820], footnote 4.

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London 740.00119 Council/4–248: Telegram

[Document 833]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, April 2, 1948—9 p. m.

1152. Ausdel 10. For Reber. Delsecs 1651 and 1653.1 Dept realizes difficulty of problem confronting you as result Soviet concession on lump-sum payment but does not believe problem can be met by agreement in part or agreement in principle on several parts. Concerned lest any agreement in principle on figure higher than 100 million dollars would only be on record for use against us by Soviets in future or serve as basis for bilateral deal in case failure of negotiations.

Would it not be helpful to submit paper setting forth all elements of a proposal for settlement assets problem including such authorized concessions as may presently seem appropriate, leaving blank for figure of lump-sum (or alternatively inserting figure $100 million) and otherwise advancing provisos Ausdel 9?2

Your position can be that lump-sum figure should be finally determined only as residual item in light of total Austrian burdens. Hence necessity to reach some understanding on other points. Putting in complete proposal would serve as basis for attempting to shift discussion to these points. Soviet statement reported Delsec 1653 seems to leave door open for such shift.

We appreciate that on properties your margin for trading is slim but doubt that you should use all your authorization at this time. Suggest you might wish to name refineries for transfer Soviets. Proposal on net profits must be sufficiently tight to leave no loopholes under which Soviets could later claim right to withdraw bulk of production or convertible currency by reason of operation of clause protecting Austria’s minimum requirements.

Sent London 1152 Ausdel 10 for Reber; rptd Vienna 311 for Keyes and Erhardt only.

Lovett

1  Delsec 1651, supra, Delsec 1653, not printed.

2 March 31, p. 1483 [Pg. 1483 includes portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831].

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/4–348: Telegram

[Document 834]

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

secret   niact London, April 3, 1948—3 p. m.

1341. Delsec 1656. At meeting with British and French today, it was tentatively agreed that on Monday three delegations would seek to return to discussion of Article 35 as whole instead of concentrating on lump sum and that following concessions would be made.

1. British would declare readiness to make concession on oil production if Soviets willing in principle to make counter-concession, it being understood that in event Soviet willingness US would offer to split difference equally US 58%.

2. British would offer exploration area in addition to that contained in their paper March 11 designed to raise percentage to about 47.

3. Subject to subsequent agreement upon conditions already specified, US would declare willingness to raise lump sum provided Soviets willing to (a) accept Austrian assets ex-enemy countries in part payment, and (b) give Austrian option to pay in goods a percentage of all but first two annual installments of 25,000,000 each.

4. US would declare willingness to allocate to Soviets a refinery in addition to Voesendorf and Korneuburg, withdrawing insistence on inclusion of Hauskirchen Topping plane plant, and French would agree to cession of Moosbierbaum together with cracking plant added thereto by Soviets.

5. On DDSG previous French offer to accord Soviets free use of port facilities in Vienna in addition to DDSG assets in ex-enemy countries would be repeated.

If Soviets accept conditions in (3), it will be necessary at an early stage to mention a specific figure. In such circumstances USDel should be prepared to agree to increase lump sum up to say 130 million, which would include at least 15 million derived from Austrian assets in ex-enemy states. We cannot avoid eventually making concrete offer on lump sum as well as on oil, et cetera, since failure to do so would be construed as act of bad faith. USDel sees no way of proceeding to discussion other articles of treaty until substantial agreement reached on lump sum and percentages in Article 35, or of breaking oil negotiations on Article 35 unless after considerable concessions by three western delegations Soviets remain intransigent.

Sent Dept as 1341, repeated Vienna for Keyes and Erhardt as 53.

[ Reber ]

1 Not printed.

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/4–548: Telegram

[Document 835]

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

secret London, April 5, 1948—7 p. m.

urgent niact

1362. Delsec 1658. Following is conference material scheduled for April 5, 11:50 a. m. Subject: Austrian treaty negotiations.

Today we were hit by a flying saucer.

1. In meeting today British opened by making previously agreed concession on oil exploration. Soviets immediately took initiative by making series of concessions as follows: a. Oil production, claim reduced from 64 percent to 60 percent of total production.

b. Oil exploration, claim reduced from ⅔ (66 percent) to 60 percent.

c. Oil refining, claim reduced from 450,000 tons annually to 420,000, accepting US and French figures without making clear however whether 1945 or 47 capacities govern.

d. Duration of contracts, from 50 years to acceptance of last French proposal. (See Delsec 1641, March 181 )

e. DDSG, in addition to DDSG assets in Hungary, Bulgaria, and Rumania, all (assets in eastern Austria, which is equivalent to 15 percent as against 25 percent of DDSG assets in Austria as a whole.

2. Other deputies agreed to modify their positions in general terms as envisaged Delsec 1656.2

3. Soviets are now endeavoring to concentrate discussion on three areas of disagreement in this article,3 i.e., exploration, DDSG, and lump sum, particularly the latter. As to first, we will not move to ultimate position until further advance is made by Soviets. We will continue to insist at this stage that Soviets accept utilization of port facilities in Austria in lieu of specific DDSG assets in Austria. Both of these positions are agreed with British and French.

4. With respect to lump sum, instructions contained in Ausdel 114 represent in effect a retrogression from position previously taken with respect to French position by USDel. In accordance with Department’s instructions, we agreed to French suggestion first two payments aggregating 50 million be paid in currency. Increase of 15 million derived from Austrian assets in ex-enemy satellites had also been approved USDel. We therefore urge reconsideration of proposal Delsec 1656 which asked for authority to insert specific figure, thus Austria would pay in goods or services on Italian formula all or part of any amount other than first two payments in cash and value of Austrian assets abroad.

5. With respect to conditions to be attached to lump sum payment Soviets have agreed to consider these when agreement on figure reached in principle.

6. In this general connection, what reply will be made to Delsec 1654, April 2,5 concerning relationship between lump sum payments and ERP.

7. Soviet move today which speeds up discussions may presage establishment of definite timetable for them in Austria. We cannot here judge full implications. It does, however, result in virtually blocking any break over Article 35. It seems reasonably clear now that Soviets either genuinely desire conclusion of treaty or are willing to take calculated risk that treaty conclusion will be blocked by western powers and give Soviets propaganda advantage. If area of agreement on Article 35 narrows further, we will make renewed effort to divert discussion to other articles while details of 35 are being ironed out by experts either here or in Vienna. The possibility of Soviets yielding on all other disagreed articles of treaty must be envisaged. On other articles we will remain firm because our position there is favorable.

8. We feel the $64 question still remains unanswered, i.e., do you want a treaty in the present situation in Europe? If not, what is your advice on best tactics to be employed in breaking off negotiations? We should have done so before Easter if we could only have persuaded the French and British to come along.

9. We are agreed with British and French on course of action for tomorrow morning’s deputies meeting, but should meet with them afterward for further plans. Could we hear your views by cable tonight?

[ Reber ]

1 Not printed; the French proposed thirty years for the duration of the contracts (740.00119 Council/3–1848).

2  Supra.

3 Article 35.

4 Not printed; it suggested that Austria be allowed to pay any or all of the total lump sum in goods and services (740.00119 Council/4–348).

5 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State 710.J/4–748: Telegram

[Document 836]

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State 1

top secret Bogotá, April 7, 1948—11 p. m.

Martel 26. Personal for Lovett from Marshall. Reference Telmar 292 regarding Austria: I am concerned lest we be put clearly in position of thwarting conclusion of Austrian treaty. What are the odds between general world effect of concluding treaty and risk of Soviet subversion of government following withdrawal of troops?

Marshall

1 Secretary Marshall was at Bogotá attending the Ninth International Conference of American States, March 30–May 2, 1948.

2 Not printed; it summarized paragraph 7 of Delsec 1658, supra (710.J/4–648).

The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State 800.515/4–948: Telegram

[Document 837]

The Chargé in Austria (Yost) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent Vienna, April 9, 1948—noon.

448. Gruber has asked us to transmit urgently to Secretary of State formal note dated April 81 setting forth latest views of Austrian Government on lump sum payment for German assets. Following is summary translation of note.

US Government is requested to review stand it has hitherto taken on lump sum with following considerations in kind: (1) Austrian Government continues to hope sum will be as small as possible.

(2) Though American proposal for payment in goods is useful bargaining position it is questionable whether agreement on this basis would be compatible with Austrian independence.

(3) Experience of Hungary and Finland with reparations payments in kind has shown that difficulties constantly arise over prices and rates of exchange and that political concessions are often exacted from debtor states.

(4) Soviets would seek from Austria materials for armament industry (steel, machines, tools, oil, and so on) which they will have increasing difficulty in obtaining from other western states.

(5) Dollar payments required Austria would only be between 12½ million (French proposal) and 25 million (Soviet proposal) annually commencing in 1949 or 1950.

(6) Production of USIA industries restored to Austria represents substantial asset which can be “commercialized”.

(7) Payment in goods would be contrary to US policy of making Austria independent of Soviet influence since it would result in tying Austria into Russian economy.

Austrian Government realizes difficulties of obtaining supplementary credits to permit payments to Soviets but believes that with US support it should be possible to commercialize restored assets in such way as to permit dollar payments in installments to Soviets. From point of view rehabilitation of western Europe it would be preferable that Austria deliver goods therefrom rather than to Soviets. Only by freeing Austria from Soviet “reparations nexus” can US aim of independent Austria be achieved and aid already extended to Austria be given lasting effect.

Although Austrian Government for reasons stated above attaches greatest importance to suggested change in stand of USDel Austria could nevertheless agree to payment in currency only if it were certain that it could count on American help in this matter. In any case it hopes that treaty will at least allow Austria possibility of choosing between payment in currency and payment in goods so that if at later time US should decide in favor of Austrian standpoint way would not be barred to relieving Austria from undesirable pressure. End of summary.

In response to our query as to exactly what sort of “American help” was contemplated by first sentence of final paragraph above Gruber replied assistance in obtaining commercial credits in US and other western countries with which installments to Soviets could be paid and which would be secured by deliveries to west of Austrian goods. US acceptance of Austrian point of view would also imply, he stated, that these deliveries of goods to west and currency payments to Soviets would not affect volume of ERP assistance to Austria. If it should prove impossible for US to give any assurance at this time in regard to “help” of sort specified (which he recognized might well be the case) Gruber believed that most desirable solution would be for treaty to give Austrian Government option of paying lump sum either in currency or in goods or combination of two. We pointed out that latter position was that already taken by USDel in current negotiations.

Full text of Austrian note being transmitted by pouch but will be telegraphed if either USDel or Department so desire. Gruber expects to be in London briefly middle of next week before proceeding to Paris for signature of CEEC statute.

Sent Department 448, repeated London USDel 102.

Yost

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London 740.00119 Council/4–1048: Telegram

[Document 838]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

top secret
niact Washington, April 10, 1948—4 p. m.

1268. Ausdel 13. For Reber. In view of considerations pointed out Delsecs 1657–9,1 Dept believes you should endeavor to reach maximum extent of agreement on Article 35 and then proceed to other disagreed articles of treaty. We still do not know whether Sov intentions are to execute tactical maneuver for propaganda purposes or to attempt to reach agreement on reasonable terms and under these cir-circumstances feel it essential to continue negotiations until Sov purposes are revealed.

Consider that following should be basic approach: SovDel has offered to accept settlement of 150 million dollars and other delegations are willing to approve figure of 115 million dollars (15 million dollars to be derived from Austrian assets in ex-enemy countries). Since gap in positions of respective delegations has been reduced to 35 million dollars, USDel feels this represents considerable progress and believes agreement can be reached somewhere in area between 115 and 150 million dollars for lump sum. As US has consistently maintained, USDel is willing to accept reasonable sum which is realistically related to Austria’s capacity to pay without impairment of Austria’s ability to achieve economic independence and to become a self-supporting nation as envisaged in the Moscow Declaration and the new control agreement.

USDel is certain that Austria can pay any such amount as 115 million dollars only if the terms of payment are generous and do not require Austria to surrender convertible currency which it does not possess or cannot afford to deliver without jeopardy to its economic position. With this in mind US Delegation is willing to make following proposal: (1) Lump sum payment of 125 million dollars (and this must be our limit) as compromise between figure of 100 million dollars in original French proposal and recent Sov offer of 150 million dollars.

(2) Fifteen million dollars of this sum to be derived from Austria’s assets in ex-enemy countries.

(3) Balance of 110 million dollars to be paid, preferably in graduated installments, over a period of 6 to 8 years with initial payment of 10 to 20 million dollars.

(4) Initial 2-year moratorium after ratification. (You must insist on 2-year moratorium in order to defer initial payment until latter part of ERP period with prospect thereby of obtaining more favorable reaction in US to treaty providing for lump-sum obligation).

(5) Austria has option to pay all or any part of obligation in goods, services or value added on Italian formula.

(6) No claim to be made to interest on unpaid balance of lump sum.

(7) Provision for appeal by Austria, whenever Austria cannot meet annual installment, to appropriate international body of experts, preferably connected with or designated by UN, with view to a finding by that body on Austria’s capacity to pay without external government assistance and to a grant of moratorium on such terms as these experts may recommend.

(8) Provisos specified in sub-paras 3, 4, 6, 8 and 9 in Ausdel 9.2

(9) Agreement on other unagreed articles of Austrian treaty.

Re your previous references to payment in convertible currency, we point out that after World Bank subscription paid, Austria will retain only about 30 million dollars out of gold pot share. No reasonable possibility can be seen here of a favorable balance of payments amounting to 20 million dollars for 1948, 1949 or 1950 so that no sum as great as 50 million dollars is in sight during this period. In any event, since major portion of 50 million dollar payment in two annual installments would be derived from Austrian gold reserve, this reserve might suffer total exhaustion leaving Austria in unsound financial position. Moreover US public would probably consider payment from gold reserve during period of ERP assistance as especially objectionable. (Sent London as Ausdel 13 for Reber; repeated Vienna as 338 for Keyes and Erhardt).

Concessions western delegations indicated Delsecs 1657, 1659 acceptable assuming agreements reached on percentages will be subject to conditions specified above for settlement assets problem.

Foregoing will answer your Delsec 16623 which has just arrived.

Lovett

1  Delsec 1658, April 5, p. 1488 [Pg. 1488 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835]. Delsecs 1657 and 1659, not printed.

2 March 31, p. 1483 [Pg. 1483 includes portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831].

3 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Bogotá 710.J/4–1048: Telegram

[Document 839]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Bogotá

top secret Washington, April 10, 1948—4 p. m.

Telmar 42. Personal for the Secretary from Lovett. You will recall JCS opinion that for military reasons, in particular troop withdrawal, Austrian treaty undesirable at this time.1 We believe there are valid political and economic grounds for our continuing to endeavor to negotiate a treaty which will fully meet Austrian requirements. Dept considers it unlikely that Sovs will accept conditions US stipulates as essential for Austrian independence. Sov responsibility for break on these terms should be clearly understood in Austria. To meet latest Sov concessions on lump sum, Dept is instructing US Dep to propose compromise amount 125 million dollars but to insist on 2-year moratorium initial payment. Dept thinks no other solution would be consistent with Austria’s reasonable capacity to pay. We would recommend that if subsequent negotiations yield prospect of treaty on US terms, question of conclusion be referred to National Security Council. In any event, it is unlikely that treaty could be completed for submission to present session Congress. Meanwhile situation may become clearer than at present.

(Sent to Bogotá as Telmar 42 repeated to London, Reber Eyes Only as 1269).

Lovett

1 See telegram 844, March 10, to London, p. 1474 [Pg. 1474 is part of Doc. 823].

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/4–1448: Telegram

[Document 840]

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

top secret   us urgent
niact London, April 14, 1948—8 p. m.

1557. Delsec 1670. From Reber. Although it is still not yet clear whether Soviet intentions are to execute a tactical maneuver or to reach agreement on reasonable terms, events of the past few days are significant in this connection and may throw further light on Soviet objectives.

Kurasov’s approach to Figl reported in Vienna’s 474, April 131 taken in connection with Soviets concessions on assets and Soviet willingness to discuss other articles in treaty, is first clear indication that Soviets may now desire treaty and may be prepared to make the necessary accommodations in their positions in order to achieve one. There is further evidence of Soviet possible objectives in statement of aims in Cominform Journal, Belgrade’s 89, April 22 and recent strengthening of factory guards in Soviet Zone. If interpretation these facts is correct, fulfillment of Soviet objectives in Austria would be facilitated by withdrawal of western forces, even at the expense of accepting conditions in the treaty which they have heretofore opposed. Even if treaty concluded in these circumstances might appear to be satisfactory as far as our previously expressed conditions are concerned, Soviets might be in a position to utilize Austria’s exposed geographic position and the economic foothold acquired in Austria through assets settlement already agreed to bring sufficient pressure on Austrian Government to enable Soviets to maintain direct or indirect control. Austria might then find it difficult to withstand this pressure.

In these circumstances USDel considers it can no longer readily be assumed that Soviets will not accept conditions which we have stipulated essential for Austrian independence, and we therefore may be faced with the possibility of rejecting the treaty on strategic grounds after reaching agreement in principle. Rejection of treaty at that time would place us in same position in Austrian opinion as British suggestion for using Congress as an agency for delay. While there are possibilities of delay in current negotiations, this tactic cannot be utilized to gain the time required to judge whether in terms of general situation western troops should be withdrawn from Austria.

This proposal and the implications of Kurasov’s approach to Figl were discussed with British and French deputies today. It was made clear to British that we could not accept course of action merely involving a delay in ratification as pretext for retention of troops. Marjoribanks stated the British Government’s view was now that we should proceed to reach a treaty at this time, arguing that the Soviets desire to reach agreement could be utilized to get the best bargain for Austria and that Austrian independence must be guaranteed in some other way, possibly through its incorporation into the western security block or by some form of separate specific guarantee by western powers.

The French deputy, on the other hand, stated his government had decided the continued presence of troops in Austria is important in the general European interest and therefore did not now wish to conclude a treaty. It was agreed that it should be recommended that Bevin and Bidault take the opportunity of Mr. Bevin’s visit to Paris further to discuss this issue.

In our opinion we are faced with a dilemma requiring consideration of this matter by the National Security Council. In USDel opinion we must face this issue without delay since the field of difference is progessively being narrowed and a reason for not concluding a treaty will become increasingly difficult to find which will not run the risk of misunderstanding in Austria.

In our opinion, the National Security Council, as suggested in Deptel 1269, April 103 should give consideration (a) to potentialities of Soviet pressure arising out of Austria’s exposed position as well as rights acquired under the assets settlement, an evaluation of which can already be given in narrow limits which now separate western and Soviet positions, (b) to the kind of guarantee which might be given to Austria to minimize the dangers of concluding a treaty and (c) to the problem, if decision is reached to retain troops in Austria, of how to conclude negotiations sat earliest possible moment rather than rely on tactics of discussion and consequent delays taking into account progressively unfavorable position such decision is likely to create for US in Austria. It was agreed at our meeting today that each deputy should seek further early clarification of the views of his government on this important matter and that for the moment we should make no further indications of concession to the Soviets position, even to the extent of stalling over the question of inviting Yugoslavia at least until next week.

[ Reber ]

1 Not printed; in it Legation Vienna reported that the Soviet High Commissioner in Austria, Col. Gen. Vladimir Vasilyevich Kurasov, had agreed that an Austrian Army should be in being when the occupation forces withdrew (863.20/4–1348).

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 740.00119 Council/4–1048: Telegram

[Document 841]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

top secret Washington, April 14, 1948—4 p. m.

346. Re Gruber’s note of Apr 8 giving Austrian views on lump-sum obligation (urtel 448 Apr 9 rptd London USDel 102)1 considered desirable for you to explain fully to Austrians US position on basis Ausdel 13.2 Please stress US has always endeavored to keep lump sum as small as possible in order to limit burden on Austria and safeguard its economic independence. Dept recognizes obligatory provision for payment in goods might under certain conditions make for excessive ties between Austrian and Soviet economies and thereby limit Austria’s freedom of action particularly vis-à-vis Western Union and ERP. Dept believes, however, protection may be had against these risks by (a) initial moratorium; (b) small or graduated payments over reasonable period of time; (c) option permitting Austria to pay in currency if it desires, and (d) satisfactory provision for settlement of disputes.

While value of production of USIA industries restored to Austria is appreciated and there would be no legal obstacles after Austria joins IMF to its efforts to obtain commercial credits with which to meet installments, we can give no assurance as to American help in payment of currency. Obligation on Austria for such payment would in fact represent for US difficult problem since it would doubtless give rise to criticism when treaty comes up for ratification that payments would be supported through ERP. Essential, therefore, to make plain to Austrian Govt reasons for our position on optional payment.

Sent Vienna as 346 rptd London as 1313 Ausdel 16.

Lovett

1  Ante, p. 1491 [Pg. 1491 is part of Doc. 837].

2  Ante, p. 1492 [Pg. 1492 includes portions of Doc. 837 and Doc. 838].

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London 740.00119 Council/4–1048: Telegram

[Document 842]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, April 16, 1948—7 p. m.

1372. Ausdel 18. For Reber. We have noted the apparent evidence of Soviet desire to conclude Austrian treaty but are not fully convinced Soviets prepared to negotiate treaty which will insure adequate guarantees of Austrian political and economic independence (Delsec 16701 ). Under circumstances you should play your hand straight, attempting to obtain treaty of maximum advantage to Austria on basis of our previous instructions, particularly as set forth in Ausdels 9 and 13.2 This position is based on: 1. Recognition that if treaty were completed in near future withdrawal of Allied troops would probably not occur before end of one year according to anticipated schedule of end of current negotiations in London, possible reference of certain technical points re Art 35 to AC, Vienna, report of Deputies to Governments or Foreign Ministers, consideration of treaty by Governments, signing and ratification. Possible delay in ratification would always remain as last resort if critical deterioration European situation makes undesirable coming into force of treaty.

2. Recognition of calculated risk in either course of agreement on treaty or breaking off of negotiations. It is realized absence of treaty could lead to partition, increased pressure to drive us from Vienna, economic dislocation, and likely decline of our influence in Austria with growing tendency to yield to Sov pressure.

Envisage question will be referred to National Security Council at early date but believe matter should not be brought to its attention until after results of Bevin–Bidault conversations and Italian election3 outcome are known.

In view of developing situation we now feel if you have not already committed yourself that our lump-sum offer should remain at $115 millions for the present, including Austria’s assets in ex-enemy States. We raise question whether proposal should not be made when military and air clauses are considered to include provision that Allied troops will not be withdrawn until Austria’s gendarmerie and armed forces proper are adequately equipped and in effective operation. Your recommendation and any proposed formula to cover the point would be appreciated.

For your own info you will, of course, keep in mind that any settlement would be out of question if and as long as Sovs interfere with our communications to Vienna. Treaty discussions may not be proper forum at present time (Ausdel 154 ) but Dept wishes to give you discretion to interject issue on suitable occasion as circumstances warrant.

Lovett

1  Ante, p. 1495 [Pg. 1495 is part of Doc. 840].

2 March 31 and April 10, pp. 1483 [Pg. 1483 includes portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831], 1492 [Pg. 1492 includes portions of Doc. 837 and Doc. 838].

3 The Italian elections took place April 18; the Bevin-Bidault conversations presumably refer to talks at the April 17 meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the Brussels Pact.

4 Not printed.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/4–2148: Telegram

[Document 843]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

top secret
priority Vienna, April 21, 1948—5 p. m.

514. We concur in view set forth in Delsec 16701 that Soviets probably wish to conclude treaty now and that their motive is belief that Soviet objective in Austria, whether it be gradual pressure and infiltration or rapid seizure of power, can be more effectively pursued if western occupation forces are withdrawn. Soviets have now substantial control and potential exclusive domination over eastern zone but are apparently willing to gamble this present capability in exchange for possible capture of whole country.

On the other hand, we consider that, in view of strategic penetration of Austria into Soviet sphere and obvious danger of allowing it to become firmly knit into ERP and perhaps Western Union, Soviets will press Austrian issue to conclusion as rapidly as overall developments permit. If they encounter serious delays in securing troop evacuation, they may conclude that partition, along lines suggested Legtel 366, March 24,2 is only certain means of assuring continued economic and political control of eastern zone.

As to Austrian attitudes, there is little question that, should Soviets make in present treaty negotiations extensive concessions necessary to meet conditions Austrian Government has fixed, Austrian population would feel there was no longer any excuse for delay in long sought withdrawal of occupation forces. There is, moreover, widespread conviction here that Austrian economic recovery cannot take place and ERP be really effective as long as Soviets occupy eastern provinces. On other hand, we can by no means be certain that Austrian leaders are justified in their belief that Austria, even with Austrian army in being and present strongly anti-Communist government in office, could resist indefinitely internal and external pressures which would probably be applied after troop withdrawal.

Question for decision by western powers would under this analysis be whether (a) to conclude treaty, withdraw forces, and risk possibility of Communist capture of country, or (b) to break off treaty negotiations on grounds which, in view of extensive Soviet concessions, may appear insubstantial, to prolong presence of Red Army in Austria and risk Soviet partition of country.

In light of all factors as seen from Vienna, preponderant advantages would seem to favor following: (1) force all possible concessions from Soviets during present treaty negotiations but, if Soviets make every concession that can be asked, ultimately sign treaty; (2) delay ratification as long as there seems any justification for so doing; (3) in meantime energetically knit Austria into structure of western European cooperation; (4) strengthen Austrian army and police so that before departure of western troops probably a year hence both are fully prepared to meet emergencies; (5) before final evacuation of troops give Austrian Government public guarantee on part of principal western European powers and US that they will assist by all means at their disposal in case Austrian sovereignty or independence is threatened.

This recommendation is made on assumption that, in event of border incursions into Austria by satellite neighbors or major Soviet-instigated internal disorders, Congress could be prevailed upon to vote grants for Austria under Truman Doctrine (additional to ERP assistance), as country threatened in same manner as Greece and Turkey. We would recognize moreover that dependence of Austrian economy on West rather than on Danube Basin was artificial and probably transitory but would consider it essential as long as Soviet domination of remainder of Basin continued unrelaxed.

It should be emphasized that above recommendation is in essence proposal to base Austrian security, after current year, on military guarantee from West rather than on presence of Western forces in Austria. Alternative would appear to be at best continued political and economic insecurity resulting from presence of Soviet troops and at worst total absorption of eastern Austria, including Vienna, into Soviet sphere.

Sent Department 514; repeated London USDel 121.

Erhardt

1 April 14, p. 1495 [Pg. 1495 is part of Doc. 840].

2  Ante, p. 1414 [Pg. 1414 is part of Doc. 772].

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/4–2848: Telegram

[Document 844]

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, April 28, 1948.

1803. Delsec 1697. For the Undersecretary and Hickerson from Reber. At the request of the French a tripartite meeting was held late yesterday to discuss whether any guarantee might be offered Austria on a tripartite basis to minimize the dangers of concluding a treaty and to take the place of the second paragraph of Article 2 which three of us had agreed was no longer desirable and was in fact dangerous. There was complete unanimity upon the importance of maintaining the first paragraph of this article.

At present, the British are studying the possibility of a three-power agreement along the lines of the old second paragraph which would provide a guarantee for existing frontiers and consultation in the event of a threat to Austria’s independence or territorial integrity. This would, of course, take the form of a separate protocol. The French feel some assurance should foe given Austria that in the event of external aggression or threat thereof it might receive some form of western support. They have, however, no specific proposal to make in this connection at this time.

Speaking personally and making it clear that I was without instructions in this matter, I said that the question of frontier guarantees raised certain difficulties for the US and would seem to involve security questions which go far beyond the application of this principle to Austria alone. For that reason I felt reluctant to consider this type of guarantee in this connection. Whether or not it would be appropriate for the United States to make a declaration similar to the President’s statement with respect to Italy at the time of withdrawal of allied troops, which might give an assurance of the sort that the French were seeking was, however, a matter upon which I said I would gladly seek instructions.

I should appreciate any comments or instructions Department may care to give me in this connection, since the matter will undoubtedly be discussed again.

[ Reber ]

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London 740.00119 Council/4–3048: Telegram

[Document 845]

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

top secret Washington, April 30, 1948—5 p. m.

1545. For Reber. As suggested Ausdel 61 concur re importance maintaining first para Art 2 and agree also re finding some way eliminating para 2 same Art (urtel 18032 ). Brit suggestion respecting separate Three Power protocol of guarantee, presumably of a secret nature, is not acceptable to us. We would be willing to consider participating at appropriate time in a declaration similar to President’s statement on occasion Allied troop withdrawal from Italy. In our view, Austrian security is related to western union security and arrangements for latter should envisage eventual Austrian inclusion.

Marshall

1 March 18, p. 1480 [Pg. 1480 is part of Doc. 828].

2  Supra.

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–648: Telegram

[Document 846]

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

secret
us urgent London, May 6, 1948—2 p. m.

1964. Delsec 1718. At 110th meeting of Austrian deputies this morning Soviet delegation continued to support Yugoslav territorial claims while western delegations continued firm support of Austria’s pre-annexation frontiers. Repeated attempts were made by Soviet delegation to divert discussion to other articles but met with firm opposition from western delegates. In response to direct questioning British representative finally elicited Soviet declaration that some frontier rectification was necessary. British representative thereupon said he would have to consult his government re continuation of negotiations in view of Soviet attitude.

As next chairman I proposed suspension of meeting until receipt views British Government and until new proposal within framework of principles re frontier rectification or reparations should be submitted. Further indicated if no break in deadlock in sight within next few days would consider present session suspended until governments informed of possibility of further useful discussions.

In these circumstances I consider no useful purpose could be served by merely passing to other articles and if Department approves will withhold convocation of next meeting until it is clear foregoing principles have been accepted by Soviets. Please instruct urgently.

Sent Department 1964, repeated Vienna 92, Vienna pass to USFA, repeated Belgrade 30.

[ Reber ]

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London 740.00119 Council/5–648: Telegram

[Document 847]

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

secret
us urgent
niact Washington, May 6, 1948—7 p. m.

1640. For Reber. US Govt remains inalterably opposed to any cessions Austrian territory or payment of reparations to Yugoslavia. We trust Brit and French will maintain same position. Your proposed course of action approved and Dept will leave to your discretion question whether future meetings should be held.

Marshall

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–848: Telegram

[Document 848]

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

secret London, May 8, 1948—3 p. m.

2007. Delsec 1724. From Reber. British deputy has today informed Secretary General views of his government (reference Delsec 1718, May 6) as follows: “His Majesty’s Government have now instructed me to say that they are unable to depart from the attitude they have taken upon these questions of principle. They cannot therefore agree to leave the Yugoslav claims in abeyance, and trust that the Soviet deputy will give a clear indication that he will be able to withdraw his demands on the questions of frontiers and reparations so as to furnish a positive basis for progress on the treaty. On receipt of such an intimation I should be authorized to resume the meetings forthwith.”

In informally acknowledging this communication I have today requested Secretary General to inform the other deputies that I have now received the reply of the UK Government and that as stated previously I shall be glad to call the next meeting when I am informed there are new proposals before us concerning these two articles of the treaty which are in accordance with the principles expressed at the last meeting in respect of a solution of the Austrian Treaty.

This procedure was previously concerted with British and French yesterday when it was further agreed we should take no initiative in urging Soviets to submit new proposals. If no response received from Soviet deputy by Tuesday, we will meet on a tripartite basis that afternoon to consider further procedure. In present circumstances it does not seem that any useful purpose could be served by another meeting unless it is clear in advance that Soviets will so modify their position as to make agreement on these crucial issues possible. We fully recognize the difficult position in which complete breakdown may place Austria, particularly the eastern zone, but if no agreement on this issue is possible failure to reach a treaty will be more easily understood in Austria. Gruber informed me before his departure he shared this view and would so inform the Chancellor on return to Vienna.

Sent Department 2007, repeated Vienna 93, Belgrade 33.

[ Reber ]

C. The continued interest of the United States in an Austrian treaty; attempts to resume meetings of the Deputies for AustriaC. The continued interest of the United States in an Austrian treaty; attempts to resume meetings of the Deputies for Austria

[849] The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

Washington, May 14, 1948—3 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1148: Telegram

[850] The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

London, May 19, 1948—10 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–1948: Telegram

[851] The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

Washington, May 21, 1948—6 p. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2048: Telegram

[852] The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

Vienna, September 25, 1948—5 p. m.

740.0011 EW (Peace)/9–2548: Telegram

[853] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

Washington, October 2, 1948—3 p. m.

740.0011 EW (Peace)/10–248: Telegram

[854] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, November 16, 1948—11 a. m.

740.0011 EW (Peace)/11–1648: Telegram

[855] Editorial Note

[856] Report to the National Security Council by the Department of State

Washington, December 8, 1948.

Executive Secretariat Files

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London 740.00119 Council/5–1148: Telegram

[Document 849]

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

secret   us urgent Washington, May 14, 1948—3 p. m.

1753. Ausdel 24. For Reber. Although no concessions can be considered on issues of frontier revisions and reparations, we wish to avoid closing door on future treaty discussions (Delsec 1730, May 111 ) and desire to be in position to resume negotiations should developing circumstances make early conclusion treaty advisable. Under latter conditions it might be desirable to make it possible for Soviets to yield to our position on Articles 5 and 342 with minimum loss of face. Suggest that on this basis negotiations could be suspended for one week so that Soviets will have time to obtain Moscow instructions. If at expiration this period Soviets fail to make any proposals along lines Delsec 17243 you might consult with British and French whether adjournment of Deputies should be for a definite period such as four months, or whether at end of four months following adjournment the four governments would communicate with each other on subject whether negotiations should be resumed. Dept would prefer latter alternative.

You might also discuss with Brit and Fr question whether proposals should be made in Deputies before adjournment to take up in Allied Commission or through Ministers in Vienna certain treaty problems such as remaining unagreed military and air clauses and Article 35, with view to obtaining agreement on those articles before any future meeting of the Deputies.

Re your last question, please see Vienna’s 1494 to you.

Sent London as 1753, Ausdel 24: repeated to Vienna as 439 for Keyes.

Marshall

1 Not printed.

2 Article 5–Frontiers, Article 34–Reparations; for the text of these two Articles see the Unagreed Articles of the Draft Austrian Treaty, p. 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857].

3  Supra.

4 Not printed. In Delsec 1730, May 11, not printed, Reber had asked whether the adjournment of the Austrian treaty negotiations would affect the talks between the United States and the Soviet Union which had been reported in the press on May 11 (740.00119 Council/5–1148). Vienna’s 149 indicated that Soviet refusal to make concessions on the frontier question would demonstrate the emptiness of any conciliatory gesture in talks with the United States (711.61/5–1248).

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–1948: Telegram

[Document 850]

The United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber) to the Secretary of State

secret London, May 19, 1948—10 p. m.

2168. Delsec 1745. From Reber. As chairman of the next meeting I called on Soviet Deputy today to endeavor to ascertain whether the Soviet Government was prepared to continue the discussions of the Austrian treaty on a basis which gave hope for settlement, stating that I had a certain responsibility to the other delegates. I asked whether his government was in a position to inform us whether it had any new proposals to make on the subject of Austria’s frontiers and reparations. Koktomov replied that the position of the Soviet delegation was well-known, that it had supported Yugoslav claims but in the interest of agreement was prepared to listen to other proposals which took these claims into account. When pressed, he stated that this should include some territorial change in favor of Yugoslavia.

He took the position that the Soviet Government had been faced with an ultimatum on part of the other powers which it could not accept but that it had no new proposals or suggestions to put forward. He made it clear however that he was not expecting new instructions and that the Soviet Government would maintain its position in respect, particularly to the frontier issue. I stated that I would, of course, inform the other delegations of this position but that I should like to make it clear that I stood ready to convene the next meeting as soon as I could be informed that [t]here was a possibility of reaching a settlement but that in order to reach this settlement it must be made clear that there could be no question of any cession of Austrian territory or payment of reparations. I pointed out that if there were any delay in receiving these assurances some time might be required to reassemble the meeting as I did not know how long delegations could remain in London. I shall consult with British and French tomorrow and report further.

Sent Department 2168, repeated Vienna 100, Vienna pass to USFA.

[ Reber ]

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London 740.00119 Council/5–2048: Telegram

[Document 851]

The Secretary of State to the United States Deputy for Austria at the Council of Foreign Ministers (Reber), at London

secret
us urgent
niact Washington, May 21, 1948—6 p. m.

1857. Ausdel 27. For Reber. Delsec 1744.1 Latest Brit and Fr views on question of adjournment suggests there is essential unanimity of purpose on their and our part to leave door open for resumption of negotiations and to make possible settlement of frontier and reparations issues without appearance of acceptance by Soviets of ultimatum. Regarding settlement of these issues as fundamental step toward clearing the way for completion of treaty, we wish as indicated Ausdel 242 to take any constructive procedural action so long as substantive position of three powers on these questions is maintained. On other hand, in view of fact there have already been five series of meetings on Austrian treaty since Jan 19473 we consider assurances are necessary that there exists a justifiable basis for negotiations before US can participate further in treaty discussions.4

On basis of these considerations Dept approves formula Deputies have developed for calling next meeting in order to suggest temporary suspension rather than breaking-off of negotiations. We are prepared to cooperate with Brit and Fr in endeavor to preserve idea of continuity of negotiations to extent that communications be exchanged between Deputies rather than between govts and that member of Embassy staff, London, be designated to act as liaison for exchange of information with CFM secretariat or representatives of other govts, provided that he engages in no substantive discussions in absence of US Deputy. Suggest you propose to Douglas designation of appropriate officer to serve in this capacity. Do you contemplate the issuance at this time of any public statement on the outcome of the negotiations or have any recommendations concerning a press release here?

Marshall

1 Not printed

2  Ante, p. 1504 [Pg. 1504 is part of Doc. 849].

3 The five series of meetings were: London, January 14–February 25; Moscow, March 10–April 24; Vienna, May 12–October 11; London, November 25–Deeember 15, 1947; and the meetings beginning on February 20, 1948.

4 The U.S. Deputy received no assurances from the Soviet delegation on the frontier question so the meetings were suspended.

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 EW (Peace)/9–2548: Telegram

[Document 852]

The Minister in Austria (Erhardt) to the Secretary of State

secret Vienna, September 25, 1948—5 p. m.

1102. Following conversation relating to Austrian treaty took place September 23 between Gruber and Soviet Political Representative Koptelov.

Koptelov protested against anti-Soviet attitude of Austrian press, particularly leading papers of two coalition parties. Gruber replied that freedom of press guaranteed and that if Austrian people hostile to Soviets cause is policy pursued by latter. Koptelov on contrary ascribed this attitude to incitement by small group.

Gruber declared this View serious miscalculation pointing out Soviets had demanded destruction Austrian national integrity, had seized Austrian property under guise German assets and had openly supported Communist Party in declared aim to destroy Austrian political system. When Koptelov denied Soviets demanded destruction Austrian integrity, Gruber referred statements made by Koktomov in London.1 Koptelov countered that negotiations broken off by Western Powers although Soviets had stated readiness to examine all proposals, Gruber declared in order to ascertain definitely Soviet views, he had addressed note to Soviets (see Legtel 709, June 42 ) but no reply has been received. Koptelov stated note would receive an answer as soon as negotiations resumed.

Gruber expressed view negotiations could be resumed as soon as Soviet Union declared change in Austrian frontiers not sine qua non for her agreement to treaty. As Koptelov insisted Soviets had never declared this was sine qua non Gruber referred again to Koktomov’s statement, which however Koptelov refused to admit.

Koptelov declared initiative for reopening treaty talks must come from Western Powers because of Soviet Union had already made an important concession for continuation negotiations. Gruber said Austria could not be expected to ask Western Powers to reopen negotiations if that meant renunciation of Austria’s present frontiers, an issue on which all Austrian parties including Communists are united. Should Soviets answer Austrian note favorably Gruber would immediately request Western Powers to reopen negotiations.

Conversation broke off with agreement to resume next week after statements of Soviet Representative at London had been verified. (Gruber will confront Koptelov with categorical statements made by Koktomov in reply to questions of Reber, Marjoribanks at final session of deputies in London.)

Sent Department 1102; repeated London 188, Paris 143.

Erhardt

1 See telegram 1964, May 6, from London, p. 1502 [Pg. 1502 includes portions of Doc. 846 and Doc. 847].

2 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria 740.0011 EW (Peace)/10–248: Telegram

[Document 853]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Austria

secret Washington, October 2, 1948—3 p. m.

798. In discussions with Reber in London and Paris Brit and Fr agreed in principle with US initiative concerning resumption Aus treaty negotiations that proposal will be made to Sov at first favorable moment. Brit and Fr concur that further clarification Berlin situation necessary prior to any move by western powers. No basis exist for Aus report from London urtel 1113 Sep 291 that US holding back as question was addressed to Brit in first instance.

Dept discounts Bischoff’s report2 as AmEmbs Moscow and Belgrade do not agree that Sovs will abandon Yugo claims or that frontier difference can be settled by bilateral arrangements. Views presented by USFA in separate message represent in general Dept’s position on considerations involved in concluding Aus treaty at this time. While resumption negotiations may be necessary in terms Aus public opinion negotiations at this stage might result in increased Sov pressure on Vienna to obtain settlement prejudicing conditions agreed by western states and Aus as basic for maintenance independence. Possible future development Sov controls in satellite areas should also be evaluated by Aus prior to despatch of any note to western powers.

Dept will consider Gruber’s proposal for approach to Sovs no later than November but reserves position entirely pending development of SC discussions on Berlin.

Lovett

1 Not printed.

2  Norbert Bischoff, Austrian Political Representative in the Soviet Union, had reported that the Soviet Union was prepared to abandon the Yugoslav claims and resume treaty negotiations if the initiative came from the West.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 EW (Peace)/11–1648: Telegram

[Document 854]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

secret London, November 16, 1948—11 a. m.

4880. For Reber. At meeting on 15 at Foreign Office at which Marjoribanks and Cullis of Foreign Office, Luc, French Embassy, and Keith were present, program to be adopted re proposed resumption of Austrian treaty talks was discussed. Discussion took into account that agreement had been reached between three western powers and Austrian government, that latter should address note to four governments concerned at end of November requesting them to seek basis for resumption of Deputies meetings and that this arrangement was subject to there being no developments in international situation necessitating modification of plans.

Various steps necessary to carry out program for resumption of discussion considered informally and following are tentative suggestions to three western governments as drafted by British land approved by Strang following meeting: a. In absence of any developments in Berlin situation or in some other field which would cause modification of plans for Austrian treaty, approach should be made to Austrian Government on 29 November informing them that three western powers saw no objection to their addressing note to all four governments. Should be suggested to Austrian Government that note be brief and in general terms only. Austrian Government should be careful to request meeting simply to seek basis for resuming talks. This would avoid giving impression that Austrian Government was asking us to reverse attitude taken last May when we broke off talks. It was agreed that it was essential that we approve contents of Austrian note before it was sent. Would be preferable for one representative alone of western powers in Vienna to concert this action with Austrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. As London is point at which action is being co-ordinated, it was suggested that HM Minister, Vienna, should make this approach.

b. On receipt of Austrian note, US Deputy, as chairman of next meeting of Deputies, should suggest through Secretary General CFM to his three colleagues that in view of Austrian request, meeting of Deputies should be called for Monday, January 17. Meeting would be designed to explore possibilities for resumption of talks.

c. Also agreed that, if this programme were approved, three western delegations should meet in London for informal discussions 4 or 5 days before appointed date, on agenda previously circulated.

With regard to approach to Austrian Foreign Minister by British Minister at Vienna, this was thought of British and French with which Keith acquiesced, subject, as in case of other points contained in memorandum, to Washington’s approval.

Sent Department 4880; repeated Paris for Bohlen 879, Vienna 130.

Holmes

Editorial Note [Document 855]

Editorial Note

On December 6, 1948 the Austrian Ministers in Washington, London, Paris and Moscow presented identical notes to the Governments to which they were accredited expressing the desire of the Austrian Government for the resumption of the Austrian Treaty negotiations. All four Governments replied favorably to the Austrian note, and the U.S. Deputy as the Chairman of the next meeting proposed that the Deputies reassemble in London on or about February 7, 1949 to see if a basis existed for the continuation of the negotiations. A copy of the Austrian note, the United States reply, and related documents may be found in Department file 740.0011 EW(Peace).

Report to the National Security Council by the Department of State Executive Secretariat Files

[Document 856]

Report to the National Security Council by the Department of State 1

secret Washington, December 8, 1948.

NSC 38

The Problem

The Austrian Treaty in the CFM.

Analysis

1. status of negotiations in the cfm

The Austrian Treaty has been the subject of negotiations in the CFM, the CFM Deputies, and the Austrian Treaty Commission since January 1947. During these negotiations a large area of agreement has been reached and numerous articles have been approved for inclusion in the final draft of the Treaty. A large area of disagreement, however, still remains. The issues in the Treaty subject to further negotiations, particularly the German assets question and the frontiers, involve the basis of Austrian independence and, consequently, have a vital effect on the fulfillment of U.S. policy objectives.

At the last meeting of the Deputies (London, February–May, 1948) negotiations were suspended during the discussion of the Yugoslav claims for frontier rectification and reparations (Articles 5 and 34). The representatives of the western states maintained that any agreements on a compromise proposal for the settlement of the German assets problem would depend on agreement on all remaining issues in the Treaty. When the Soviet Deputy refused to withdraw his support of the Yugoslav claim for frontier rectification and declared that some change would have to be made in the frontier to meet the legitimate interest of Yugoslavia, the western Deputies stated on May 6 that further discussion would be pointless. No further meetings have been convened. We have informed the Austrian Government, as well as the British and French, that we will concur in a projected Austrian proposal for a resumption of treaty negotiations early in 1949.

2. unagreed issues in the austrian treaty

The remaining unagreed issues subject to further negotiations may be summarized as follows:

a. German Assets 2

In view of the impossibility of reaching agreement on a definition of “German external assets”, to be transferred to the Soviet Union in satisfaction of its claims under Potsdam, the CFM has endeavored to reach agreement on a compromise proposal introduced by the French in the Austrian Treaty Commission on October 7, 1947 and the counterproposal of the Soviet Delegation of January 24, 1948. The compromise offered by the French proposed that certain properties in the field of oil production, oil refinement, oil distribution and oil exploration, and certain properties belonging to the Danube Shipping Company be transferred to Soviet ownership in satisfaction of their claims to oil and shipping properties and that the Austrian Government pay a lump sum to the USSR in satisfaction of all other claims. In return the Austrians would regain control of all other properties now claimed by the USSR as German assets, the ownership of which would not be transferred to the Soviet Union by the Treaty.

The existing differences among the delegations on the various points involved in the German assets question are summarized in Tab A.

b. Frontiers (Article 5)

The Western Powers have agreed that the Austrian: frontiers of 1937 shall be restored and no territory be ceded to Yugoslavia. The USSR believes that legitimate Yugoslav claims should be considered.

c. Reparations (Article 34)

The Western Powers have agreed that in accordance with the Potsdam Agreement no reparations shall be exacted from Austria. The USSR holds that legitimate Yugoslav claims should be considered.

d. Military Defense (Articles 26 and 27)

The Western Powers insist that Austria shall be permitted to arm its military forces to the extent agreed in the Treaty with no restrictions on the source from which material is obtained.

The US and UK are agreed in opposing extensive restrictions on the economic life of Austria which are considered necessary for military security by France and the Soviet Union.

e. Independence (Article 2)

The Western States have proposed that all four powers agree to respect the independence and territorial integrity of Austria. The USSR does not consider that such a provision is necessary.

f. Displaced Persons (Article 16)

The Western Powers insist that the principle of voluntary repatriation safeguarding the rights of refugees shall become the basis of the article dealing with displaced persons in Austria. The USSR opposes this principle.

Other unagreed articles such as United Nations’ property, the settlement of disputes arising from property questions and other related issues probably can be settled once agreement is reached on the foregoing basic questions.

3. the importance of the unagreed articles in u.s. policy objectives

a. The German Assets Question

The settlement of the German assets question on the compromise basis proposed by the French raises serious questions involving U.S. policy. The existing instructions to the U.S. Delegation (summarized in detail in Tab B3 ) hold that no settlement shall be accepted which imposes on Austria an obligation beyond its capacity to discharge, or which deprives Austria of resources to an extent making impossible the fulfillment of minimum requirements from indigenous production, or which creates in Austria any privileged position for Soviet enterprises exempt from the normal operation of Austrian law. A settlement of the German assets problem which would involve extensive foreign aid to effect fulfillment would be inconsistent with U.S. policy objectives. Likewise, a settlement, the terms of which could not be carried out and would in event of a default invite Soviet intervention in Austrian domestic affairs would create a security risk of major proportions. No settlement, therefore, should be accepted at this time which leaves the USSR in a position either to intervene in Austrian affairs in order to gain political advantage or to retard the present rate of recovery by preventing resources from being used to meet Austria’s own requirements. It is important that the amount and nature of the payments to be made under a lump-sum settlement should be such as not to jeopardize the viability of the Austrian economy or its present rate of recovery. Although it is recognized that property will have to be transferred to the USSR under the terms of Potsdam, the emphasis in any future negotiations should be on the conditions under which Soviet enterprises are to operate in Austria in order to avoid conditions permitting the exercise of undue pressure by the Soviets on Austrian national life.

b. International and Internal Security

The JCS recommended in March 1948 that from the military point of view it was not desirable to conclude at that time a treaty involving the withdrawal of the occupation forces; if overriding political and economic considerations required, however, that a treaty toe concluded, the occupation forces should not be withdrawn until such time that the Austrians have organized, equipped and trained a security force reasonably adequate to perform the tasks envisaged in the treaty. In accordance with this recommendation, steps are being taken in the three western zones of Austria to train and equip the Austrian police, and to provide preliminary organization and training for the Austrian army. Since a treaty would not become operative for at least eight months, the training of police should by then be well advanced. Under existing agreements, the small nucleus of the army now being secretly projected, cannot be expanded to normal strength until 90 days prior to the withdrawal of the occupying forces.

The problem of internal and external security remains the basic problem in concluding a treaty at this time. In terms of external security, Austria’s geographic position in relation to the satellite states and the lack of any means of defense would make impossible any Austrian resistance of external aggression. Sufficient forces, however, can be formed within Austria to prevent internal disorder and any projected Communist coup d’etat, provided sufficient controls are left to the Austrians to assure that Soviet enterprises are conducted according to Austrian law and are not used for political objectives. Similarly, sufficient forces can be provided in Austria to combat any guerrilla activity which may follow a rejection of the Yugoslav claims and the restoration of the frontiers of 1937.

c. The Political Situation in Austria

The political situation in Austria, which is at present completely favorable to western objectives, requires that all possible steps be taken to secure the early withdrawal of Soviet forces.

The Austrian Government must utilize every means to obtain Soviet withdrawal, and since this can be achieved only by treaty, must push for the completion of the treaty at the earliest possible moment. It is for this reason that the Austrian Government has proposed the resumption of treaty negotiations.

The Austrian Parliament reconvenes in November and the Government coalition must renew its efforts to achieve complete national liberation, both in order to maintain the coalition as a functioning unit and to prevent the use of splinter parties or splits in the major parties over the issue of cooperation with the USSR in the hope of obtaining easier terms from their occupation forces. While there is no immediate possibility of such a development, the longer the Soviet forces remain in Austria the greater will be the pressure for an agreement accommodating Soviet political objectives in the hope that the burden of occupdation might be alleviated.

d. The Extent of Economic Reconstruction

The conclusion of a treaty is essential to full recovery in Austria and the establishment of the Austrian economy on a sound, self-sustaining basis. In spite of military occupation, Austria has since liberation been able with extensive foreign aid to achieve a progressive improvement in production, volume of exports and the level of consumption. The average production of certain producers’ goods has now practically attained the pre-war level. Nevertheless, so long as occupation by the Four Powers continues Austria will be prevented from achieving maximum utilization of its own resources and facilities, and the Soviet position in Eastern Austria will mean a constant drain on the Austrian economy. There is, of course, further possibility of economic revival within the limitations resulting from the occupation, but the objectives envisaged in our ECA program for Austria cannot be fully attained by 1952 unless a treaty with acceptable economic provisions is completed at an early date.

Conclusions

1. Our primary objective in an Austrian treaty should be viable, independent state free from alien domination.

2. We should insist upon the recognition of Austria’s 1937 frontiers.

3. We should continue with the British and French, until the treaty becomes operative, the current program of training and equipping the Austrian police in the Western zones and the organization, training, and equipping of basic cadres in the Austrian army.

4. We should seek a settlement of the German assets question which is within Austria’s capabilities. The treaty should define precisely the amount, nature, and terms of the Austrian obligations to the Soviet Union and the conditions under which the Soviet enterprises in Austria will be operated.

5. We should seek the admittance of Austria to the United Nations at the earliest date, if possible before the completion of the treaty.

1 At its. 31st meeting, December 16, 1948, the National Security Council noted the receipt of this report, but took no action on it.

2 Article 35.

3 Not printed.

D. The unagreed articles of the draft Austrian treatyD. The unagreed articles of the draft Austrian treaty

[857] Unagreed Articles of the Draft Austrian Treaty

[Washington,] October 18, 1948.

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 74

Unagreed Articles of the Draft Austrian Treaty CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 74

[Document 857]

Unagreed Articles of the Draft Austrian Treaty

secret [Washington,] October 18, 1948.

[Editor’s Note: The following are the unagreed articles of the draft Austrian State Treaty as it stood when quadripartite discussions were suspended after the 110th meeting of the Deputies for Austria on May 6, 1948, as indicated by the records of the United States delegation at these discussions. The brackets indicate unagreed text. All numbered notes to the articles correspond to the notes in the final report of the Austrian Treaty Commission to the Council of Foreign Ministers, October 11, 1947 ( Foreign Relations, 1947, volume II, page 632). These notes were submitted by the Deputies as correct statements of the positions of their delegations on these articles at the time the present report was submitted. All unnumbered notes were inserted by the United States Delegation and were not agreed statements unless otherwise indicated. For text of the agreed articles see ibid., page 516.]

Article 2 Preservation of Austria’s Independence (1)

[1. The Allied and Associated Powers declare that they will respect the independence and territorial integrity of Austria as established under the present Treaty.] (2)

[2. The Allied and Associated Powers shall oppose any action, in any form whatsoever, that may threaten the political or economic independence or the territorial integrity of Austria, and in event of such threat will consult with one another and with the appropriate organs of the United Nations with regard to appropriate action.] (3)

(1) Soviet Delegation considers this Article unnecessary.

(2) Proposal by United States Delegation. United Kingdom and French Delegations will accept this paragraph in order to obtain agreement.

(3) Proposal by French and United States Delegations. Note: The United States Deputy stated at the 101st meeting that if the first paragraph of this Article was accepted, his delegation would be prepared to withdraw its proposal for the second paragraph (CFM/D/L/48/A/101st meeting, April 22, 1948, Record of Decisions.)

Article 5 Frontiers of Austria

[The frontiers of Austria shall be those existing on January 1, 1938.] (1) (2) (1) Proposal by United Kingdom, United States and French Delegations.

(2) The Soviet Delegation regards as well founded the proposals of the Yugoslav Government concerning the reuniting of Slovene Carinthia with Slovenia (which is part of Yugoslavia), and regarding the Slovene frontier districts of Styria as well as with regard to the conferring of a special status on the Burgenland Croats, ensuring their national rights, as proposed in the Yugoslav memorandum which was submitted to the Council of Deputy Foreign Ministers in London on January 22, 1947.
Note: The Soviet Deputy at the 108–110th meetings supported the revised Yugoslav territorial claim (CFM/D/L/48/A/8, April 27, 1948) as being well founded and just, but stated that his delegation was prepared in the interest of early settlement of the treaty to consider proposals by the other delegations which take into consideration the legitimate interests of Yugoslavia. This would mean each delegation would drift from its extreme position. He added that he thought the legitimate interests of Yugoslavia require some rectification of the present frontier.

section v

Article 16 Displaced Persons [and Refugees] (1)

1. Austria undertakes within the period determined by the Allied Commission for Austria to take all necessary measures to complete the [voluntary] (1) repatriation of Displaced Persons [and refugees] (1) within its territory.

2. Austria undertakes to render full assistance to the Allied and Associated Powers concerned in regard to the [voluntary] (1) repatriation of their nationals and [may](1) [shall] (2) enter into direct bilateral negotiations for this purpose.

3. Austria further undertakes: (a) to permit accredited representatives of any Allied or Associated Power whose nationals are in camps or assembly centers allotted to Displaced Persons now in Austria to visit [freely] (3) such camps or centers for the purpose of conferring with its nationals;

(b) to prohibit in such camps or centers any propaganda hostile to the interests of the Allied and Associated Powers and any activities designed to induce such Displaced Persons not to return to the countries of which they are nationals;

(c) to dissolve immediately any [“committees”, “centers” and other similar] (2) organizations existing in those camps and centers that may be found to be engaged in activities opposed to the interests of the Allied and Associated Powers;

(d) to prohibit the recruiting of Displaced Persons [and refugees] (1) into military or paramilitary organizations [such as security detachments and guard units] (2);

(e) to provide the means of transportation necessary for the transfer of repatriates to the frontier of their countries or origin nearest Austria.

4. Austria undertakes to grant to such Displaced Persons [and refugees] (1) the same rights in all respects as those normally accorded to non-Austrians who have been legally admitted into Austria.

[5. Neither Austria nor any international organization allowed to function on Austrian territory shall give any relief to persons who for hostile reasons refuse to accept help from the Government of their country and refuse to return to their native country.] (2)

6. This Article shall be applied without prejudice to the provisions of Article 11 of the present Treaty.

[7. No Displaced Persons or refugees who have expressed objections to returning to their countries of origin and who do not come within the provisions of Article 11 of the present Treaty, shall be compelled to return to their country of origin.] (4) (1) Proposal by the French, United Kingdom and United States Delegations.

(2) Proposal by Soviet Delegation.

(3) Proposal by Soviet and French Delegations.

(4) Proposal by United States Delegation, acceptable to United Kingdom Delegation. The French Delegation is not opposed to the inclusion of this paragraph but wishes to point out that it would be superfluous if the word “voluntary” was included in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article. The Soviet Delegation objects to the inclusion of this paragraph.
Note: See Appendix I for texts of United Kingdom position at end of Moscow CFM and Annex VI.

Article 26 Disposal of War Materiel of Allied and German Origin

1. All war materiel of Allied origin in Austria shall be placed at the disposal of the Allied and Associated Power concerned according to the instructions given by that Power.

Within one year from the coming into force of the present Treaty Austria shall render unusable for any military purpose or destroy: all excess war materiel of German or other non-Allied origin;

in so far as they relate to modern war materiel, all German and Japanese drawings, including existing blueprints, prototypes, experimental models and plans;

all war materiel prohibited by Article 21 of the present Treaty;

all specialized installations, including research and production equipment, prohibited by Article 21 [and 27] (1) which are not convertible for authorized research, development or construction or which are in excess of those necessary for the military requirements defined in Articles 17 and 25 of the present Treaty.

2. Within six months from the coming into force of the present Treaty Austria shall provide the Governments of the Soviet Union, of the United States of America, of the United Kingdom, and of France with a list of the war materiel and installations enumerated in paragraph 1.

3. Austria shall renounce all rights to the above-mentioned war materiel.

[4. Austria shall not manufacture, acquire or possess, either publicly or privately, or by any other means, any war materiel of German origin or design.

This does not forbid the use of such restricted quantities of war materiel of German origin or design remaining in Austria after the Second World War as may be required for the creation of the Armed Forces authorized by Article 17 of the present Treaty.] (2)

[Austria shall not manufacture any war materiel of German design.] (3)

[4. Austria shall not manufacture any war materiel of German design.

Austria shall not acquire or possess, either publicly or privately, or by any other means, any war materiel of German manufacture or origin except that the Austrian Government may utilize, for the creation of the armed forces authorized by Article 17 of the present Treaty, restricted quantities of war materiel of German manufacture or origin remaining in Austria after the Second World War.] (See note below)

5. A definition and list of war materiel for the purposes of the present Treaty are contained in Annex II.

(1.) Proposal by French Delegation, with which the Soviet Delegation agrees. The United States and United Kingdom Delegations oppose this proposal.

(2) Proposal by Soviet Delegation, which is opposed by United States, United Kingdom and French Delegations. Note: It was the understanding of the US Delegation at the Moscow CFM that all delegations were agreed that paragraph 3 of this Article refers only to the first subparagraph of paragraph 2 of this Article.

(3) Proposal of United States Delegation, with which the French and United Kingdom Delegations agree. Note: United States proposal informally submitted at 102nd meeting. The Deputies noted in the Record of Decisions for that meeting that “all Delegations were in agreement on the principle contained in this draft, but that the final wording should be determined at the drafting stage.”

Article 27 Prevention of German Rearmament

1. Austria shall co-operate fully with the Allied and Associated Powers in order to ensure that Germany is unable to take steps outside German territory towards rearmament.

[2. Austria undertakes to abide by the limitations and prohibitions listed in Annexes III, IV and V of the present Treaty.] (1)

3. Austria shall not employ or train in military or civil aviation or in the experimentation, design, production or maintenance of war materiel: persons who are, or were at any time previous to March 13, 1938, nationals of Germany;

or Austrian nationals precluded from serving in the Armed Forces under Article 18;

[or persons who are not Austrian nationals.] (2)

(1) Proposal by French Delegation, with which the Soviet Delegation agrees. The French Delegation, while adhering in principle to its position, is ready to reexamine certain points of detail in the Annexes III, IV and V when Article 27 is under discussion by the Council of Foreign Ministers in London. The United States and United Kingdom Delegations oppose the inclusion of this paragraph and its annexes.

(2) Proposal by Soviet Delegation, opposed by the French, United Kingdom and United States Delegations.

Part IV Claims Arising Out of War

section i

Article 34 Reparations

[The Allied and Associated Powers declare that they will advance no claims for reparation from Austria on their own behalf or on behalf of their nationals arising directly out of the war or out of actions taken because of the existence of a state of war in Europe after September 1, 1939, whether or not the Allied or Associated Power was at war with Germany at the time.] (1) (1) Proposal by United Kingdom and United States Delegations, supported by French Delegation. The Soviet Delegation suggests consideration of the proposals of the Yugoslav Delegation, set out in documents CFM(D) (47) (A) 10, CFM(D) (47) (A)75, and CFM (47)M/143, relating to its reparation claims against Austria and proposes hearing the Yugoslav Delegation.

Article 35 German Assets in Austria

[1. Austria recognizes that the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, the United States of America and France have the right to dispose of all assets in Austria in accordance with decisions of the Berlin Conference of August 2, 1945.

2. (a) Notwithstanding the provisions in paragraphs 4 and 5 of the present Article, Austria undertakes to take all measures necessary to eliminate German interests in Austria and in particular to trace, take under control and liquidate assets of all kinds belonging to Germany or to German nationals and which are situated in Austria.

(b) The liquidation of German assets shall not affect the rights possessed by the United Nations and their nationals directly or indirectly to property in Austria, including the rights which are to be re-established under Article 42 of the present Treaty.

(c) The liquidation of German assets shall be carried out under the control of a Commission consisting of representatives of the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, the United States of America and France and shall be completed within a period of eighteen months from the coming into force of the present Treaty.

3. Austria undertakes to pay to the Soviet Union the proceeds from the liquidation of German assets in Eastern Austria and to pay to the United States of America, the United Kingdom and France the proceeds from the liquidation of German assets in Western Austria. She will hand over or deliver free of charge to these Powers, as representing the proceeds of such liquidation: (a) the assets mentioned in paragraphs 4 and 5 of the present Article immediately upon the coming into force of the present Treaty;

(b) for a period of — years from the coming into force of the present Treaty, the property and products under the conditions set out in paragraph 6 of the present Article to the value of — millions of US dollars corresponding to the share of the Soviet Union and to the value of — millions of US dollars corresponding to the share of the United States of America, the United Kingdom and France.

4. (a) Austria shall take all measures necessary to ensure the transfer to the Soviet Union in full ownership the installations and equipment used in prospecting and extracting bituminous products and which are enumerated in Appendix—to the present Treaty.

(b) Austria undertakes to grant to the Soviet Union and to uphold for a period of—years from the coming into force of the present Treaty concessions for prospecting and extracting bituminous products on land of an area of—hectares as set out in Appendix—to the present Treaty.

(c) The undertakings set up by the Soviet Union for the purpose of exploiting the property and the rights mentioned in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of the present paragraph shall, for all purposes, be subject to the provisions of Austrian law. However, Austria undertakes not to nationalize or to order under any form whatsoever the forced alienation of such undertakings before the expiry of a period of—years from the coming into force of the present Treaty, without the agreement of the Soviet Union.

5. (a) Austria renounces, on her own behalf, and on behalf of her nationals, in favor of the Soviet Union all property of the “Erste Donau Dampfschiffahrte Gesellschaft” Company (D.D.S.G.) which are located on the territory of Hungary, Bulgaria and Rumania including the ships enumerated in Appendix—to the present Treaty.

(b) Austria shall hand over to each of the Allied and Associated Powers a number of ships to be levied on those belonging to the D.D.S.G. Company representing a tonnage equal to that of the ships which were lost by the Shipping Companies owned or controlled by the said Allied or Associated Power or by its nationals due to their ships having been used by the D.D.S.G. during the war.

6. (a) The deliveries mentioned in paragraph 3(b) of the present Article shall be derived: (i) from Austria’s current production;

(ii) from the installations and industrial equipment designed for the manufacture of war material and which are not necessary for the requirements of the authorized military forces and which cannot immediately be adapted to civilian use.

(b) The amounts and categories of goods to be delivered shall form the subject of agreements between the interested Government and the Austrian Government; the choice will be made and deliveries spread out in such a fashion as not to impede the economic reconstruction of Austria and not to impose additional burdens on the other Allied or Associated Powers. The agreements concluded in virtue of this paragraph shall be communicated to the Heads of the Diplomatic Missions of the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, the United States of America and France in Vienna.

(c) The Allied or Associated Power concerned shall supply to Austria under trade conditions the raw materials or products normally imported by Austria and which are required for the production of such goods. Payment for such raw materials or products shall be made by deducting their value from the value of the goods supplied to the Power concerned.

(d) The United States dollar at gold parity as on July 1, 1946, that is to say that 35 dollars per fine ounce of gold shall be used as the basis for calculating the settlement provided for in the present paragraph.] (1)

(1)French proposal submitted as Annex to CFM/ATC (47) 76, October 8, 1947. This text was supplemented by document CFM/47/L/8 of November 27, 1947 as follows:

The French Delegation is now able to supply certain particulars in regard to the proposals which it put forward in Vienna on October 8th and which formed the subject of Document CFM/ATC (47) 76 of October 8, 1947.

Definite settlement of the problem of German assets in Austria should comprise three elements i.e.: (a) an apportionment of oil rights both for prospecting and extracting in the form of new concessions;

(b) a division of the holdings of the D.D.S.G.;

(c) an amount fixed in dollars to be paid by Austria in the form of products from her current production.
After further study, since the adjournment of the work of the Austrian Control Commission, the French Delegation is able to put forward certain figures in respect of each of these elements.

1. Oil.

(a) Extraction. The Soviet Union should receive concessions corresponding to about 50% of the present production of Austria. The duration and general terms should be fixed in accordance with precedents in similar cases.

(b) Prospecting. The Soviet Union should receive about ⅓ of the area of the Zistersdorf oil fields.

(c) Refining. Refineries representing a capacity of 250,000 to 300,000 tons should be transferred to the Soviet Union.

(d) Distribution. The Soviet Union should keep those facilities which she now has in two distributing concerns.

2. D.D.S.G.

Austria should forfeit in favor of the Soviet Union all holdings of the D.D.S.G. in Hungary, Roumania and Bulgaria. Further, Austria should transfer to the Allies a certain number of ships in order to compensate the losses suffered by their river fleets during the war through requisitions made for the benefit of the D.D.S.G.

3. Amount in Dollars.

The figure envisaged by the French Delegation for Eastern Austria is 100,000,000 dollars. Delivery should be spread over ten years, starting from such time as Austria’s minimum needs have been met.

The particulars set out above by the French Delegation do not, of course, constitute a fresh proposal, and all the suggestions contained in the document of October 8th, which formed a whole, as indicated in paragraph 17 of this document, still stand particularly those concerning points not dealt with above; this is especially the case as regards the application of Austrian law, arbitration, and the property of United Nations and minority groups.

[The Soviet Union shall receive: 1. (a) Oil Extraction
Concession rights to oil production areas equivalent to two thirds of the current production of oil in Austria, as well as property rights to all buildings, plant, equipment and other property forming part of these production areas, in accordance with the lists and the map annexed to the Treaty.
(b) Oil Prospecting
Concession rights to two thirds of all undeveloped areas in Eastern Austria that are German assets to which the Soviet Union is entitled in conformity with the Potsdam Agreement and which are in its possession at the present time, in accordance with the list of concessions and the maps annexed to the Treaty.

2. The period of validity of the concessions defined in paragraph 1 for prospecting and for the extraction of oil shall be fifty years.

3. The Soviet Union shall receive oil refineries having a total annual production capacity of four hundred and fifty thousand tons of crude oil, in accordance with the list annexed to the Treaty.

4. The Soviet Union shall receive those undertakings concerned in the distribution of oil products which are at present at its disposal, in accordance with the list annexed to the Treaty.

5. In respect of D.D.S.G. (Danube Shipping Co.), the Soviet Union shall receive the assets, including ships, located in Hungary, Bulgaria and Rumania, and likewise a share (25%) of the assets of D.D.S.G. which are located in Austria itself.

6. The Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, the United States and France cede to Austria their property rights to all former German assets in Austria, with the exception of those assets which are specified in paragraphs 1, 3, 4 and 5 of the present proposal, and Austria, on her part, undertakes to pay the Soviet Union within two years two hundred million American dollars in freely convertible currency, and to pay to the United Kingdom, the United States of America and to France —— million American dollars within —— years.

7. All former German assets which have come into the possession of the Soviet Union shall not be subject to alienation without the consent of the Soviet Union.

Undertakings covered by the definition of assets above-mentioned shall operate in accordance with Austrian legislation, on condition that Austria shall not raise any difficulties in regard to the export of the profits or other income in the form of output or freely convertible currency.

The foregoing German assets shall be transferred to the Soviet Union free from any obligations which have accrued up to the date of the actual transfer of the said assets to the Soviet Union.

8. Any disputes which may arise in connection with the application of the provisions of the Article covering German assets in Austria shall be settled by means of bilateral negotiation between the interested parties.] (2) (2) Soviet proposal, CFM/D/L/48/A/1, January 24, 1948, revised.

Note: The following was recorded in the Record of Decisions for the 89th meeting of the Deputies:

The Deputies continued discussion on the question of German assets in Austria and decided to record the following decisions of principle, these decisions being subject to a satisfactory settlement of the German assets question as a whole and conditional upon subsequent agreement on lists of definite properties to be transferred: (a) Refining
There shall be transferred to the Soviet Union oil refineries with a total annual capacity of 420,000 tons of crude oil on the basis of the 1947 capacity of these refineries;

(b) Distribution of Oil Products
There shall be transferred to the Soviet Union those undertakings concerned in the distribution of oil products which are at present at its disposal;

(c) Duration of Contracts
The period of validity of concessions to be transferred to the Soviet Union shall be established as follows: (i) For the extraction of oil from areas already under exploitation—30 years;

(ii) For oil exploration—8 years, with a further period of 25 years for extraction to run from the time when oil has been discovered in the explored areas.

section ii

Article 36 Restitution by Austria

1. Austria accepts the principles of the United Nations Declaration of January 5, 1943, and shall return, in the shortest possible time, property removed from the territory of any of the United Nations.

2. The obligation to make restitution applies to all identifiable property at present in Austria which was removed by force or duress by any of the Axis Powers from the territory of any of the United Nations, irrespective of any subsequent transactions by which the present holder of any such property has secured possession.

3. The Austrian Government shall return the property referred to in this Article in good order and, in this connection, shall bear all costs in Austria relating to labor, materials and transport.

4. The Austrian Government shall co-operate with the United Nations in, and shall provide at its own expense all necessary facilities for, the search for and restitution of property liable to restitution under this Article.

5. The Austrian Government shall take the necessary measures to effect the return of property covered by this Article held in any third country by persons subject to Austrian jurisdiction.

6. Claims for the restitution of property shall be presented to the Austrian Government by the Government of any country from whose territory the property was removed, it being understood that rolling stock shall be regarded as having been removed from the territory to which it originally belonged. The period during which such claims may be presented shall be nine months from the coming into force of the present Treaty.

7. The burden of identifying the property and of proving ownership shall rest on the claimant Government and the burden of proving that the property was not removed by force or duress shall rest on the Austrian Government.

8. The Government entitled to restitution and the Austrian Government may conclude agreements which will replace the provisions of the present Article. This bilateral procedure will apply particularly to the restitution of rolling stock, in regard to which the Allied and Associated Powers recognize that restitution should be arranged so as to effect a minimum dislocation of Austria’s essential transport requirements.

[9. If, in particular cases, it is impossible for Austria to make restitution of objects of artistic, historical or archaeological value, belonging to the cultural heritage of the United Nation from whose territory such objects were removed to Austria by force or duress by German forces, authorities or nationals, Austria shall transfer to the United Nation concerned objects of the same kind as, and of approximately equivalent value to, the objects removed, insofar as such objects are obtainable in Austria.] (1) (1) Proposal by the Soviet Delegation opposed by the French, United States and United Kingdom Delegations.

Article 38 Austrian Property in Germany and Renunciation of Claims by Austria on Germany

1. From the date of the coming into force of the present Treaty the property in Germany of the Austrian Government or of Austrian nationals, [including such property removed after March 12, 1938, as may be declared subject to return by the Powers in occupation of Germany], (1) shall be returned to its owners. This provision shall not apply to the property of war criminals or persons who have been subjected to the penalties of denazification measures; such property shall be placed at the disposal of the Austrian Government if it has not been subjected to blocking or confiscation in accordance with the laws or ordinances in force in Germany after May 8, 1945.

[2. The restoration of Austrian property in Germany shall be effected in accordance with measures which will be determined by the Powers in occupation of Germany in their zones of occupation.] (2)

[3. Without prejudice to these and to any other disposition in favor of Austria and Austrian nationals by the Powers occupying Germany, Austria waives on its own behalf and on behalf of Austrian nationals all claims against Germany and German nationals outstanding on May 8, 1945, except those arising out of contracts and other obligations entered into, and rights acquired, before March 13, 1938. This waiver shall be deemed to include all claims in respect of transactions effected by Germany during the period of the annexation of Austria and all claims in respect of loss or damage suffered during the said period, particularly in respect of the German public debt held, by the Austrian Government or its nationals and of currency withdrawn at the time of the monetary conversion. Such currency shall be destroyed, [except for such amounts as may be required to meet the claims of United Nations,] (3) upon the coming into force of the present Treaty.] (4) (1) Proposal of the French Delegation, supported by United Kingdom and United States Delegations, opposed by Soviet Delegation.

(2) Proposal of the Soviet Delegation.

(3) Proposal of the United Kingdom and United States Delegations. The Soviet Delegation is opposed to the words between brackets. The French Delegation reserves its position on these words until Articles 35 and 48 bis are agreed.

(4) The United States and United Kingdom Delegations will accept paragraph 3 above only on condition that a general agreement is reached on Article 41.

Article 41 German Claims against Austria

[The Allied and Associated Powers undertake to support the inclusion in the German Peace Treaty of a waiver by Germany to all claims based on the transfer or liquidation of its property or the property of its nationals as well as to all economic and financial claims against Austria or Austrian nationals outstanding on May 8, 1945, or arising out of the re-establishment of Austrian independence and of such waiver as may be appropriate of claims of German nationals against Austria or Austrian nationals.] (1) (1) Proposal of United States, United Kingdom and French Delegations. Soviet Delegation considers it premature to discuss this question.

Article 42 United Nations Property in Austria

[1. In so far as Austria has not already done so, Austria shall restore all legal rights and interests in Austria of the United Nations and their nationals as they existed on the day hostilities commenced between Germany and the United Nation concerned, and shall return all property in Austria of the United Nations and their nationals as it now exists.] (1)

[1. In so far as this has not already been done, Austria will restore all legal rights and interests in Austria of the United Nations and of their nationals such as they existed on September 1, 1939, as well as the legal rights and interests of the United Nations and of their nationals which existed on March 13, 1938, and were subjected after that date to transfers liable to cancellation under paragraph 3 of the present Article. Austria will restitute to such United Nations and their nationals items of property belonging to them in Austria in their present condition.] (2)

2. The Austrian Government undertakes that all property, rights and interests passing under this Article shall be restored free of all encumbrances and charges of any kind to which they may have become subject as a result of the war with Germany and without the imposition of any charges by the Austrian Government in connection with their return. The Austrian Government shall nullify all measures [including seizures, sequestration or control] (3) [of seizures, sequestration or control] (4) taken against United Nations property between [March 13, 1938] (5) [the day of commencement of hostilities between Germany and the United Nation concerned] (6) and the coming into force of the present Treaty. In cases where the property has not been returned within six months from the coming into force of the present Treaty, application shall be made to the Austrian authorities not later than twelve months from the coming into force of the Treaty, except in cases in which the claimant is able to show that he could not file his application within this period.

[3. The Austrian Government shall invalidate transfers involving property, rights and interests of any description belonging to United Nations nationals, where such transfers resulted from force exerted by Axis Governments or their agencies between the beginning of hostilities between Germany and the United Nation concerned and May 8, 1945.] (7)

[3. (a) The Austrian Government will cancel transfers of property, rights and interests of all kinds belonging to the United Nations which were carried out between March 13, 1938 and May 8, 1945, when these transfers: (i) were carried out in relation to measures directed by Germany against physical or juridical persons designated as non-Aryan;

(ii) were carried out without the free consent of the owners and without complete compensation.

(b) The Austrian Government will also cancel, in the degree in which they have caused prejudice to the United Nations or their nationals, transactions carried out between March 13, 1938 and May 8, 1945 in relation to property, rights and interests belonging on March 13, 1938 to these United Nations or to their nationals when by such transactions the property, rights and interests have been acquired by any person whatsoever: (i) to the exclusion of the rights of nationals of the United Nations;

(ii) by an investment in enterprises the property rights of which had previously been transferred and which must be cancelled in accordance with the terms of sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph;

(iii) through acquiring enterprises the property rights of which had been transferred previously and which must be cancelled in accordance with the terms of sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph, or through acquiring the assets of these enterprises.] (8)

[4. (a) In cases in which the Austrian Government provides compensation for losses suffered by reason of injury or damage to property in Austria which occurred during the German occupation of Austria or during the war, United Nations nationals shall in no event receive less favorable treatment than that accorded to Austrian nationals; and in such cases United Nations nationals who hold, directly or indirectly, ownership interests in corporations or associations which are not United Nations nationals within the meaning of paragraph 8 (a) of this Article shall receive compensation based on the total loss or damage suffered by the corporations or associations and bearing the same proportion to such loss or damage as the beneficial interest of such nationals bears to the capital of the corporation or association.] (9)

[4. (a) The Austrian Government undertakes to enter into agreements with each of the United Nations concerned in regard to the property in Austria, dealt with in this Article, of their nationals which cannot be returned or which has suffered injury or damage as a result of the war with Germany. These agreements shall be concluded in the shortest possible time and Austria undertakes therein to give to the nationals of each of the United Nations concerned treatment no less favorable than has been, is, or may be, granted in the territory of that United Nation to Austrian property, and, in no event, less favorable treatment than that accorded by the Austrian Government to Austrian nationals.

Nothing in the foregoing shall require Austria to make payments in foreign currencies in respect of loss, injury or damage to property.] (10)

4. (b) The Austrian Government shall accord to United Nations nationals the same treatment in the allocation of materials for the repair or rehabilitation of their property in Austria and in the allocation of foreign exchange for the importation of such materials as applies to Austrian nationals.

5. All reasonable expenses incurred in Austria in establishing claims, including the assessment of loss or damage, shall be borne by the Austrian Government.

6. United Nations nationals and their property shall be exempted from any exceptional taxes, levies or imposts imposed on their capital assets in Austria by the Austrian Government or any Austrian authority between the date of the surrender of the German armed forces and the coming into force of the present Treaty for the specific purpose of meeting charges arising out of the war or of meeting the costs of occupying forces. Any sums which have been so paid shall be refunded.

7. The owner of the property concerned and the Austrian Government may agree upon arrangements in lieu of the provisions of this Article.

8. As used in this Article:

(a) “United Nations nationals” means individuals who are nationals of any of the United Nations, or corporations or associations organized under the laws of any of the United Nations, at the coming into force of the present Treaty, provided that the said individuals, corporations or associations also had this status on May 8, 1945.

The term “United Nations nationals” also includes all individuals, corporations or associations which, under the laws in force in Austria during the war, have been treated as enemy [or as under enemy control]. (11)

[Only those United Nations nationals who possessed United Nations nationality prior to the date on which their property suffered damage in Austria shall, however, be entitled to compensation in accordance with paragraph 4 of this Article.] (12)

(b) “Owner” means the United Nation, or the United Nations national, as defined in sub-paragraph (a) above, who is entitled to the property in question, and includes a successor of the owner, provided that the successor is also a United Nation or a United Nations national as defined in sub-paragraph (a). If the successor has purchased the property in its damaged state, the transferor shall retain his rights to compensation under this article, without prejudice to obligations between the transferor and the purchaser under domestic law.

(c) “Property” means all movable or immovable property, whether tangible or intangible, including industrial, literary and artistic property, as well as all rights or interests of any kind in property.

[9. The provisions of this Article do not apply to transfers of property, rights or interests of United Nations or United Nations nationals in Austria made in accordance with laws and enactments which were in force as Austrian Law on June 28, 1946.] (13)

10. The Austrian Government recognizes that the Brioni Agreement of August 10, 1942, is null and void. It undertakes to participate with the other signatories of the Rome Agreement of March 29, 1923, in any negotiations having the purpose of introducing into its provisions the modifications necessary to ensure the equitable settlement of the annuities which it provides.

(1) Proposal by the Soviet Delegation. Opposed by the French, United States and United Kingdom Delegations.

(2) Proposal by the French Delegation. The United States Delegation supports this proposal in principle but in view of the intimate relation of paragraphs 1 and 3 of Article 42 to Article 35, and the existing differences among the several Delegations, including differences between the French and United States Delegations, regarding the text of Article 35, the United States Delegation prefers to reserve its position on the exact language of these paragraphs pending further study of or agreement on Article 35. The United Kingdom Delegation agrees in principle with the United States Delegation but will reserve its final position on these paragraphs.

(3) Proposal of United Kingdom, French and United States Delegations.

(4) Proposal of Soviet Delegation.

(5) Proposal of United Kingdom, French and United States Delegations.

(6) Proposal of Soviet Delegation.

(7) Proposal of Soviet Delegation. Opposed by French, United Kingdom and United States Delegations.

(8) Proposal of the French Delegation. The United States Delegation supports this proposal in principle but in view of the intimate relation of paragraphs 1 and 3 of Article 42 to Article 35, and the existing differences among the several Delegations, including differences between the French and United States Delegations, regarding the text of Article 35, the United States Delegation prefers to reserve its position on the exact language of these paragraphs pending further study of or agreement on Article 35. The United Kingdom Delegation agrees in principle with the United States Delegation but will reserve its final position on these paragraphs.

(9) Proposal by United States and Soviet Delegations.

(10) Proposal by United Kingdom Delegation. Supported by French Delegation.

(11) Addition by United States and United Kingdom Delegations, which the Soviet and French Delegations consider unnecessary.

(12) Addition by the French Delegation, with which Soviet Delegation agrees in principle. Opposed by the United States Delegation.

(13) Proposal of Soviet Delegation. Opposed by the United States, United Kingdom and French Delegations.

Article 43 Application of Austrian Law to United Nations Property, Rights and Interests in Austria

[Subject to any other provisions in the present Treaty affecting the treatment of property in Austria, all property, rights and interests in Austria of the United Nations and their nationals, equally with Austrian-owned property, shall receive the full protection of Austrian law and be subject to the provisions of Austrian law.] (1) (1) Proposal of United States, French and United Kingdom Delegations. The Soviet Delegation reserves its position until Articles 35 and 42 have been agreed.

Article 44 Property, Rights and Interests of Minority Groups in Austria

1. In so far as such action has not already been taken, Austria undertakes that, in all cases where property, legal rights or interests in Austria have since March 13, 1938, been the subject of [measures of sequestration, confiscation or control] (1) [transfer under duress, acts of confiscation, dispossession or spoliation] (2) on account of the racial origin or religion of the owner, the said property shall be returned and the said legal rights and interests shall be restored together with their accessories. Where return or restoration is impossible, compensation shall be granted for losses incurred by reason of such measures to the same extent as is, or may be, given to Austrian nationals generally in respect of war damage.

2. Austria agrees to take under its control all property, legal rights and interests in Austria of persons, organizations or communities which, individually or as members of groups, were the object of racial, religious or other Nazi measures of persecution where, in the case of persons, such property, rights and interests remain heirless or unclaimed for six months after the coming into force of the present Treaty, or where in the case of organizations and communities such organizations or communities have ceased substantially to exist. Austria shall transfer such property, rights and interests to appropriate agencies or organizations to be designated by the Four Heads of Mission in Vienna by agreement with the Austrian Government to be used for the relief and rehabilitation of victims of persecution by the Axis Powers, it being understood that these provisions do not require Austria to make payments in foreign exchange or other transfers to foreign countries which would constitute a burden on the Austrian economy. Such transfer shall be effected within eighteen months from the coming into force of the present Treaty and shall include property rights and interests required to be restored under paragraph 1 of this Article. (1) Proposal by the Soviet Delegation which the French and United Kingdom. Delegations are prepared to accept.

(2) Proposal by United States Delegation which United Kingdom and French Delegations are prepared to accept.
Note: The following notation is made to the text of this Article in the ATC Final Report:
Comparison of the texts revealed that the word “substantially” in paragraph 2 Of the English text is not contained in the Soviet and French texts.

Article 45 Austrian Property in the Territory of the Allied and Associated Powers

1. The Allied and Associated Powers declare their intention to return Austrian property, rights and interests as they now exist in their territories or the proceeds arising out of the liquidation, disposal or realization of such property, rights or interests subject to accrued taxes, expenses of administration, creditor claims and other like charges, where such property, rights or interests have been liquidated, disposed of or otherwise realized. The Allied and Associated Powers will be prepared to conclude agreements with the Austrian Government for this purpose.

[2. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia shall have the right to seize, retain or liquidate Austrian property, rights and interests within Yugoslav territory on the coming into force of the present Treaty and also to apply the proceeds thereof to such purposes as it may desire within the limits of its claims and those of its nationals against Austria or Austrian nationals, including debts, other than claims fully satisfied under other Articles of the present Treaty. The Government of Austria undertakes to compensate Austrian nationals whose property is taken under this paragraph.] (1) (1) Proposal by French Delegation, supported by Soviet Delegation. United states and United Kingdom Delegations can accept this paragraph only if the United States, United Kingdom and French proposal for Article 34 is accepted by all Delegations. The Soviet Delegation considers paragraph 2 has no connection whatsoever with Article 34.

Article 48 Debts

1. The annexation of Austria by Germany shall not be deemed to have affected the obligations of the Austrian Government in respect of external loans issued prior to March 13, 1938. The Allied and Associated Powers recognize that the Government of Austria has no obligation in respect of German Government securities freely accepted by the holders thereof in exchange for securities of the Government of Austria, [or in respect of these Austrian securities regarding which after March 13, 1938, payment agreements were concluded between Germany and the creditor States]. (1)

[2. The Allied and Associated Powers recognize that interest payments and similar charges on Austrian Government securities falling due after March 12, 1938, and before May 8, 1945, constitute a claim on Germany and not on Austria.] (2) [As regards payment of interest and similar charges on Austrian Government securities falling due between March 13, 1938, and May 8, 1945, the Allied and Associated Powers declare their intention to negotiate with Austria agreements to fix the conditions of payment, taking into consideration the financial position of Austria.] (3)

3. The Allied and Associated Powers declare their intention not to avail themselves of the provisions of loan agreements made by the Government of Austria before March 13, 1938, in so far as those provisions granted to the creditors a right of control over the government finances of Austria.

4. The existence of the state of war between the Allied and Associated Powers and Germany shall not, in itself, be regarded as affecting the obligation to pay pecuniary debts arising out of obligations and contracts which existed, and rights which were acquired, before the existence of the state of war, which became payable prior to the coming into force of the present Treaty, and which are due by the Government or nationals of Austria to the Government or nationals of one of the Allied and Associated Powers or are due by the Government or nationals of one of the Allied and Associated Powers to the Government or nationals of Austria.

5. Except as otherwise expressly provided in the present Treaty, nothing therein shall be construed as impairing debtor-creditor relationships arising out of contracts concluded at any time prior to September 1, 1939, by either the Government of Austria or persons who were nationals of Austria on March 12, 1938. (1) Proposal by the Soviet Delegation opposed by the United Kingdom, United States and French Delegations.

(2) Proposal by United States, United Kingdom and Soviet Delegations.

(3) Alternative proposal by French Delegation, opposed by United States, United Kingdom and Soviet Delegations.

Article 48 bis

[Austria acknowledges as a debt, payable by her, monetary loans and also the value of all supplies and services delivered to the Austrian Government by any of the Allied or Associated Powers between May 8, 1945, and the coming into force of the present Treaty.] (1)

[The Governments of the Allied and Associated Powers waive all claims against the Government or nationals of Austria which they or any of them may have for the value of imported supplies delivered by them or any of them for civilian consumption in Austria between May 8, 1945, and the coming into force of the present Treaty, other than supplies delivered under commercial contracts, trade agreements or credit arrangements.] (2)

(1) Proposal by Soviet Delegation.

(2) Proposal by United States Delegation, supported by the United Kingdom and French Delegations.

Article 49 bis Contracts Between Austria and Germany

[The Government of Austria with the agreement of the Heads of the Diplomatic Missions in Vienna of the Soviet Union, of the United Kingdom, of the United States and of France, may take action with a view to terminating contractual relations between Austrian nationals and Germany or German nationals existing on May 8, 1945, which created conditions of undue economic dependence by Austria on Germany, or which were harmful to the Austrian economy and involved long-term obligations for the delivery of goods or services or for the determination of prices or of preferential terms of payment.] (1) (1) Proposal of the United Kingdom, United States and French Delegations. The Soviet Delegation reserves its position on this Article until a decision on Article 35 is reached.

Part VIII Miscellaneous Economic Provisions

Article 51 Patents

[Austrian patent law shall be amended in order to limit the study preliminary to registration to a simple survey of the definition of the new characteristics of the projects.

Any kind of technical centralization by any means and any form of preliminary appeal to opposition are prohibited.] (1) (1) Proposal by French Delegation. Opposed by the United States, United Kingdom and Soviet Delegations. The French Delegation reserves the right to present a new text of this Article.
Note: The French Deputy informally proposed the following at the 103rd meeting:
Austria undertakes to join any international organization engaged in the investigation of the novelty of inventions on behalf of national Patents Offices.
Austria shall not adopt within its territory any measures which might prevent it from becoming a member of such an organization in the future.

Annex III Prohibition of Certain Equipment and Products

[List of the equipment and products of which the research and development, experimentation, production and possession are prohibited under the conditions set out below.

i (a) Continuous rolling mills of an affective width over 2 meters, other than those already existing.

(b) Cranes and gantries of a power greater than 100 tons in steel mills or steel foundries, other than those already existing.

(c) Armour plate over 3 inches thick (76 mm.), with a surface hardness greater than 500 Brinnell.

ii

Manufacture, research for the purposes of industrial manufacture, and possession of hydrogen peroxide of a concentration greater than 41 percent. Laboratory research on this product is authorized, likewise the possession of the requisite quantities for this purpose.

iii

(a) Mathematical machines specially designed to be fitted into prohibited apparatus or equipment, or to be applied to their study or construction.

(b) Installations or apparatus devised for the study of nuclear physics, as applied to industrial uses or for war purposes. However, the use of cyclotrons or similar instruments in universities, for fundamental research work, is authorized.

(c) Installations or apparatus intended for aerodynamic research in the regions corresponding to a Mach number greater than or equal to 0.9.

(d) Experimental tanks and all other apparatus devised for the study and development of high speed craft (speed equal to or over 30 knots), submarines, underwater explosions and other development or apparatus and equipment adaptable to naval warfare.] (See note below.)
Note: French proposal; supported by USSR; opposed by US and UK.

Annex IV Prohibition of Certain Research, Development and Manufacture

[List of research and development and manufacture which are prohibited under the conditions set out below:

i

(a) Research and development into the application of gas turbines and rockets to aircraft and manufacture in connection therewith.

(b) Research and development of gyroscopes.

ii

(a) Research, development and manufacture of radio-electric emitting apparatus of a frequency over 300,000 kilocycles, and the equipment connected with these.

(b) Research, development and improvement of manufacturing processes of quartz and piezo-electric cells, thermo-electric, radio-electric and photo-electric cells, the use of which shall be unrestrictedly authorized, but the stock shall be limited to the indispensable spares, and exportation prohibited.

(c) Research, development and manufacture of emitting or receiving apparatus for infra-red, ultra-violet, infra-sounds and ultrasounds, the use of which shall be limited to medical and university-requirements exclusively, and the stock shall be restricted to the indispensable spares for these requirements. Fundamental research and development on infra-red, ultra-violet, infra-sounds and ultra-sounds are authorized.

(d) Research and development on stratospheric cabins and manufacture connected with these.

(e) Research, development and manufacture of industrial machines such as: centering machines and industrial measuring machines and machine tools, accurate to over one ten-thousandth in the measurement of force, one ten-thousandth of a second in the measurement of time, and one thousandth of a millimeter in the measurement of length.

iii

(a) Manufacture and use of heavy water on an industrial scale, and research for this purpose.

(b) Manufacture for export purposes of the following primary metals and their alloys: magnesium, beryllium, vanadium.

(c) Manufacture of nitric and sulphuric acids by processes producing directly concentrations of higher than 95 percent and 98 percent respectively in excess of domestic non-military requirements.

(d) Research, development and manufacture in the field of fritted metals, with the exception of the Reutte works, which shall not be permitted either to increase or alter their installations and equipment.

(e) Research, development and manufacture of radio-active materials, the use and stocking of which shall be restricted to medical and university requirements.] (See note below)

Note: French proposal; supported by USSR; opposed by US and UK.

Annex V Limitation of Stocks of Certain Materials

[List of materials, the stocking of which shall be restricted to the quantities requisite to meet the peace-time requirements of the Austrian economy over a period of six months: Copper

Nickel

Chromium

Vanadium

Tungsten

Manganese

Molybdenum

Magnesium

Beryllium

Natural and artificial radio-active products

Rubber

Primary aluminum

Fritted metals

Sulphuric acid of more than 98 percent concentration

Nitric acid of more than 95 percent concentration] (See note below)

Note: French proposal; supported by USSR; opposed by US and UK.

Index Index

Achilles, Theodore C., 63–64 [Pgs. 63–64 include portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 66n [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

Acker, Heinrich, 1221 [Pg. 1221 is part of Doc. 682]

Adams, Ware, 1194 [Pg. 1194 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669]

Adcock, Clarence L., 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2]

Adenauer, Konrad, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 256], 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 420–422 [Pgs. 420–422 include portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 442–446 [Pgs. 442–446 include portions of Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296], 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 642–648 [Pgs. 642–648 include portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, and Doc. 393], 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 517], 1272 [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708]

Albania, 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 428], 746n [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 751–753 [Pgs. 751–753 include portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, and Doc. 450], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 758–760 [Pgs. 758–760 include portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, and Doc. 455], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 916n [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 922n [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 560]

Allied Bank Commission (U.S.-U.K.), 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 102], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 107], 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Allied Commission for Germany, proposed establishment of an, 1333–1335 [Pg. 1333 is part of Doc. 721]

Allied Commission on Reparations, meeting at Moscow, 1945, 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 486]

Allied Control Authority for Austria, 629–630 [Pgs. 629–630 include portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

Allied Control Authority for Germany (ACA): Berlin, status of, 934 [Pg. 934 is part of Doc. 567], 1299 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 720]; breakdown of, 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 744n [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 442], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 455], 1298–1300 [Pg. 1298 is part of Doc. 720], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 720], 1314–1315 [Pg. 1314 is part of Doc. 720]; Coordinating Committee of, 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239]; postal services for Berlin, agreement on, 906 [Pg. 906 is part of Doc. 545]; Praha Declaration, referral to, 395n [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 264]; Quadripartite control, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 29], 867n [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517]; reparations from Germany, 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 165], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 422], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 426], 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 465], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 466], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 466], 806 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 477], 846–847 [Pgs. 846–847 include portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504]; restitution from Germany, 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 470]

Allied Control Council for Germany (ACC): Agreement concerning, 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 236], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 236], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 236], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 239], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 241]

Air regulations, Nov. 30, 1945, 1136 [Pg. 1136 is part of Doc. 648], 1138–1139 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 648], 1163–1164 [Pg. 1163 is part of Doc. 659], 1167–1169 [Pg. 1167 is part of Doc. 660], 1189 [Pg. 1189 is part of Doc. 667], 1198 [Pg. 1198 includes portions of Doc. 670 and Doc. 671]

Berlin as international zone, 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 575]

Berlin as seat of Allied Control, 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 962 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 579]

Berlin blockade, 935n [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 567], 945n [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 572]

Bizonal (U.S.-U.K.) economic organization, revision of, 867–868 [Pgs. 867–868 include portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517]

Bizonia (U.S.-U.K. zones of occupation), 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 236], 357–358 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 239], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 241]

Breakdown of, 179n [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 291], 884–886 [Pgs. 884–886 include portions of Doc. 526, Doc. 527, and Doc. 528], 893–894 [Pgs. 893–894 include portions of Doc. 533, Doc. 534, and Doc. 535], 962 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 579], 1299 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 720], 1314 [Pg. 1314 is part of Doc. 720], 1333 [Pg. 1333 is part of Doc. 721]

Coordinating Committee, 869n [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 518], 876n [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 521 and Doc. 522], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 522], 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526], 1270 [Pg. 1270 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707]

Currency reform, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 15], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 218], 870–882 [Pgs. 870–882 include portions of Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 576]

Denazification policy, 1302 [Pg. 1302 is part of Doc. 720]

Disarmament and demilitarization, 876–877 [Pgs. 876–877 include portions of Doc. 521 and Doc. 522], 1335 [Pg. 1335 is part of Doc. 721]

German war prisoners, repatriation of, 869–870 [Pgs. 869–870 include portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519]

Industries in Germany, control over, 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

Kulturbund, ban of, in western zones, 875–876 [Pgs. 875–876 include portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, and Doc. 522]

Level of industry in Germany, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 104–105 [Pgs. 104–105 include portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 834n [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 497], 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 499]

London Conference on Germany, 345n [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 236], 368n [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248]

Meetings: 5th, Sept. 10, 1945, 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 561] n; 13th, Nov. 30, 1945, 927n [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 561]; 34th, June 20, 1946, 357–358 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 239]; 35th, July 30, 1946, 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 239]; 77th, Jan. 20, 1948, 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517], 869–870 [Pgs. 869–870 include portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519]; 78th, Feb. 1, 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519]; 79th, Feb. 11, 868n [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 517], 873–876 [Pgs. 873–876 include portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, Doc. 521, and Doc. 522]; 80th, Feb. 20, 876–877 [Pgs. 876–877 include portions of Doc. 521 and Doc. 522]; 81st, Feb. 25, 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 241]; 82d, Mar. 20, 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239], 883–884 [Pgs. 883–884 include portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526]

Peoples Congress movement, ban of, in western zones, 875–876 [Pgs. 875–876 include portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, and Doc. 522]

Political and economic unity of Germany, 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 1308 [Pg. 1308 is part of Doc. 720]

Praha Declaration, 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526]

Provisional government in West Germany, 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]

Refugees, German, distribution of, 869 [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 518]

Reparations from Germany, 118–119 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 78], 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462]

Restitution to Bulgaria, Hungary, Italy, and Rumania, 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 470]

Soviet charges regarding Anglo-American policy, 350–351 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 236]; Soviet vetoes, 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 250]; Soviet walk-out, 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 139], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 239], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 526], 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 540], 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 1299 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 720]

Terms of reference, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 236], 867n [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517]

United States policy toward, 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 250], 892–893 [Pgs. 892–893 include portions of Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534]

Allied Council for Austria (AC), 1342–1377 [Pgs. 1342–1377 include portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, Doc. 725, Doc. 726, Doc. 727, Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, Doc. 734, Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, Doc. 745, and Doc. 746] passim, 1407–1456 [Pgs. 1407–1456 include portions of Doc. 766, Doc. 767, Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, Doc. 772, Doc. 773, Doc. 774, Doc. 775, Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, Doc. 788, Doc. 789, Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, and Doc. 807] passim, 1474–1498 [Pgs. 1474–1498 include portions of Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842] passim, 1515 [Pg. 1515 is part of Doc. 857]

Alphand, Hervé, 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 118–119 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 78], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 80], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 83], 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 125], 242–244 [Pgs. 242–244 include portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311], 477–479 [Pgs. 477–479 include portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 482–483 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 316], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 320], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 328], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 331], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 331], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 537–539 [Pgs. 537–539 include portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 553–554 [Pgs. 553–554 include portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 359], 560–562 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 360], 564–566 [Pgs. 564–566 include portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 569n [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 829–830 [Pgs. 829–830 include portions of Doc. 491, Doc. 492, and Doc. 493], 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 845–847 [Pgs. 845–847 include portions of Doc. 502, Doc. 503, and Doc. 504], 849–851 [Pgs. 849–851 include portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662]

Altenberger, Erwin, 1412 [Pg. 1412 includes portions of Doc. 770 and Doc. 771]

Altmeier, Peter, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 287]

American republics, 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]

Anderson, Clinton P., 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439], 740–741 [Pgs. 740–741 include portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468]

Andronikoff, Constantin, 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662]

Appelt, Rudolf, 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 269]

Argentina, 1212 [Pg. 1212 includes portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676], 1233 [Pg. 1233 includes portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688], 1275 [Pg. 1275 includes portions of Doc. 709 and Doc. 710]

Armour, Norman, 356–360 [Pgs. 356–360 include portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240], 368–370 [Pgs. 368–370 include portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249]

Arnold, Karl, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4], 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 6], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 410–411 [Pgs. 410–411 include portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 420–421 [Pgs. 420–421 include portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 287], 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 1272 [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708]

Atomic energy, 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 496]

Attlee, Clement R, 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 560], 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568]

Auriol, Vincent, 321n [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 1117 [Pg. 1117 is part of Doc. 640]

Austin, Warren R., 1216–1218 [Pgs. 1216–1218 include portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680], 1225–1228 [Pgs. 1225–1228 include portions of Doc. 683, Doc. 684, and Doc. 685]

Australia, 181–183 [Pgs. 181–183 include portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

Austria (see also Allied Control Authority for Austria, Allied Council for Austria, Austrian Peace Treaty, and Austrian Treaty Commission): Air corridor between Vienna and Praba, Soviet protests regarding alleged U.S. violations of, 1436–1437 [Pgs. 1436–1437 include portions of Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793]

Air Force, equipment and training for, 1358 [Pg. 1358 includes portions of Doc. 730 and Doc. 731], 1362–1363 [Pgs. 1362–1363 include portions of Doc. 734, Doc. 735, and Doc. 736], 1368 [Pg. 1368 is part of Doc. 739]

Arms for military and police forces, 1344–1345 [Pg. 1344 is part of Doc. 723], 1350 [Pg. 1350 is part of Doc. 723], 1356–1378 [Pgs. 1356–1378 include portions of Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, Doc. 734, Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748], 1406 [Pg. 1406 is part of Doc. 766], 1415 [Pg. 1415 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1469–1470 [Pgs. 1469–1470 include portions of Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819], 1474 [Pg. 1474 is part of Doc. 823], 1476–1477 [Pgs. 1476–1477 include portions of Doc. 824 and Doc. 825], 1498 [Pg. 1498 is part of Doc. 842], 1500 [Pg. 1500 includes portions of Doc. 843 and Doc. 844], 1511 [Pg. 1511 is part of Doc. 856], 1513–1514 [Pgs. 1513–1514 include portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857]

Army, questions regarding formation of, 1356–1363 [Pgs. 1356–1363 include portions of Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, Doc. 734, Doc. 735, and Doc. 736], 1365–1375 [Pgs. 1365–1375 include portions of Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, and Doc. 745], 1377 [Pg. 1377 is part of Doc. 746], 1389 [Pg. 1389 includes portions of Doc. 756 and Doc. 757], 1406 [Pg. 1406 is part of Doc. 766], 1474 [Pg. 1474 is part of Doc. 823], 1477 [Pg. 1477 is part of Doc. 825], 1495n [Pg. 1495 is part of Doc. 840], 1499 [Pg. 1499 is part of Doc. 843], 1513 [Pg. 1513 is part of Doc. 856]

Bipartite committee for future Army, 1365–1366 [Pgs. 1365–1366 include portions of Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 739 and Doc. 740], 1371 [Pg. 1371 includes portions of Doc. 740 and Doc. 741], 1373 [Pg. 1373 is part of Doc. 743], 1375 [Pg. 1375 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745]

Conference on the Danube, participation, 1348 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723]

Constitution of, 1370 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 740], 1389 [Pg. 1389 includes portions of Doc. 756 and Doc. 757], 1440 [Pg. 1440 is part of Doc. 794]

Currency reform (Dec. 1947), 1346 [Pg. 1346 is part of Doc. 723], 1431 [Pg. 1431 is part of Doc. 787], 1456 [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 807]

Customs union with Italy, proposal regarding, 1409–1410 [Pgs. 1409–1410 include portions of Doc. 767, Doc. 768, and Doc. 769]

Czechoslovakia, relations with, 1348 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723], 1408 [Pg. 1408 includes portions of Doc. 766 and Doc. 767]

Demilitarization policy, 1411 [Pg. 1411 includes portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770], 1452 [Pg. 1452 is part of Doc. 804]

Denazification policy, 1411 [Pg. 1411 includes portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770], 1437–1439 [Pgs. 1437–1439 include portions of Doc. 792, Doc. 793, and Doc. 794], 1452 [Pg. 1452 is part of Doc. 804], 1524 [Pg. 1524 is part of Doc. 857]

Economic Cooperation Administration (see also European Recovery Program, infra): Agreement, July 2, 1348 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723], 1410 [Pg. 1410 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 1429 [Pg. 1429 includes portions of Doc. 786 and Doc. 787], 1431–1432 [Pgs. 1431–1432 include portions of Doc. 787 and Doc. 788]; allotments and grants, 1346–1347 [Pg. 1346 is part of Doc. 723], 1393 [Pg. 1393 includes portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759], 1395–1396 [Pgs. 1395–1396 include portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761]; program, 1394 [Pg. 1394 is part of Doc. 759], 1400 [Pg. 1400 includes portions of Doc. 763 and Doc. 764], 1409 [Pg. 1409 includes portions of Doc. 767 and Doc. 768], 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857]

European Recovery Program assistance for (see also Economic Cooperation Administration, supra), 1346 [Pg. 1346 is part of Doc. 723], 1351 [Pg. 1351 is part of Doc. 723], 1378–1379 [Pgs. 1378–1379 include portions of Doc. 747 and Doc. 748], 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 1383 [Pg. 1383 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752], 1386–1396 [Pgs. 1386–1396 include portions of Doc. 753, Doc. 754, Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, Doc. 759, Doc. 760, and Doc. 761], 1399–1400 [Pgs. 1399–1400 include portions of Doc. 762, Doc. 763, and Doc. 764], 1405–1409 [Pgs. 1405–1409 include portions of Doc. 766, Doc. 767, and Doc. 768], 1412 [Pg. 1412 includes portions of Doc. 770 and Doc. 771], 1430 [Pg. 1430 is part of Doc. 787], 1442 [Pg. 1442 includes portions of Doc. 795 and Doc. 796], 1450 [Pg. 1450 is part of Doc. 802], 1455 [Pg. 1455 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1461 [Pg. 1461 is part of Doc. 811], 1468 [Pg. 1468 includes portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817], 1473 [Pg. 1473 is part of Doc. 822], 1476 [Pg. 1476 is part of Doc. 824], 1489 [Pg. 1489 is part of Doc. 835], 1492–1493 [Pgs. 1492–1493 include portions of Doc. 837 and Doc. 838], 1497 [Pg. 1497 includes portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842], 1499–1500 [Pgs. 1499–1500 include portions of Doc. 843 and Doc. 844]

Export-Import Bank, question of loans to Austria, 1387–1388 [Pgs. 1387–1388 include portions of Doc. 754, Doc. 755, and Doc. 756], 1395 [Pg. 1395 is part of Doc. 760], 1397–1401 [Pgs. 1397–1401 include portions of Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, and Doc. 765]

Exports to Austria, screening of licenses, 1396–1401 [Pgs. 1396–1401 include portions of Doc. 760, Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, and Doc. 765]

Foreign exchange holdings, 1380–1381 [Pgs. 1380–1381 include portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749]

France, relations with, 1347 [Pg. 1347 is part of Doc. 723]

French policy toward, 1347–1348 [Pg. 1347 is part of Doc. 723], 1401–1403 [Pgs. 1401–1403 include portions of Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766], 1416 [Pg. 1416 is part of Doc. 773], 1420 [Pg. 1420 is part of Doc. 777], 1423 [Pg. 1423 is part of Doc. 780], 1425–1427 [Pgs. 1425–1427 include portions of Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785]

Frontier question. see under Austrian Peace Treaty.

German assets. see under Austrian Peace Treaty.

German displaced persons, 1303 [Pg. 1303 is part of Doc. 720]

German war booty, disposition of, 1407 [Pg. 1407 is part of Doc. 766], 1443–1444 [Pgs. 1443–1444 include portions of Doc. 796, Doc. 797, and Doc. 798]

Gold holdings, 1380 [Pg. 1380 is part of Doc. 748], 1493–1494 [Pgs. 1493–1494 include portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839]

Government of, 1343 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 723], 1350 [Pg. 1350 is part of Doc. 723], 1353 [Pg. 1353 includes portions of Doc. 725 and Doc. 726], 1364 [Pg. 1364 is part of Doc. 736], 1366–1367 [Pgs. 1366–1367 include portions of Doc. 737, Doc. 738, and Doc. 739], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 739 and Doc. 740], 1372–1374 [Pgs. 1372–1374 include portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744], 1376–1378 [Pgs. 1376–1378 include portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748], 1387 [Pg. 1387 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755], 1392–1393 [Pgs. 1392–1393 include portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759], 1399–1401 [Pgs. 1399–1401 include portions of Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, and Doc. 765], 1403–1407 [Pgs. 1403–1407 include portions of Doc. 765 and Doc. 766], 1411–1412 [Pgs. 1411–1412 include portions of Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771], 1414–1415 [Pgs. 1414–1415 include portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1421–1426 [Pgs. 1421–1426 include portions of Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, and Doc. 784], 1428 [Pg. 1428 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 1437–1439 [Pgs. 1437–1439 include portions of Doc. 792, Doc. 793, and Doc. 794], 1444–1445 [Pgs. 1444–1445 include portions of Doc. 797, Doc. 798, and Doc. 799], 1448 [Pg. 1448 includes portions of Doc. 800 and Doc. 801], 1458–1459 [Pgs. 1458–1459 include portions of Doc. 809 and Doc. 810], 1475 [Pg. 1475 includes portions of Doc. 823 and Doc. 824], 1477 [Pg. 1477 is part of Doc. 825], 1486 [Pg. 1486 is part of Doc. 832], 1491 [Pg. 1491 is part of Doc. 837], 1495 [Pg. 1495 is part of Doc. 840], 1497 [Pg. 1497 includes portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842], 1499–1500 [Pgs. 1499–1500 include portions of Doc. 843 and Doc. 844], 1509–1510 [Pgs. 1509–1510 include portions of Doc. 854, Doc. 855, and Doc. 856], 1513 [Pg. 1513 is part of Doc. 856], 1524 [Pg. 1524 is part of Doc. 857], 1526–1528 [Pg. 1526 is part of Doc. 857], 1531 [Pg. 1531 is part of Doc. 857]

Hostilities, question regarding termination of, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 290]

Hungary, relations with, 1348 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723]

Independence, territorial integrity, and sovereignty of Austria. see under Austrian Peace Treaty.

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, 1380 [Pg. 1380 is part of Doc. 748], 1493 [Pg. 1493 is part of Doc. 838]

International Monetary Fund, 1380 [Pg. 1380 is part of Doc. 748], 1497 [Pg. 1497 includes portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842]

Italy, relations with, 1348 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723], 1407–1410 [Pgs. 1407–1410 include portions of Doc. 766, Doc. 767, Doc. 768, and Doc. 769]

Neutral status, 1401–1403 [Pgs. 1401–1403 include portions of Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766], 1405 [Pg. 1405 is part of Doc. 766]

Occupation costs, 1421–1424 [Pgs. 1421–1424 include portions of Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, and Doc. 781], 1441–1442 [Pgs. 1441–1442 include portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796], 1444–1446 [Pgs. 1444–1446 include portions of Doc. 797, Doc. 798, and Doc. 799]

Organization for European Economic Cooperation (OEEC), relations with, 1343 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 723], 1407 [Pg. 1407 is part of Doc. 766], 1410 [Pg. 1410 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 1422 [Pg. 1422 is part of Doc. 779]

Parliament, 1437 [Pg. 1437 includes portions of Doc. 792 and Doc. 793], 1441 [Pg. 1441 includes portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795], 1444 [Pg. 1444 includes portions of Doc. 797 and Doc. 798], 1513 [Pg. 1513 is part of Doc. 856]

Political parties: Communist, 1343 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 723], 1349 [Pg. 1349 is part of Doc. 723], 1371 [Pg. 1371 includes portions of Doc. 740 and Doc. 741], 1382 [Pg. 1382 is part of Doc. 750], 1386–1387 [Pgs. 1386–1387 include portions of Doc. 753, Doc. 754, and Doc. 755], 1393 [Pg. 1393 includes portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759], 1403–1405 [Pgs. 1403–1405 include portions of Doc. 765 and Doc. 766], 1408 [Pg. 1408 includes portions of Doc. 766 and Doc. 767], 1413–1415 [Pgs. 1413–1415 include portions of Doc. 771, Doc. 772, and Doc. 773], 1440–1441 [Pgs. 1440–1441 include portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795], 1447–1448 [Pgs. 1447–1448 include portions of Doc. 800 and Doc. 801], 1455–1456 [Pgs. 1455–1456 include portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1460–1461 [Pgs. 1460–1461 include portions of Doc. 810 and Doc. 811], 1507 [Pg. 1507 is part of Doc. 852]; Democratic Union, 1439–1441 [Pgs. 1439–1441 include portions of Doc. 793, Doc. 794, and Doc. 795]; Peoples’ Party, 1343 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 723], 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 736 and Doc. 737], 1370–1371 [Pgs. 1370–1371 include portions of Doc. 740 and Doc. 741], 1382 [Pg. 1382 is part of Doc. 750], 1385–1386 [Pgs. 1385–1386 include portions of Doc. 753 and Doc. 754], 1389 [Pg. 1389 includes portions of Doc. 756 and Doc. 757], 1402 [Pg. 1402 is part of Doc. 765], 1440 [Pg. 1440 is part of Doc. 794], 1462 [Pg. 1462 includes portions of Doc. 811, Doc. 812, and Doc. 813]; Socialists, 1343 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 723], 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 736 and Doc. 737], 1370–1371 [Pgs. 1370–1371 include portions of Doc. 740 and Doc. 741], 1382 [Pg. 1382 is part of Doc. 750], 1385 [Pg. 1385 is part of Doc. 753], 1389–1390 [Pgs. 1389–1390 include portions of Doc. 756, Doc. 757, and Doc. 758], 1402 [Pg. 1402 is part of Doc. 765], 1405 [Pg. 1405 is part of Doc. 766], 1414 [Pg. 1414 is part of Doc. 772], 1440 [Pg. 1440 is part of Doc. 794], 1462 [Pg. 1462 includes portions of Doc. 811, Doc. 812, and Doc. 813], 1476 [Pg. 1476 is part of Doc. 824]

Public Law 84 assistance, 1379 [Pg. 1379 is part of Doc. 748], 1388 [Pg. 1388 includes portions of Doc. 755 and Doc. 756], 1391–1392 [Pg. 1391 is part of Doc. 758]

Public Law 389 assistance, 1379–1380 [Pg. 1379 is part of Doc. 748], 1389 [Pg. 1389 includes portions of Doc. 756 and Doc. 757], 1391–1392 [Pg. 1391 is part of Doc. 758]

Restitutions from Germany, 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

Security, 1403–1408 [Pgs. 1403–1408 include portions of Doc. 765, Doc. 766, and Doc. 767], 1462 [Pg. 1462 includes portions of Doc. 811, Doc. 812, and Doc. 813], 1469–1470 [Pgs. 1469–1470 include portions of Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819], 1500–1501 [Pgs. 1500–1501 include portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, and Doc. 845], 1511–1513 [Pg. 1511 is part of Doc. 856]

South Tyrol: Austro-Italian understanding, 1348 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723], 1352 [Pg. 1352 includes portions of Doc. 724 and Doc. 725], 1354 [Pg. 1354 includes portions of Doc. 726 and Doc. 727]; repatriation of South Tyrolean optants, 1353–1356 [Pgs. 1353–1356 include portions of Doc. 725, Doc. 726, Doc. 727, Doc. 728, and Doc. 729]: U.S. interest in, 1352–1356 [Pgs. 1352–1356 include portions of Doc. 724, Doc. 725, Doc. 726, Doc. 727, Doc. 728, and Doc. 729]

Soviet Union: Administration for Soviet Property in Austria (USIA), 1383 [Pg. 1383 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752], 1385 [Pg. 1385 is part of Doc. 753], 1400 [Pg. 1400 includes portions of Doc. 763 and Doc. 764], 1404 [Pg. 1404 is part of Doc. 766], 1407 [Pg. 1407 is part of Doc. 766], 1455 [Pg. 1455 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1460–1461 [Pgs. 1460–1461 include portions of Doc. 810 and Doc. 811], 1491 [Pg. 1491 is part of Doc. 837], 1497 [Pg. 1497 includes portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842]; Soviet arrests of Austrian officials, 1348 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723], 1406 [Pg. 1406 is part of Doc. 766], 1425 [Pg. 1425 includes portions of Doc. 781 and Doc. 782], 1427 [Pg. 1427 includes portions of Doc. 784 and Doc. 785], 1433–1436 [Pgs. 1433–1436 include portions of Doc. 789, Doc. 790, Doc. 791, and Doc. 792], 1442–1443 [Pgs. 1442–1443 include portions of Doc. 795, Doc. 796, and Doc. 797]; Soviet claims) for war booty, 1443–1444 [Pgs. 1443–1444 include portions of Doc. 796, Doc. 797, and Doc. 798]; Soviet policy toward Austria, 1342–1345 [Pg. 1342 is part of Doc. 723], 1347–1349 [Pg. 1347 is part of Doc. 723], 1351 [Pg. 1351 is part of Doc. 723], 1379–1380 [Pg. 1379 is part of Doc. 748], 1388 [Pg. 1388 includes portions of Doc. 755 and Doc. 756], 1403–1405 [Pgs. 1403–1405 include portions of Doc. 765 and Doc. 766], 1409–1415 [Pgs. 1409–1415 include portions of Doc. 767, Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, Doc. 772, and Doc. 773], 1417 [Pg. 1417 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 1421 [Pg. 1421 includes portions of Doc. 778 and Doc. 779], 1423–1424 [Pgs. 1423–1424 include portions of Doc. 780 and Doc. 781], 1429–1433 [Pgs. 1429–1433 include portions of Doc. 786, Doc. 787, Doc. 788, and Doc. 789], 1437–1439 [Pgs. 1437–1439 include portions of Doc. 792, Doc. 793, and Doc. 794], 1456 [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 807]; Soviet restrictions on Allied movements, possibility of, 1415–1421 [Pgs. 1415–1421 include portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, Doc. 774, Doc. 775, Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, and Doc. 779], 1427–1431 [Pgs. 1427–1431 include portions of Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, and Doc. 787], 1435 [Pg. 1435 includes portions of Doc. 789, Doc. 790, and Doc. 791], 1498 [Pg. 1498 is part of Doc. 842]; strategic control plan to minimize Soviet capabilities for exerting pressure on Austria, 1393–1394 [Pgs. 1393–1394 include portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759], 1407–1408 [Pgs. 1407–1408 include portions of Doc. 766 and Doc. 767]

Strategic importance, 1393 [Pg. 1393 includes portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759], 1468–1469 [Pgs. 1468–1469 include portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, and Doc. 818], 1495 [Pg. 1495 is part of Doc. 840], 1499 [Pg. 1499 is part of Doc. 843]

Switzerland, relations with, 1348 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723]

Trade relations, 1347 [Pg. 1347 is part of Doc. 723], 1351 [Pg. 1351 is part of Doc. 723], 1383 [Pg. 1383 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752], 1407 [Pg. 1407 is part of Doc. 766]

Trade Union Federation, 1387 [Pg. 1387 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755]

Trade Unions, 1415 [Pg. 1415 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773]

United Kingdom: Economic assistance, 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749]; policy toward Austria, 1342 [Pg. 1342 is part of Doc. 723], 1347–1348 [Pg. 1347 is part of Doc. 723], 1406–1408 [Pgs. 1406–1408 include portions of Doc. 766 and Doc. 767], 1416 [Pg. 1416 is part of Doc. 773], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 775 and Doc. 776], 1420 [Pg. 1420 is part of Doc. 777], 1423–1427 [Pgs. 1423–1427 include portions of Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785]

United Nations: Admission of Austria, question of, 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857]; Austrian participation in certain U.N. activities, 1343 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 723], 1347 [Pg. 1347 is part of Doc. 723]; Soviet kidnapping of Austrian officials, considerations regarding possible referral to, 1434–1435 [Pgs. 1434–1435 include portions of Doc. 789, Doc. 790, and Doc. 791]; threat to territorial integrity of Austria, possible referral to, 1515 [Pg. 1515 is part of Doc. 857]; U.N. experts to determine Austrian capacity to pay for German assets, proposal regarding, 1493 [Pg. 1493 is part of Doc. 838]

United States, relations with Austria: Economic assistance (see also ECA, ERP, PL 84 and PL 389 assistance, supra), 1341–1342 [Pg. 1341 is part of Doc. 723], 1345–1348 [Pg. 1345 is part of Doc. 723], 1378–1380 [Pgs. 1378–1380 include portions of Doc. 747 and Doc. 748], 1386 [Pg. 1386 includes portions of Doc. 753 and Doc. 754], 1388 [Pg. 1388 includes portions of Doc. 755 and Doc. 756], 1455 [Pg. 1455 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1459n [Pg. 1459 includes portions of Doc. 809 and Doc. 810]; U.S. forces in Austria (USFA), 1361 [Pg. 1361 includes portions of Doc. 733 and Doc. 734], 1371 [Pg. 1371 includes portions of Doc. 740 and Doc. 741], 1373–1377 [Pgs. 1373–1377 include portions of Doc. 743, Doc. 744, Doc. 745, and Doc. 746], 1379 [Pg. 1379 is part of Doc. 748], 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 1387 [Pg. 1387 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755], 1392 [Pg. 1392 is part of Doc. 758], 1394–1395 [Pgs. 1394–1395 include portions of Doc. 759 and Doc. 760], 1400 [Pg. 1400 includes portions of Doc. 763 and Doc. 764], 1410–1412 [Pgs. 1410–1412 include portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771], 1415 [Pg. 1415 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 788], 1434–1435 [Pgs. 1434–1435 include portions of Doc. 789, Doc. 790, and Doc. 791], 1443–1446 [Pgs. 1443–1446 include portions of Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, and Doc. 799], 1468–1470 [Pgs. 1468–1470 include portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819], 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 820 and Doc. 821], 1479 [Pg. 1479 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827], 1502 [Pg. 1502 includes portions of Doc. 846 and Doc. 847], 1505 [Pg. 1505 is part of Doc. 850], 1508 [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, and Doc. 854]; U.S. policy, 1341–1351 [Pg. 1341 is part of Doc. 723], 1411–1413 [Pgs. 1411–1413 include portions of Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771], 1417–1418 [Pgs. 1417–1418 include portions of Doc. 774, Doc. 775, and Doc. 776], 1423–1425 [Pgs. 1423–1425 include portions of Doc. 780, Doc. 781, and Doc. 782], 1433 [Pg. 1433 is part of Doc. 789], 1470 [Pg. 1470 includes portions of Doc. 818 and Doc. 819]; U.S. recognition (1946), 1342 [Pg. 1342 is part of Doc. 723]

U.N.R.R.A. assistance to Austria. 1342 [Pg. 1342 is part of Doc. 723], 1379 [Pg. 1379 is part of Doc. 748]

Vienna, position of Western Powers in, 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535], 896–897 [Pgs. 896–897 include portions of Doc. 536, Doc. 537, and Doc. 538], 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541], 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 579], 1241 [Pg. 1241 is part of Doc. 693], 1427–1432 [Pgs. 1427–1432 include portions of Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, and Doc. 788], 1498 [Pg. 1498 is part of Doc. 842]

War criminals, 1524 [Pg. 1524 is part of Doc. 857]

West Germany, relations with, 1407 [Pg. 1407 is part of Doc. 766]

Western European Security, question of inclusion of Austria, 1501 [Pg. 1501 includes portions of Doc. 844 and Doc. 845]

Western European Union, question of Austrian participation in, 1389n [Pg. 1389 includes portions of Doc. 756 and Doc. 757], 1415 [Pg. 1415 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1497 [Pg. 1497 includes portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842], 1499 [Pg. 1499 is part of Doc. 843]

Yugoslavia, relations with, 1344 [Pg. 1344 is part of Doc. 723], 1347–1349 [Pg. 1347 is part of Doc. 723], 1404 [Pg. 1404 is part of Doc. 766], 1408 [Pg. 1408 includes portions of Doc. 766 and Doc. 767], 1429 [Pg. 1429 includes portions of Doc. 786 and Doc. 787]

Zones of occupation: British, 1379 [Pg. 1379 is part of Doc. 748]; French, 1373 [Pg. 1373 is part of Doc. 743], 1379 [Pg. 1379 is part of Doc. 748]; International Zone of Vienna, 1433–1434 [Pg. 1433 is part of Doc. 789], 1436 [Pg. 1436 includes portions of Doc. 791 and Doc. 792]; Soviet, 1343–1344 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 723], 1347 [Pg. 1347 is part of Doc. 723], 1375–1377 [Pgs. 1375–1377 include portions of Doc. 744, Doc. 745, and Doc. 746], 1379 [Pg. 1379 is part of Doc. 748], 1388 [Pg. 1388 includes portions of Doc. 755 and Doc. 756], 1397–1401 [Pgs. 1397–1401 include portions of Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, and Doc. 765], 1414–1416 [Pgs. 1414–1416 include portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1428 [Pg. 1428 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 1433–1434 [Pg. 1433 is part of Doc. 789], 1495 [Pg. 1495 is part of Doc. 840], 1499 [Pg. 1499 is part of Doc. 843]; U.S., 1342 [Pg. 1342 is part of Doc. 723], 1374 [Pg. 1374 includes portions of Doc. 743 and Doc. 744], 1379 [Pg. 1379 is part of Doc. 748], 1410 [Pg. 1410 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769]

Austrian Peace Treaty: Austrian attitude and position, 1343 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 723], 1382–1386 [Pgs. 1382–1386 include portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, Doc. 752, Doc. 753, and Doc. 754], 1423 [Pg. 1423 is part of Doc. 780], 1441 [Pg. 1441 includes portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795], 1449–1450 [Pgs. 1449–1450 include portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802], 1460–1462 [Pgs. 1460–1462 include portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, and Doc. 813], 1473 [Pg. 1473 is part of Doc. 822], 1477 [Pg. 1477 is part of Doc. 825], 1491–1492 [Pgs. 1491–1492 include portions of Doc. 837 and Doc. 838], 1497 [Pg. 1497 includes portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842], 1499 [Pg. 1499 is part of Doc. 843], 1503 [Pg. 1503 is part of Doc. 848], 1507 [Pg. 1507 is part of Doc. 852], 1509–1510 [Pgs. 1509–1510 include portions of Doc. 854, Doc. 855, and Doc. 856], 1513 [Pg. 1513 is part of Doc. 856]

Austrian claims on Germany, renunciation of, 1524 [Pg. 1524 is part of Doc. 857]

Austrian property in Germany, 1524 [Pg. 1524 is part of Doc. 857]

Austrian property in territory of Allied and Associated Powers, 1530 [Pg. 1530 is part of Doc. 857]

British position, 1451 [Pg. 1451 includes portions of Doc. 803 and Doc. 804], 1453–1454 [Pgs. 1453–1454 include portions of Doc. 804, Doc. 805, and Doc. 806], 1464 [Pg. 1464 is part of Doc. 814], 1467 [Pg. 1467 includes portions of Doc. 815 and Doc. 816], 1471 [Pg. 1471 is part of Doc. 820], 1476 [Pg. 1476 is part of Doc. 824], 1482–1483 [Pgs. 1482–1483 include portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831], 1488–1490 [Pgs. 1488–1490 include portions of Doc. 834, Doc. 835, and Doc. 836], 1496 [Pg. 1496 is part of Doc. 840], 1500–1501 [Pgs. 1500–1501 include portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, and Doc. 845], 1503 [Pg. 1503 is part of Doc. 848], 1515n –1535n [Pg. 1515 is part of Doc. 857] passim

Contracts between Austria and Germany, 1532 [Pg. 1532 is part of Doc. 857]

Council of Foreign Ministers, consideration by, 1342 [Pg. 1342 is part of Doc. 723], 1344 [Pg. 1344 is part of Doc. 723], 1349–1350 [Pg. 1349 is part of Doc. 723], 1412 [Pg. 1412 includes portions of Doc. 770 and Doc. 771], 1448 [Pg. 1448 includes portions of Doc. 800 and Doc. 801]

Council of Foreign Ministers, Deputies for Austria: Meetings (Feb. 20–May 6), 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 1348–1349 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723], 1358 [Pg. 1358 includes portions of Doc. 730 and Doc. 731], 1372 [Pg. 1372 includes portions of Doc. 741 and Doc. 742], 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 745 and Doc. 746], 1383 [Pg. 1383 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752], 1385 [Pg. 1385 is part of Doc. 753], 1413–1415 [Pgs. 1413–1415 include portions of Doc. 771, Doc. 772, and Doc. 773], 1417 [Pg. 1417 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 1422 [Pg. 1422 is part of Doc. 779], 1429 [Pg. 1429 includes portions of Doc. 786 and Doc. 787], 1447–1514 [Pgs. 1447–1514 include portions of Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857] passim; adjournment of, 1344 [Pg. 1344 is part of Doc. 723], 1348 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723], 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 1480–1481 [Pgs. 1480–1481 include portions of Doc. 828 and Doc. 829], 1483 [Pg. 1483 includes portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831], 1490 [Pg. 1490 includes portions of Doc. 835 and Doc. 836], 1503–1506 [Pgs. 1503–1506 include portions of Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, and Doc. 851], 1510 [Pg. 1510 includes portions of Doc. 855 and Doc. 856]; attempts to resume, 1373 [Pg. 1373 is part of Doc. 743], 1377–1378 [Pgs. 1377–1378 include portions of Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748], 1404 [Pg. 1404 is part of Doc. 766], 1408 [Pg. 1408 includes portions of Doc. 766 and Doc. 767], 1431 [Pg. 1431 is part of Doc. 787], 1504–1505 [Pgs. 1504–1505 include portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850], 1508–1510 [Pgs. 1508–1510 include portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, Doc. 855, and Doc. 856], 1513 [Pg. 1513 is part of Doc. 856]

Debts, 1530–1531 [Pg. 1530 is part of Doc. 857]

Displaced persons, principle of voluntary repatriation of, 1512 [Pg. 1512 is part of Doc. 856], 1515–1516 [Pg. 1515 is part of Doc. 857]

Draft text: Agreed articles, citation to, 1515 [Pg. 1515 is part of Doc. 857]; unagreed articles, texts of, 1514–1535 [Pgs. 1514–1535 include portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857]

French position, 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 1451–1535 [Pgs. 1451–1535 include portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857] passim

Frontier question, 1467 [Pg. 1467 includes portions of Doc. 815 and Doc. 816], 1483–1485 [Pgs. 1483–1485 include portions of Doc. 830, Doc. 831, and Doc. 832], 1502–1508 [Pgs. 1502–1508 include portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, and Doc. 854], 1510–1511 [Pgs. 1510–1511 include portions of Doc. 855 and Doc. 856]; boundary of 1937, 1343–1344 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 723], 1349 [Pg. 1349 is part of Doc. 723], 1502 [Pg. 1502 includes portions of Doc. 846 and Doc. 847], 1511 [Pg. 1511 is part of Doc. 856], 1513–1515 [Pgs. 1513–1515 include portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857]; Yugoslav claims to Carinthia and Trieste, 1344 [Pg. 1344 is part of Doc. 723], 1348–1349 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723], 1403n [Pg. 1403 includes portions of Doc. 765 and Doc. 766], 1404 [Pg. 1404 is part of Doc. 766], 1452 [Pg. 1452 is part of Doc. 804], 1502–1503 [Pgs. 1502–1503 include portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848], 1505 [Pg. 1505 is part of Doc. 850], 1508 [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, and Doc. 854], 1510–1511 [Pgs. 1510–1511 include portions of Doc. 855 and Doc. 856], 1513 [Pg. 1513 is part of Doc. 856], 1515n [Pg. 1515 is part of Doc. 857]

German assets (Art. 35 of draft treaty), Soviet claims to, 1344 [Pg. 1344 is part of Doc. 723], 1346 [Pg. 1346 is part of Doc. 723], 1348 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723], 1351 [Pg. 1351 is part of Doc. 723], 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 1407 [Pg. 1407 is part of Doc. 766], 1413 [Pg. 1413 is part of Doc. 771], 1447–1455 [Pgs. 1447–1455 include portions of Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, and Doc. 807], 1457–1461 [Pgs. 1457–1461 include portions of Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, and Doc. 811], 1463–1472 [Pgs. 1463–1472 include portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, and Doc. 821], 1475–1476 [Pgs. 1475–1476 include portions of Doc. 823 and Doc. 824], 1478–1479 [Pgs. 1478–1479 include portions of Doc. 825, Doc. 826, and Doc. 827], 1481–1496 [Pgs. 1481–1496 include portions of Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, and Doc. 840], 1498 [Pg. 1498 is part of Doc. 842], 1510–1512 [Pgs. 1510–1512 include portions of Doc. 855 and Doc. 856], 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857], 1519–1522 [Pg. 1519 is part of Doc. 857]

German claims against Austria, 1524–1525 [Pg. 1524 is part of Doc. 857]

German rearmament, 1518 [Pg. 1518 is part of Doc. 857]

Independence, territorial integrity, and sovereignty of Austria, 1341–1360 [Pgs. 1341–1360 include portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, Doc. 725, Doc. 726, Doc. 727, Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733] passim, 1402 [Pg. 1402 is part of Doc. 765], 1413 [Pg. 1413 is part of Doc. 771], 1415 [Pg. 1415 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1426 [Pg. 1426 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784], 1448–1515 [Pgs. 1448–1515 include portions of Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857] passim

Limitation of stocks of certain materials, 1534–1535 [Pg. 1534 is part of Doc. 857]

Military and air provisions, 1467 [Pg. 1467 includes portions of Doc. 815 and Doc. 816], 1469–1470 [Pgs. 1469–1470 include portions of Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819], 1477 [Pg. 1477 is part of Doc. 825], 1480 [Pg. 1480 is part of Doc. 828], 1481n [Pg. 1481 includes portions of Doc. 828 and Doc. 829], 1483–1485 [Pgs. 1483–1485 include portions of Doc. 830, Doc. 831, and Doc. 832], 1498 [Pg. 1498 is part of Doc. 842], 1504 [Pg. 1504 is part of Doc. 849], 1511 [Pg. 1511 is part of Doc. 856]

Patents, 1532 [Pg. 1532 is part of Doc. 857]

Prohibitions of research, development and manufacture of certain equipment and products, 1532–1534 [Pg. 1532 is part of Doc. 857]

Property, rights and interests of minority groups in Austria, 1529 [Pg. 1529 is part of Doc. 857]

Reparations question, 1467–1468 [Pgs. 1467–1468 include portions of Doc. 815, Doc. 816, and Doc. 817], 1482–1484 [Pgs. 1482–1484 include portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831], 1502–1506 [Pgs. 1502–1506 include portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, and Doc. 851], 1508 [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, and Doc. 854], 1511 [Pg. 1511 is part of Doc. 856], 1518 [Pg. 1518 is part of Doc. 857]; Yugoslav claim, 1344 [Pg. 1344 is part of Doc. 723], 1348–1349 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723], 1502–1503 [Pgs. 1502–1503 include portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848], 1505 [Pg. 1505 is part of Doc. 850], 1508 [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, and Doc. 854], 1510–1511 [Pgs. 1510–1511 include portions of Doc. 855 and Doc. 856], 1518n [Pg. 1518 is part of Doc. 857], 1534 [Pg. 1534 is part of Doc. 857]

Report to National Security Council, 1510–1514 [Pgs. 1510–1514 include portions of Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857]

Restitution by Austria, 1523–1524 [Pg. 1523 is part of Doc. 857]

Soviet attitude and position, 1421 [Pg. 1421 includes portions of Doc. 778 and Doc. 779], 1430 [Pg. 1430 is part of Doc. 787], 1447–1535n [Pgs. 1447–1535 include portions of Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857] passim

Tripartite (U.S.–U.K.–France) discussions, 1462–1466 [Pgs. 1462–1466 include portions of Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, and Doc. 815]

Unagreed articles of draft Austrian treaty, 1345 [Pg. 1345 is part of Doc. 723], 1485 [Pg. 1485 includes portions of Doc. 831 and Doc. 832], 1490 [Pg. 1490 includes portions of Doc. 835 and Doc. 836], 1493 [Pg. 1493 is part of Doc. 838], 1511–1512 [Pg. 1511 is part of Doc. 856], 1514–1535 [Pgs. 1514–1535 include portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857]

United Nations property in Austria, treatment of, 1525–1529 [Pg. 1525 is part of Doc. 857]

U.S. position, 1454–1535n [Pgs. 1454–1535 include portions of Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857] passim

War material, disposal of, 1517–1518 [Pg. 1517 is part of Doc. 857]

Withdrawal of forces from Austria, questions concerning, 1246 [Pg. 1246 is part of Doc. 693], 1290 [Pg. 1290 is part of Doc. 719], 1331–1350 [Pgs. 1331–1350 include portions of Doc. 721, Doc. 722, and Doc. 723], 1357–1359 [Pgs. 1357–1359 include portions of Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, and Doc. 732], 1366 [Pg. 1366 includes portions of Doc. 737 and Doc. 738], 1373 [Pg. 1373 is part of Doc. 743], 1376–1378 [Pgs. 1376–1378 include portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748], 1383–1384 [Pgs. 1383–1384 include portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753], 1393 [Pg. 1393 includes portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759], 1404 [Pg. 1404 is part of Doc. 766], 1414 [Pg. 1414 is part of Doc. 772], 1447 [Pg. 1447 is part of Doc. 800], 1456–1457 [Pgs. 1456–1457 include portions of Doc. 807, Doc. 808, and Doc. 809], 1459 [Pg. 1459 includes portions of Doc. 809 and Doc. 810], 1462 [Pg. 1462 includes portions of Doc. 811, Doc. 812, and Doc. 813], 1468 [Pg. 1468 includes portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817], 1470 [Pg. 1470 includes portions of Doc. 818 and Doc. 819], 1472–1474 [Pgs. 1472–1474 include portions of Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823], 1490 [Pg. 1490 includes portions of Doc. 835 and Doc. 836], 1494–1495 [Pgs. 1494–1495 include portions of Doc. 838, Doc. 839, and Doc. 840], 1498–1500 [Pgs. 1498–1500 include portions of Doc. 842, Doc. 843, and Doc. 844], 1513 [Pg. 1513 is part of Doc. 856]

Yugoslavia (see also under Frontier question and Reparations question, supra), question of invitation to attend meetings of CFM Deputies for Austria, 1496 [Pg. 1496 is part of Doc. 840]

Austrian Treaty Commission, 1454 [Pg. 1454 includes portions of Doc. 805 and Doc. 806], 1457–1458 [Pgs. 1457–1458 include portions of Doc. 808 and Doc. 809], 1478 [Pg. 1478 includes portions of Doc. 825 and Doc. 826], 1480–1482 [Pgs. 1480–1482 include portions of Doc. 828, Doc. 829, and Doc. 830], 1504 [Pg. 1504 is part of Doc. 849], 1510–1511 [Pgs. 1510–1511 include portions of Doc. 855 and Doc. 856]; report to CFM, Oct. 11, 1947, 1515 [Pg. 1515 is part of Doc. 857], 1530n [Pg. 1530 is part of Doc. 857]

Babcock, Col. William, 900n [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 901–902 [Pgs. 901–902 include portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541]

Bapst Brig. Gen. Charles, 459–460 [Pgs. 459–460 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 677n [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 410], 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635]

Barnes, J. E., 1453 [Pg. 1453 includes portions of Doc. 804 and Doc. 805]

Baudet, Philippe, 318–319 [Pgs. 318–319 include portions of Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

Baumis, Frank J., 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446], 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466]

Beam, Jacob D., 43–45 [Pgs. 43–45 include portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 112–113 [Pgs. 112–113 include portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 124n [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 83], 155–156 [Pgs. 155–156 include portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 176n [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 200], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 425n [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 434n [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]., 443n [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 446n [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 296], 458n [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 562n [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 360], 831n [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 870n [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519], 917 [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 556 and Doc. 557], 928–929 [Pgs. 928–929 include portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, and Doc. 563], 961n [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 579], 977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 586], 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 590], 1071–1072 [Pgs. 1071–1072 include portions of Doc. 620, Doc. 621, and Doc. 622], 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 640], 1320n [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 721], 1367 [Pg. 1367 includes portions of Doc. 738 and Doc. 739]

Beattie, Edward W., 1412 [Pg. 1412 includes portions of Doc. 770 and Doc. 771]

Beaulieu see Leroy Beaulieu .

Bech, Joseph, 65n [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39].

Becker, Max, 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284]

Belgium (see also Benelux and under London Conference on Germany, London Conference on the Ruhr, Ruhr, and West Germany: Occupation statute): Berlin blockade, introducton of Security Council resolution on, 1233 [Pg. 1233 includes portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688], 1275 [Pg. 1275 includes portions of Doc. 709 and Doc. 710]

Bizonal economic organizations, Belgian interest in revision, 23–24 [Pgs. 23–24 include portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Brussels treaty, 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

Germany: Belgian policy toward, 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 95–96 [Pgs. 95–96 include portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 1309 [Pg. 1309 is part of Doc. 720], 1359 [Pg. 1359 includes portions of Doc. 731 and Doc. 732]; reparations from, 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]; territorial questions, 288–289 [Pgs. 288–289 include portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Inter-Allied Reparations Agency allocations, 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 450]

Neutrality statute of 1837, cited, 1402 [Pg. 1402 is part of Doc. 765]

Soviet Union, Belgian attitude toward, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Western European Union, Belgian attitude toward, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 236]

Benelux (see also Belgium, Brussels Treaty, Luxembourg, Netherlands, and under London Conference on the Ruhr, Ruhr, and International Authority for the Ruhr): Bipartite Board (U.S.-U.K.), Benelux cooperation with, 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 120]

French zone of occupation in Germany, Benelux cooperation with, 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 185–186 [Pgs. 185–186 include portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

Germany: Attitude toward, 1338–1339 [Pgs. 1338–1339 include portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722]; demilitarization of, Benelux association with, 563n [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]; German peace settlement, Benelux desire for participation in, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 76], 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 95]; reparations from Germany, 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]; security against, 61–62 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 38], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 73], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 82], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]; territorial and economic claims against, 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 218–219 [Pgs. 218–219 include portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 154], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 159], 249–251 [Pgs. 249–251 include portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163], 259–260 [Pgs. 259–260 include portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 171], 288–289 [Pgs. 288–289 include portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

London Conference on Germany, participation in, 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 29], 65–66 [Pgs. 65–66 include portions of Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, and Doc. 41], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 76–78 [Pgs. 76–78 include portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 81–87 [Pgs. 81–87 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, Doc. 55, and Doc. 56], 91–95 [Pgs. 91–95 include portions of Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, and Doc. 63], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 66], 103–107 [Pgs. 103–107 include portions of Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 72], 113–115 [Pgs. 113–115 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, and Doc. 76], 134–135 [Pgs. 134–135 include portions of Doc. 88, Doc. 89, and Doc. 90], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 143–145 [Pgs. 143–145 include portions of Doc. 94, Doc. 95, and Doc. 96], 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 108], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 197–198 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 129], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 131], 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 135], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 140], 226–227 [Pgs. 226–227 include portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 231–232 [Pgs. 231–232 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 238–239 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 154], 245–246 [Pgs. 245–246 include portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 249–251 [Pgs. 249–251 include portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 263–264 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 171], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 208], 312–313 [Pgs. 312–313 include portions of Doc. 208, Doc. 209, and Doc. 210], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 962 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 579], 1202 [Pg. 1202 is part of Doc. 673], 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 720], 1317 [Pg. 1317 is part of Doc. 720]

Military Governors Conference at Berlin, participation in, 149–150 [Pgs. 149–150 include portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 160–161 [Pgs. 160–161 include portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 114], 177–178 [Pgs. 177–178 include portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 180–181 [Pgs. 180–181 include portions of Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 120], 185–186 [Pgs. 185–186 include portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

West Germany: Military Security Board, proposals regarding Benelux participation in. 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 82], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]; occupation statute, 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 394], 662–663 [Pgs. 662–663 include portions of Doc. 394, Doc. 395, and Doc. 396]; policy regarding future development of, association of Benelux countries in, 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 29], 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 76], 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 143–145 [Pgs. 143–145 include portions of Doc. 94, Doc. 95, and Doc. 96], 148–149 [Pgs. 148–149 include portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 160–161 [Pgs. 160–161 include portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 140], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 146], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 310–311 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 208], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]; political and economic organization of, 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]; protection of foreign interests in, 307–308 [Pgs. 307–308 include portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 208]; provisional government of, 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 208]; territorial arrangements, 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

Western European Union, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 236]

Bennett, Jack, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120], 432n [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 458n [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 676n [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 409], 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635], 1233n [Pg. 1233 includes portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688]

Bérard, Armand, 63–65 [Pgs. 63–65 include portions of Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 475]

Berlin (see also Berlin blockade): Allied Kommandatura (Allied Commanders of Berlin), 885n [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 527], 900–903 [Pgs. 900–903 include portions of Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 905–906 [Pgs. 905–906 include portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 552], 937 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 568], 1017 [Pg. 1017 is part of Doc. 601], 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 602], 1032–1034 [Pgs. 1032–1034 include portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, and Doc. 608], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 620 and Doc. 621], 1078 [Pg. 1078 is part of Doc. 625], 1106 [Pg. 1106 is part of Doc. 637], 1126 [Pg. 1126 includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644], 1270 [Pg. 1270 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1275 [Pg. 1275 includes portions of Doc. 709 and Doc. 710], 1299 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 720]; deputies, 900–901 [Pgs. 900–901 include portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540]; Soviet tactics in, 878–879 [Pgs. 878–879 include portions of Doc. 523 and Doc. 524], 901–902 [Pgs. 901–902 include portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541]; Soviet walk-out from, 908 [Pg. 908 includes portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547], 911 [Pg. 911 includes portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551], 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 569 and Doc. 570], 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 1281 [Pg. 1281 includes portions of Doc. 714 and Doc. 715], 1299 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 720]; Tripartite Kommandatura (U.S.U.K.-France), proposal for, 1197 [Pg. 1197 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 1200 [Pg. 1200 is part of Doc. 672], 1281–1282 [Pgs. 1281–1282 include portions of Doc. 714, Doc. 715, and Doc. 716]

Assembly, 1131 [Pg. 1131 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646], 1134–1135 [Pgs. 1134–1135 include portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648], 1221–1222 [Pg. 1221 is part of Doc. 682], 1260–1261 [Pgs. 1260–1261 include portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703], 1270–1271 [Pgs. 1270–1271 include portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1274–1275 [Pgs. 1274–1275 include portions of Doc. 708, Doc. 709, and Doc. 710]

Capital of Germany, questions relating to, 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 291], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 337], 1000 [Pg. 1000 is part of Doc. 594], 1203 [Pg. 1203 is part of Doc. 673], 1244 [Pg. 1244 is part of Doc. 693]

Capital of Soviet zone, 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 602]

Constitution, 1269–1270 [Pgs. 1269–1270 include portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1273–1275 [Pgs. 1273–1275 include portions of Doc. 708, Doc. 709, and Doc. 710]

Currency question. see under Berlin blockade.

Elections of Dec. 5, 1265n [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 704], 1266 [Pg. 1266 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1269 [Pg. 1269 is part of Doc. 706], 1272–1276 [Pgs. 1272–1276 include portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, and Doc. 711]; postponement, question of, 1268–1270 [Pgs. 1268–1270 include portions of Doc. 705, Doc. 706, and Doc. 707], 1272–1274 [Pgs. 1272–1274 include portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709]; Soviet opposition to, 1265n [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 704], 1270n [Pg. 1270 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1271–1273 [Pgs. 1271–1273 include portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708]

Financial situation in, 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 386]

Municipal government of Berlin, breakdown of, 914–915 [Pgs. 914–915 include portions of Doc. 552, Doc. 553, and Doc. 554], 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 569 and Doc. 570], 1038–1040 [Pgs. 1038–1040 include portions of Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611], 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622], 1125 [Pg. 1125 is part of Doc. 643], 1135 [Pg. 1135 is part of Doc. 648], 1141 [Pg. 1141 is part of Doc. 649], 1144–1146 [Pgs. 1144–1146 include portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 1152 [Pg. 1152 includes portions of Doc. 654 and Doc. 655], 1189 [Pg. 1189 is part of Doc. 667], 1192 [Pg. 1192 is part of Doc. 667], 1197 [Pg. 1197 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 1209 [Pg. 1209 is part of Doc. 673], 1224–1226 [Pgs. 1224–1226 include portions of Doc. 683 and Doc. 684], 1258 [Pg. 1258 is part of Doc. 702], 1260–1262 [Pgs. 1260–1262 include portions of Doc. 702, Doc. 703, and Doc. 704], 1264 [Pg. 1264 is part of Doc. 704], 1266 [Pg. 1266 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1269 [Pg. 1269 is part of Doc. 706]

Soviet attitude and conduct in (see also Berlin blockade), 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 34n [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 17], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 164–165 [Pgs. 164–165 include portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 154], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 885–886 [Pgs. 885–886 include portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528]

West German financial support for West Berlin, 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 291], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 292]

West German Parliamentary Council, question regarding representation of Berlin in, 415–417 [Pgs. 415–417 include portions of Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, and Doc. 278], 420–421 [Pgs. 420–421 include portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 1130 [Pg. 1130 is part of Doc. 645]

Western Powers in, position of, 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 417], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 419]

Berlin blockade: Agreements regarding Western access to Berlin, 1945, 919 [Pg. 919 includes portions of Doc. 558 and Doc. 559], 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 561], 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 562 and Doc. 563], 933–934 [Pg. 933 is part of Doc. 567], 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 572], 951–952 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 575], 961–963 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 579]

Air corridors into Berlin, 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 888–891 [Pgs. 888–891 include portions of Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, and Doc. 532], 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 1121 [Pg. 1121 is part of Doc. 641], 1196 [Pg. 1196 is part of Doc. 669]; Soviet Air Force maneuvers affecting, 1121 [Pg. 1121 is part of Doc. 641], 1128 [Pg. 1128 is part of Doc. 644]

Approach to Stalin regarding U.S. proposal for, 971–978 [Pgs. 971–978 include portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586], 980–981 [Pg. 980 is part of Doc. 586], 986 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 589], 988–992 [Pgs. 988–992 include portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 993n [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 590]; British position, 975–978 [Pgs. 975–978 include portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586], 980–982 [Pgs. 980–982 include portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 986–988 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 589]; French position, 979–980 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 586]

Armed convoys, considerations regarding utilization of, 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 589], 994–995 [Pgs. 994–995 include portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592]

Berlin, status as international zone and seat of Allied control, 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 909–910 [Pgs. 909–910 include portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 559], 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 561], 934 [Pg. 934 is part of Doc. 567], 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 575], 962 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 579], 1022 [Pg. 1022 is part of Doc. 603], 1030 [Pg. 1030 is part of Doc. 605], 1084 [Pg. 1084 is part of Doc. 627], 1331 [Pg. 1331 is part of Doc. 721]

British plane incident at Gatow, 890–891 [Pgs. 890–891 include portions of Doc. 530, Doc. 531, and Doc. 532]

British position, 888–950 [Pgs. 888–950 include portions of Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, Doc. 555, Doc. 556, Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, and Doc. 575] passim, 965–1053 [Pgs. 965–1053 include portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615] passim, 1082–1186 [Pgs. 1082–1186 include portions of Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, and Doc. 666] passim

Council of Foreign Ministers meeting on Germany, proposals regarding, 469–470 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 309], 924–1086 [Pgs. 924–1086 include portions of Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629] passim, 1145 [Pg. 1145 is part of Doc. 651], 1175 [Pg. 1175 is part of Doc. 661], 1207 [Pg. 1207 is part of Doc. 673], 1209–1212 [Pgs. 1209–1212 include portions of Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, and Doc. 676], 1287–1288 [Pgs. 1287–1288 include portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719], 1290 [Pg. 1290 is part of Doc. 719], 1296 [Pg. 1296 is part of Doc. 719], 1320–1325 [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 721], 1328 [Pg. 1328 is part of Doc. 721], 1331 [Pg. 1331 is part of Doc. 721], 1334 [Pg. 1334 is part of Doc. 721], 1336–1338 [Pgs. 1336–1338 include portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722]

Currency question, discussions regarding (see also under Moscow Conversations, Negotiations by Military Governors, and U.N. Security Council, infra), 432n [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 291], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 320], 517n [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334], 912–915 [Pgs. 912–915 include portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, and Doc. 554], 928–929 [Pgs. 928–929 include portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, and Doc. 563], 940 [Pg. 940 is part of Doc. 569], 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 574], 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 576 and Doc. 577], 958–960 [Pgs. 958–960 include portions of Doc. 577, Doc. 578, and Doc. 579], 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 970 [Pg. 970 is part of Doc. 582], 972 [Pg. 972 is part of Doc. 583], 983n [Pg. 983 is part of Doc. 587], 984–985 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 588], 991 [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 590], 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 594], 1004–1012 [Pgs. 1004–1012 include portions of Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, and Doc. 598], 1015–1017 [Pgs. 1015–1017 include portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1019–1024 [Pgs. 1019–1024 include portions of Doc. 602, Doc. 603, and Doc. 604], 1028–1029 [Pg. 1028 is part of Doc. 605], 1174 [Pg. 1174 is part of Doc. 661], 1178 [Pg. 1178 is part of Doc. 662], 1201 [Pg. 1201 includes portions of Doc. 672 and Doc. 673], 1322 [Pg. 1322 is part of Doc. 721]

Evacuation of dependents from Berlin, question of, 889–890 [Pgs. 889–890 include portions of Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531]

Food supplies for Western sectors of Berlin, 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533], 919 [Pg. 919 includes portions of Doc. 558 and Doc. 559], 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 560], 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 562 and Doc. 563], 934–935 [Pg. 934 is part of Doc. 567], 950 [Pg. 950 includes portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575], 971–972 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 583], 984 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 588], 1105–1106 [Pg. 1105 is part of Doc. 637]; Soviet offer of food, 974 [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 584], 976 [Pg. 976 is part of Doc. 585], 984 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 588], 1106 [Pg. 1106 is part of Doc. 637], 1208 [Pg. 1208 is part of Doc. 673]

French position, 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 889–890 [Pgs. 889–890 include portions of Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531], 893–894 [Pgs. 893–894 include portions of Doc. 533, Doc. 534, and Doc. 535], 916–917 [Pgs. 916–917 include portions of Doc. 555, Doc. 556, and Doc. 557], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 559], 922–923 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 560], 938–939 [Pgs. 938–939 include portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 943–944 [Pgs. 943–944 include portions of Doc. 571 and Doc. 572], 946–947 [Pgs. 946–947 include portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573], 949–950 [Pgs. 949–950 include portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575], 979–980 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 586], 983 [Pg. 983 is part of Doc. 587], 992 [Pg. 992 is part of Doc. 590], 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 594], 1005 [Pg. 1005 is part of Doc. 594], 1017 [Pg. 1017 is part of Doc. 601], 1024 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 604], 1041 [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 611], 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], 1091 [Pg. 1091 is part of Doc. 631], 1101–1185 [Pgs. 1101–1185 include portions of Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, and Doc. 665] passim, 1214–1215 [Pgs. 1214–1215 include portions of Doc. 677 and Doc. 678], 1239 [Pg. 1239 is part of Doc. 692]

Gatow, British plane incident at, 890–891 [Pgs. 890–891 include portions of Doc. 530, Doc. 531, and Doc. 532]

International Court of Justice, question of referral to, 954 [Pg. 954 is part of Doc. 576], 957 [Pg. 957 is part of Doc. 577]

London Conference on Germany, Soviet demand for suspension of agreements, 967–968 [Pgs. 967–968 include portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 1000 [Pg. 1000 is part of Doc. 594], 1002–1005 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 594], 1007 [Pg. 1007 is part of Doc. 595], 1010n [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 597], 1013–1015 [Pgs. 1013–1015 include portions of Doc. 598, Doc. 599, and Doc. 600], 1018 [Pg. 1018 is part of Doc. 602], 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 602], 1022–1026 [Pgs. 1022–1026 include portions of Doc. 603 and Doc. 604], 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 612], 1046–1048 [Pgs. 1046–1048 include portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613], 1052–1053 [Pgs. 1052–1053 include portions of Doc. 614 and Doc. 615], 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616], 1064–1068 [Pgs. 1064–1068 include portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1077–1078 [Pgs. 1077–1078 include portions of Doc. 623, Doc. 624, and Doc. 625], 1079n [Pg. 1079 is part of Doc. 625], 1088–1089 [Pg. 1088 is part of Doc. 630], 1091 [Pg. 1091 is part of Doc. 631], 1095–1098 [Pgs. 1095–1098 include portions of Doc. 632 and Doc. 633], 1152 [Pg. 1152 includes portions of Doc. 654 and Doc. 655], 1161 [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 658], 1203 [Pg. 1203 is part of Doc. 673], 1207 [Pg. 1207 is part of Doc. 673]

Moscow Conversations, 416–417 [Pgs. 416–417 include portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, and Doc. 278], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 291], 1288 [Pg. 1288 is part of Doc. 719] Breakdown, 1142n [Pg. 1142 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650], 1144 [Pg. 1144 is part of Doc. 650], 1150 [Pg. 1150 is part of Doc. 653], 1174n [Pg. 1174 is part of Doc. 661], 1175 [Pg. 1175 is part of Doc. 661], 1197 [Pg. 1197 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 1207–1208 [Pg. 1207 is part of Doc. 673] Foreign Ministers, Western, meetings of: Sept. 20, 1173–1176 [Pgs. 1173–1176 include portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661]; Sept. 21, 1177–1180 [Pgs. 1177–1180 include portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663]; Sept. 26, 1184–1186 [Pgs. 1184–1186 include portions of Doc. 664, Doc. 665, and Doc. 666]; joint statement, Sept. 26, 1186–1187 [Pgs. 1186–1187 include portions of Doc. 665, Doc. 666, and Doc. 667]

Notes to Soviet Union: Sept. 14, 1140–1142 [Pgs. 1140–1142 include portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, and Doc. 650], 1146n [Pg. 1146 is part of Doc. 651], 1147–1149 [Pgs. 1147–1149 include portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652], 1151–1155 [Pgs. 1151–1155 include portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656], 1162–1167 [Pgs. 1162–1167 include portions of Doc. 658, Doc. 659, and Doc. 660], 1169 [Pg. 1169 is part of Doc. 660], 1171 [Pg. 1171 is part of Doc. 660], 1173n [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1180 [Pg. 1180 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1182 [Pg. 1182 is part of Doc. 664], 1189–1190 [Pg. 1189 is part of Doc. 667], 1218 [Pg. 1218 includes portions of Doc. 679 and Doc. 680]; Sept. 22, 1180–1181 [Pgs. 1180–1181 include portions of Doc. 662, Doc. 663, and Doc. 664], 1183 [Pg. 1183 is part of Doc. 664], 1187 [Pg. 1187 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 1190 [Pg. 1190 is part of Doc. 667], 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 683 and Doc. 684], 1266 [Pg. 1266 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705]; Sept. 26, 1174 [Pg. 1174 is part of Doc. 661], 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662], 1184–1193 [Pgs. 1184–1193 include portions of Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668], 1200–1201 [Pgs. 1200–1201 include portions of Doc. 672 and Doc. 673], 1203 [Pg. 1203 is part of Doc. 673], 1205 [Pg. 1205 is part of Doc. 673], 1208–1209 [Pg. 1208 is part of Doc. 673], 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 683 and Doc. 684], 1266 [Pg. 1266 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705]

Soviet Notes: Sept. 18, 1162–1170 [Pgs. 1162–1170 include portions of Doc. 658, Doc. 659, and Doc. 660], 1171 [Pg. 1171 is part of Doc. 660], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1180 [Pg. 1180 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1182 [Pg. 1182 is part of Doc. 664], 1190 [Pg. 1190 is part of Doc. 667], 1206 [Pg. 1206 is part of Doc. 673], 1229 [Pg. 1229 is part of Doc. 685]; Sept. 25, 1181–1187 [Pgs. 1181–1187 include portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, and Doc. 667], 1191 [Pg. 1191 is part of Doc. 667], 1259 [Pg. 1259 is part of Doc. 702]; Oct. 3, 1201–1211 [Pgs. 1201–1211 include portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, and Doc. 675], 1215 [Pg. 1215 is part of Doc. 678], 1224 [Pg. 1224 is part of Doc. 683]

Communiqué, draft, 1016–1108 [Pgs. 1016–1108 include portions of Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, and Doc. 638] passim, 1207 [Pg. 1207 is part of Doc. 673]

Consultations between representatives of Western Powers, 995–998 [Pgs. 995–998 include portions of Doc. 591, Doc. 592, and Doc. 593], 1016–1017 [Pgs. 1016–1017 include portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 602], 1041n [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 611], 1047 [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613], 1061n [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 618], 1097 [Pg. 1097 includes portions of Doc. 632 and Doc. 633]

Conversations with Molotov, 996–998 [Pgs. 996–998 include portions of Doc. 592 and Doc. 593], 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 594], 1018–1021 [Pgs. 1018–1021 include portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 1024–1027 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 604], 1035–1038 [Pgs. 1035–1038 include portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610], 1042–1047 [Pgs. 1042–1047 include portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, and Doc. 613], 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1080–1090 [Pgs. 1080–1090 include portions of Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, and Doc. 630], 1093–1097 [Pgs. 1093–1097 include portions of Doc. 632 and Doc. 633], 1157–1160 [Pgs. 1157–1160 include portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1166–1173 [Pgs. 1166–1173 include portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1206 [Pg. 1206 is part of Doc. 673]

Conversations with Stalin, 999–1006 [Pgs. 999–1006 include portions of Doc. 594 and Doc. 595], 1021 [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 1050 [Pg. 1050 is part of Doc. 614], 1065–1066 [Pgs. 1065–1066 include portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619]

Currency for Berlin: Quadripartite control over currency in Berlin, discussions concerning, 435–436 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 291], 1008–1009 [Pg. 1008 is part of Doc. 596], 1011–1083 [Pgs. 1011–1083 include portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627] passim, 1188 [Pg. 1188 is part of Doc. 667], 1191–1192 [Pg. 1191 is part of Doc. 667], 1224 [Pg. 1224 is part of Doc. 683], 1257 [Pg. 1257 is part of Doc. 702]; Soviet demand for withdrawal of B Marks, 1005 [Pg. 1005 is part of Doc. 594], 1008 [Pg. 1008 is part of Doc. 596], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 598], 1017 [Pg. 1017 is part of Doc. 601], 1044 [Pg. 1044 is part of Doc. 612], 1051–1052 [Pg. 1051 is part of Doc. 614], 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 616], 1063–1064 [Pg. 1063 is part of Doc. 618], 1069 [Pg. 1069 is part of Doc. 620], 1075 [Pg. 1075 is part of Doc. 623], 1079 [Pg. 1079 is part of Doc. 625], 1086 [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 629], 1182 [Pg. 1182 is part of Doc. 664], 1188 [Pg. 1188 is part of Doc. 667]; Soviet proposals for utilization of Soviet zone currency, 912–913 [Pgs. 912–913 include portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 930 [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564], 1005 [Pg. 1005 is part of Doc. 594], 1007–1009 [Pgs. 1007–1009 include portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596], 1017 [Pg. 1017 is part of Doc. 601], 1019–1020 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 602], 1022 [Pg. 1022 is part of Doc. 603], 1024–1028 [Pgs. 1024–1028 include portions of Doc. 604 and Doc. 605], 1030–1031 [Pgs. 1030–1031 include portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 609], 1041–1046 [Pgs. 1041–1046 include portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 1049–1052 [Pgs. 1049–1052 include portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614], 1054 [Pg. 1054 is part of Doc. 615], 1056–1057 [Pgs. 1056–1057 include portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616], 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 618], 1063–1066 [Pgs. 1063–1066 include portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1069–1070 [Pg. 1069 is part of Doc. 620], 1073–1076 [Pgs. 1073–1076 include portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 1079 [Pg. 1079 is part of Doc. 625], 1081 [Pg. 1081 is part of Doc. 626], 1086 [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 629], 1091 [Pg. 1091 is part of Doc. 631], 1182 [Pg. 1182 is part of Doc. 664], 1188 [Pg. 1188 is part of Doc. 667], 1215 [Pg. 1215 is part of Doc. 678], 1257 [Pg. 1257 is part of Doc. 702], 1283 [Pg. 1283 is part of Doc. 716]; special currency in Western sectors (B Mark), utilization of, 999–1002 [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 594], 1004–1005 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 594], 1008–1009 [Pg. 1008 is part of Doc. 596], 1010n [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 597], 1017 [Pg. 1017 is part of Doc. 601], 1197 [Pg. 1197 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 1202 [Pg. 1202 is part of Doc. 673], 1213–1214 [Pgs. 1213–1214 include portions of Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 1236 [Pg. 1236 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], 1239 [Pg. 1239 is part of Doc. 692], 1267–1268 [Pgs. 1267–1268 include portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1276–1277 [Pgs. 1276–1277 include portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], 1281–1283 [Pgs. 1281–1283 include portions of Doc. 714, Doc. 715, and Doc. 716]

Directive to Military Governors, Aug. 30 (see also under United Nations Security Council, infra), 1043–1210 [Pgs. 1043–1210 include portions of Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674] passim

Finance Commission of representatives from four military commanders of Berlin, Soviet proposal regarding, 1066–1095 [Pgs. 1066–1095 include portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, and Doc. 632] passim

Military Governor’s role in settlement, proposals regarding (see also Directive, supra), 1029 [Pg. 1029 is part of Doc. 605], 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 609], 1041 [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 611], 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 612], 1045 [Pg. 1045 is part of Doc. 612], 1051 [Pg. 1051 is part of Doc. 614], 1070 [Pg. 1070 is part of Doc. 620]

Rights, duties, and obligations of Western Powers in Berlin, 1091–1092 [Pgs. 1091–1092 include portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 1096 [Pg. 1096 is part of Doc. 632], 1145 [Pg. 1145 is part of Doc. 651], 1318 [Pg. 1318 is part of Doc. 720]

Soviet blockade measures, proposals for removal of (see also under Negotiations by Military Governors in Berlin and Soviet blockade measures, infra), 1005 [Pg. 1005 is part of Doc. 594], 1008 [Pg. 1008 is part of Doc. 596], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 597], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 598], 1015–1017 [Pgs. 1015–1017 include portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 602], 1024 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 604], 1026 [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 604], 1028–1029 [Pg. 1028 is part of Doc. 605], 1031 [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 1034–1036 [Pgs. 1034–1036 include portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609], 1041–1043 [Pgs. 1041–1043 include portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 1046 [Pg. 1046 is part of Doc. 612], 1047n [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613], 1049 [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614], 1051 [Pg. 1051 is part of Doc. 614], 1055–1057 [Pgs. 1055–1057 include portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616], 1060–1061 [Pgs. 1060–1061 include portions of Doc. 617 and Doc. 618], 1063 [Pg. 1063 is part of Doc. 618], 1066 [Pg. 1066 is part of Doc. 619], 1069 [Pg. 1069 is part of Doc. 620], 1073–1075 [Pgs. 1073–1075 include portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 1083 [Pg. 1083 includes portions of Doc. 626 and Doc. 627], 1085–1086 [Pgs. 1085–1086 include portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], 1088 [Pg. 1088 is part of Doc. 630], 1091 [Pg. 1091 is part of Doc. 631], 1203–1204 [Pg. 1203 is part of Doc. 673], 1206 [Pg. 1206 is part of Doc. 673], 1215 [Pg. 1215 is part of Doc. 678], 1323 [Pg. 1323 is part of Doc. 721]

Stalin proposal for settlement, 1005 [Pg. 1005 is part of Doc. 594], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 597], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 598], 1018–1019 [Pg. 1018 is part of Doc. 602], 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 612], 1049 [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614], 1051 [Pg. 1051 is part of Doc. 614], 1062 [Pg. 1062 is part of Doc. 618], 1203 [Pg. 1203 is part of Doc. 673]; British position, 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 597], 1014 [Pg. 1014 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600], 1015n [Pg. 1015 is part of Doc. 600], 1016–1017 [Pgs. 1016–1017 include portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601]; French position, 1011 [Pg. 1011 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 1017 [Pg. 1017 is part of Doc. 601]; U.S. position, 1014–1016 [Pgs. 1014–1016 include portions of Doc. 599, Doc. 600, and Doc. 601], 1021–1023 [Pgs. 1021–1023 include portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 1049 [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614]

Negotiations by Military Governors in Berlin; Air restrictions, Soviet proposal for additional, 1101 [Pg. 1101 is part of Doc. 635], 1110–1113 [Pgs. 1110–1113 include portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640], 1120 [Pg. 1120 is part of Doc. 641], 1138–1139 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 648], 1140n [Pg. 1140 includes portions of Doc. 648 and Doc. 649], 1141 [Pg. 1141 is part of Doc. 649], 1144 [Pg. 1144 is part of Doc. 650], 1149 [Pg. 1149 is part of Doc. 652], 1153–1154 [Pg. 1153 is part of Doc. 655], 1163 [Pg. 1163 is part of Doc. 659], 1166–1169 [Pg. 1166 is part of Doc. 660], 1180 [Pg. 1180 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1183 [Pg. 1183 is part of Doc. 664], 1187 [Pg. 1187 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 1189 [Pg. 1189 is part of Doc. 667], 1191–1192 [Pg. 1191 is part of Doc. 667], 1206 [Pg. 1206 is part of Doc. 673]

Breakdown of negotiations, 1139 [Pg. 1139 is part of Doc. 648], 1142n [Pg. 1142 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650], 1157 [Pg. 1157 is part of Doc. 657], 1174n [Pg. 1174 is part of Doc. 661], 1186n [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666]

Committees: Establishment of, 1099–1100 [Pgs. 1099–1100 include portions of Doc. 633, Doc. 634, and Doc. 635]; Finance Committee, 1100–1101 [Pgs. 1100–1101 include portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 637], 1109–1110 [Pgs. 1109–1110 include portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 1121–1122 [Pgs. 1121–1122 include portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642], 1124 [Pg. 1124 includes portions of Doc. 642 and Doc. 643], 1132–1134 [Pg. 1132 is part of Doc. 647], 1137 [Pg. 1137 is part of Doc. 648]; Trade Committee, 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635], 1105–1107 [Pg. 1105 is part of Doc. 637], 1112 [Pg. 1112 is part of Doc. 639], 1118–1119 [Pgs. 1118–1119 include portions of Doc. 640 and Doc. 641], 1121 [Pg. 1121 is part of Doc. 641], 1132n [Pg. 1132 is part of Doc. 647], 1134 [Pg. 1134 is part of Doc. 647]; Transport Committee, 1100–1101 [Pgs. 1100–1101 include portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 637], 1110–1111 [Pg. 1110 is part of Doc. 639], 1120–1122 [Pgs. 1120–1122 include portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642], 1126 [Pg. 1126 includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644], 1132n [Pg. 1132 is part of Doc. 647], 1134 [Pg. 1134 is part of Doc. 647], 1136 [Pg. 1136 is part of Doc. 648]

Currency for Berlin: Soviet zone currency, 1101 [Pg. 1101 is part of Doc. 635], 1106–1107 [Pg. 1106 is part of Doc. 637], 1116 [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 640], 1132–1133 [Pg. 1132 is part of Doc. 647], 1137 [Pg. 1137 is part of Doc. 648], 1139 [Pg. 1139 is part of Doc. 648], 1145 [Pg. 1145 is part of Doc. 651], 1146n [Pg. 1146 is part of Doc. 651], 1155 [Pg. 1155 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 1164 [Pg. 1164 is part of Doc. 659], 1176 [Pg. 1176 is part of Doc. 661], 1182–1183 [Pg. 1182 is part of Doc. 664], 1187 [Pg. 1187 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 1191 [Pg. 1191 is part of Doc. 667], 1202–1204 [Pg. 1202 is part of Doc. 673], 1206 [Pg. 1206 is part of Doc. 673], 1208–1209 [Pg. 1208 is part of Doc. 673]; special currency (B Marks) in Western sectors, 1101 [Pg. 1101 is part of Doc. 635], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 637], 1109 [Pg. 1109 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 1203–1204 [Pg. 1203 is part of Doc. 673]

Finance Commission, jurisdiction of, 1101–1104 [Pgs. 1101–1104 include portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636], 1108–1110 [Pgs. 1108–1110 include portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 1113–1115 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 640], 1123–1129 [Pgs. 1123–1129 include portions of Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, and Doc. 645], 1133 [Pg. 1133 is part of Doc. 647], 1137–1139 [Pg. 1137 is part of Doc. 648], 1140n [Pg. 1140 includes portions of Doc. 648 and Doc. 649], 1141 [Pg. 1141 is part of Doc. 649], 1444 [Pg. 1444 includes portions of Doc. 797 and Doc. 798], 1146 [Pg. 1146 is part of Doc. 651], 1149 [Pg. 1149 is part of Doc. 652], 1153–1156 [Pgs. 1153–1156 include portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 1163–1172 [Pgs. 1163–1172 include portions of Doc. 659 and Doc. 660], 1180 [Pg. 1180 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1183 [Pg. 1183 is part of Doc. 664], 1188–1190 [Pg. 1188 is part of Doc. 667], 1205 [Pg. 1205 is part of Doc. 673]

Meetings, Aug. 31–Sept. 6, 1099–1103 [Pgs. 1099–1103 include portions of Doc. 633, Doc. 634, and Doc. 635], 1105–1107 [Pg. 1105 is part of Doc. 637], 1109–1112 [Pgs. 1109–1112 include portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 1118–1122 [Pgs. 1118–1122 include portions of Doc. 640, Doc. 641, and Doc. 642], 1132–1140 [Pgs. 1132–1140 include portions of Doc. 647, Doc. 648, and Doc. 649]

Report (U.S.-U.K.-France), 1138–1139 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 648]; Soviet proposal for joint report, 1157–1159 [Pg. 1157 is part of Doc. 657], 1162 [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 1166 [Pg. 1166 is part of Doc. 660]

Rights, duties, and obligations of Western Powers in Berlin (see also under Moscow conversations, supra), 1141 [Pg. 1141 is part of Doc. 649], 1143–1147 [Pgs. 1143–1147 include portions of Doc. 650, Doc. 651, and Doc. 652], 1149–1150 [Pgs. 1149–1150 include portions of Doc. 652 and Doc. 653], 1167 [Pg. 1167 is part of Doc. 660], 1169 [Pg. 1169 is part of Doc. 660], 1178 [Pg. 1178 is part of Doc. 662], 1181 [Pg. 1181 includes portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664], 1188 [Pg. 1188 is part of Doc. 667], 1190–1191 [Pg. 1190 is part of Doc. 667], 1203 [Pg. 1203 is part of Doc. 673], 1208 [Pg. 1208 is part of Doc. 673]

Soviet blockade measures, proposals for removal of (see also under Moscow conversations, supra and Soviet blockade measures, infra), 1101 [Pg. 1101 is part of Doc. 635], 1103 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 635], 1111–1113 [Pgs. 1111–1113 include portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640], 1115–1117 [Pg. 1115 is part of Doc. 640], 1120 [Pg. 1120 is part of Doc. 641], 1123 [Pg. 1123 is part of Doc. 642], 1127 [Pg. 1127 is part of Doc. 644], 1129 [Pg. 1129 includes portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1135–1136 [Pg. 1135 is part of Doc. 648], 1138 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 648], 1140–1141 [Pgs. 1140–1141 include portions of Doc. 648 and Doc. 649], 1146n [Pg. 1146 is part of Doc. 651], 1149 [Pg. 1149 is part of Doc. 652], 1153–1155 [Pgs. 1153–1155 include portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 1163 [Pg. 1163 is part of Doc. 659], 1166 [Pg. 1166 is part of Doc. 660], 1168–1169 [Pg. 1168 is part of Doc. 660], 1176–1178 [Pgs. 1176–1178 include portions of Doc. 661 and Doc. 662], 1181–1183 [Pgs. 1181–1183 include portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664], 1187–1192 [Pgs. 1187–1192 include portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 1208 [Pg. 1208 is part of Doc. 673], 1291 [Pg. 1291 is part of Doc. 719]

Trade, Soviet insistence on control over, 1106 [Pg. 1106 is part of Doc. 637], 1118–1119 [Pgs. 1118–1119 include portions of Doc. 640 and Doc. 641], 1135 [Pg. 1135 is part of Doc. 648], 1139 [Pg. 1139 is part of Doc. 648], 1140n [Pg. 1140 includes portions of Doc. 648 and Doc. 649], 1141 [Pg. 1141 is part of Doc. 649], 1144–1145 [Pgs. 1144–1145 include portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 1146n [Pg. 1146 is part of Doc. 651], 1149 [Pg. 1149 is part of Doc. 652], 1153–1156 [Pgs. 1153–1156 include portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 1163–1165 [Pg. 1163 is part of Doc. 659], 1167–1171 [Pg. 1167 is part of Doc. 660], 1180 [Pg. 1180 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1183 [Pg. 1183 is part of Doc. 664], 1189–1191 [Pg. 1189 is part of Doc. 667], 1206 [Pg. 1206 is part of Doc. 673]

Notes exchanged: July 6, Western note, text of, 950–953 [Pgs. 950–953 include portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575]

July 14, Soviet reply, text of, 960–964 [Pgs. 960–964 include portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579]; discussion concerning, 965–967 [Pgs. 965–967 include portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582], 969n [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 582], 972–973 [Pg. 972 is part of Doc. 583], 996–997 [Pgs. 996–997 include portions of Doc. 592 and Doc. 593], 999–1000 [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 594], 1059 [Pg. 1059 is part of Doc. 617], 1427–1432 [Pgs. 1427–1432 include portions of Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, and Doc. 788]

July 30, Western aide-memoire, draft text, 990–991 [Pg. 990 is part of Doc. 590]; citation to final text, 991n [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 590]

Occupation costs, proposals regarding assumption of, 1027 [Pg. 1027 is part of Doc. 604], 1030–1031 [Pgs. 1030–1031 include portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 607], 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 609], 1052 [Pg. 1052 is part of Doc. 614], 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 616], 1064–1067 [Pgs. 1064–1067 include portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1069–1070 [Pg. 1069 is part of Doc. 620], 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622], 1077 [Pg. 1077 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624], 1093 [Pg. 1093 is part of Doc. 632], 1183 [Pg. 1183 is part of Doc. 664], 1232 [Pg. 1232 is part of Doc. 687], 1234 [Pg. 1234 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689]

Postal services in Berlin, breakdown of, 906 [Pg. 906 is part of Doc. 545], 1038–1039 [Pgs. 1038–1039 include portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610]

Quadripartite control over Berlin, issue of, 1011 [Pg. 1011 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 602], 1024 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 604], 1027–1029 [Pgs. 1027–1029 include portions of Doc. 604 and Doc. 605], 1034–1036 [Pgs. 1034–1036 include portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609], 1045 [Pg. 1045 is part of Doc. 612], 1047 [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613], 1054 [Pg. 1054 is part of Doc. 615], 1071–1074 [Pgs. 1071–1074 include portions of Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, and Doc. 623], 1076 [Pg. 1076 is part of Doc. 623], 1078–1079 [Pg. 1078 is part of Doc. 625], 1082 [Pg. 1082 is part of Doc. 626], 1144 [Pg. 1144 is part of Doc. 650], 1146n [Pg. 1146 is part of Doc. 651], 1161 [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 658], 1170 [Pg. 1170 is part of Doc. 660], 1243 [Pg. 1243 is part of Doc. 693], 1265n [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 704], 1314 [Pg. 1314 is part of Doc. 720]

Situation in Berlin, 186–187 [Pgs. 186–187 include portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122], 189–191 [Pgs. 189–191 include portions of Doc. 123, Doc. 124, and Doc. 125], 194–195 [Pgs. 194–195 include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 200], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 213], 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 395–396 [Pgs. 395–396 include portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, and Doc. 278], 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 282], 425n [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 296], 456n [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 353], 704–705 [Pgs. 704–705 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 420], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 442], 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466], 1297 [Pg. 1297 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 1508–1509 [Pgs. 1508–1509 include portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855]

Soviet blockade measures (see also under Moscow conversations and Negotiations by Military Governors in Berlin, supra), 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 744n [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 442], 770–771 [Pgs. 770–771 include portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464], 886n [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 887–889 [Pgs. 887–889 include portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530], 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 548 and Doc. 549], 912 [Pg. 912 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 919–920 [Pgs. 919–920 include portions of Doc. 558 and Doc. 559], 932–934 [Pgs. 932–934 include portions of Doc. 566 and Doc. 567], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 569], 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 572], 947–952 [Pgs. 947–952 include portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, and Doc. 575], 954–958 [Pgs. 954–958 include portions of Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578], 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 583], 973–974 [Pgs. 973–974 include portions of Doc. 583 and Doc. 584], 983 [Pg. 983 is part of Doc. 587], 985 [Pg. 985 is part of Doc. 588], 987 [Pg. 987 is part of Doc. 589], 990–992 [Pg. 990 is part of Doc. 590], 998–1002 [Pgs. 998–1002 include portions of Doc. 593 and Doc. 594], 1004–1005 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 594], 1008 [Pg. 1008 is part of Doc. 596], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 597], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 598], 1015–1016 [Pgs. 1015–1016 include portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 602], 1022–1024 [Pgs. 1022–1024 include portions of Doc. 603 and Doc. 604], 1028 [Pg. 1028 is part of Doc. 605], 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 612], 1048 [Pg. 1048 is part of Doc. 613], 1055 [Pg. 1055 is part of Doc. 615], 1059–1060 [Pg. 1059 is part of Doc. 617], 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], 1146 [Pg. 1146 is part of Doc. 651], 1181 [Pg. 1181 includes portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664], 1186–1187 [Pgs. 1186–1187 include portions of Doc. 665, Doc. 666, and Doc. 667], 1202–1203 [Pg. 1202 is part of Doc. 673], 1314 [Pg. 1314 is part of Doc. 720]

Soviet note of July 14, 960–967 [Pgs. 960–967 include portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582], 969n [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 582], 972–973 [Pg. 972 is part of Doc. 583], 996–997 [Pgs. 996–997 include portions of Doc. 592 and Doc. 593], 999–1000 [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 594], 1059 [Pg. 1059 is part of Doc. 617], 1427–1432 [Pgs. 1427–1432 include portions of Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, and Doc. 788]; text, 960–964 [Pgs. 960–964 include portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579]

Soviet objectives, 911 [Pg. 911 includes portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551], 970 [Pg. 970 is part of Doc. 582], 983–985 [Pgs. 983–985 include portions of Doc. 587 and Doc. 588], 991 [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 590], 1013 [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599], 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 602], 1025 [Pg. 1025 is part of Doc. 604], 1027 [Pg. 1027 is part of Doc. 604], 1047–1048 [Pgs. 1047–1048 include portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613], 1055 [Pg. 1055 is part of Doc. 615], 1090 [Pg. 1090 is part of Doc. 630], 1137 [Pg. 1137 is part of Doc. 648], 1178 [Pg. 1178 is part of Doc. 662], 1190 [Pg. 1190 is part of Doc. 667], 1192 [Pg. 1192 is part of Doc. 667], 1211n [Pg. 1211 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675], 1231 [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 1243 [Pg. 1243 is part of Doc. 693], 1323 [Pg. 1323 is part of Doc. 721], 1428–1430 [Pgs. 1428–1430 include portions of Doc. 785, Doc. 786, and Doc. 787]

Soviet position, 909 [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 547 and Doc. 548], 912 [Pg. 912 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 915 [Pg. 915 includes portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554], 947–971 [Pgs. 947–971 include portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583] passim, 997–1048 [Pgs. 997–1048 include portions of Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, and Doc. 613], 1065–1220 [Pgs. 1065–1220 include portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, and Doc. 681] passim

Soviet zone of occupation, prohibition of entry into by pedestrians, 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 548 and Doc. 549]

Stockpile. see Food supplies, supra.

Telephone service in Berlin, Soviet demand for control over, 888 [Pg. 888 is part of Doc. 529]

Traffic into Berlin: Air, 1136 [Pg. 1136 is part of Doc. 648], 1138 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 648]

Highway, Soviet restrictions on, 886–889 [Pgs. 886–889 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530], 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 548 and Doc. 549], 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 559], 929–930 [Pgs. 929–930 include portions of Doc. 562, Doc. 563, and Doc. 564], 932 [Pg. 932 is part of Doc. 566], 940 [Pg. 940 is part of Doc. 569], 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 583], 1031 [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 1136 [Pg. 1136 is part of Doc. 648]

Interzonal, restrictions on, 932 [Pg. 932 is part of Doc. 566], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 569], 945n [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 572]

Railway service, Soviet demand for control over, 155–156 [Pgs. 155–156 include portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 744n [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 442], 886n [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 529 and Doc. 530], 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 548 and Doc. 549], 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 559], 929–930 [Pgs. 929–930 include portions of Doc. 562, Doc. 563, and Doc. 564], 932 [Pg. 932 is part of Doc. 566], 935 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 567], 939–940 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 569], 945n [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 572], 949–950 [Pgs. 949–950 include portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575], 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 583], 1031 [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 1136 [Pg. 1136 is part of Doc. 648]

Water traffic, restrictions on, 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 548 and Doc. 549], 940 [Pg. 940 is part of Doc. 569], 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 583], 1136 [Pg. 1136 is part of Doc. 648], 1141 [Pg. 1141 is part of Doc. 649]

Troops in Berlin, right of Western Powers to maintain, 1000 [Pg. 1000 is part of Doc. 594]

United Nations: Blockade settlement, considerations regarding U.N. responsibility for, 931 [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565], 935–937 [Pgs. 935–937 include portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 942–943 [Pg. 942 is part of Doc. 571], 945n [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 572], 946 [Pg. 946 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573], 947n [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 573], 953 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 575], 957 [Pg. 957 is part of Doc. 577], 968 [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 582], 973–976 [Pgs. 973–976 include portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, and Doc. 585], 983 [Pg. 983 is part of Doc. 587], 986–987 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 589], 993 [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 590], 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607], 1055 [Pg. 1055 is part of Doc. 615], 1058–1059 [Pgs. 1058–1059 include portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1114 [Pg. 1114 is part of Doc. 640], 1117 [Pg. 1117 is part of Doc. 640], 1129 [Pg. 1129 includes portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1142 [Pg. 1142 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650], 1144 [Pg. 1144 is part of Doc. 650], 1147 [Pg. 1147 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652], 1161 [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 658], 1173–1176 [Pgs. 1173–1176 include portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1179 [Pg. 1179 is part of Doc. 662]

General Assembly, considerations regarding possible referral of Berlin question to, 976 [Pg. 976 is part of Doc. 585], 986–987 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 589], 993 [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 590], 1128 [Pg. 1128 is part of Doc. 644], 1161 [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 658], 1174 [Pg. 1174 is part of Doc. 661], 1220 [Pg. 1220 is part of Doc. 681], 1227 [Pg. 1227 is part of Doc. 684], 1236 [Pg. 1236 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], 1238 [Pg. 1238 is part of Doc. 691], 1245–1246 [Pg. 1245 is part of Doc. 693], 1250 [Pg. 1250 is part of Doc. 696]; Mexican resolution, Nov. 3, 1250 [Pg. 1250 is part of Doc. 696], 1252 [Pg. 1252 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698]

Secretary General, role of, 1236–1237 [Pgs. 1236–1237 include portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], 1247–1249 [Pgs. 1247–1249 include portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696], 1251 [Pg. 1251 includes portions of Doc. 696 and Doc. 697]

Security Council: British position, 1233–1234 [Pgs. 1233–1234 include portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 775 and Doc. 776]

Council of Foreign Ministers meeting on Germany, proposals regarding, 1216–1219 [Pgs. 1216–1219 include portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, and Doc. 681], 1226–1227 [Pg. 1226 is part of Doc. 684], 1237 [Pg. 1237 is part of Doc. 690], 1252 [Pg. 1252 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698]

Currency for Berlin, proposals regarding, 1219 [Pg. 1219 is part of Doc. 681], 1224–1225 [Pgs. 1224–1225 include portions of Doc. 683 and Doc. 684], 1228 [Pg. 1228 includes portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685], 1231–1232 [Pgs. 1231–1232 include portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 1234–1235 [Pgs. 1234–1235 include portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1247–1251 [Pgs. 1247–1251 include portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, and Doc. 697], 1253n [Pg. 1253 includes portions of Doc. 698 and Doc. 699], 1254 [Pg. 1254 is part of Doc. 700], 1256–1259 [Pgs. 1256–1259 include portions of Doc. 701 and Doc. 702], 1263–1269 [Pgs. 1263–1269 include portions of Doc. 704, Doc. 705, and Doc. 706], 1273 [Pg. 1273 is part of Doc. 708], 1276–1279 [Pgs. 1276–1279 include portions of Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713], 1281–1284 [Pgs. 1281–1284 include portions of Doc. 714, Doc. 715, and Doc. 716]

Debates, 1233–1234 [Pgs. 1233–1234 include portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 1508 [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, and Doc. 854]

Directive to Military Governors, Aug. 30 (see also under Moscow conversations supra), question regarding status or application of, 1210–1212 [Pgs. 1210–1212 include portions of Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, and Doc. 676], 1215 [Pg. 1215 is part of Doc. 678], 1218 [Pg. 1218 includes portions of Doc. 679 and Doc. 680], 1228–1230 [Pgs. 1228–1230 include portions of Doc. 684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686], 1232 [Pg. 1232 is part of Doc. 687], 1234–1235 [Pgs. 1234–1235 include portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1240n [Pg. 1240 is part of Doc. 693], 1248–1249 [Pgs. 1248–1249 include portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696], 1264 [Pg. 1264 is part of Doc. 704], 1267 [Pg. 1267 is part of Doc. 705], 1273n [Pg. 1273 is part of Doc. 708]

Evatt-Lie letter, Nov. 13, 1251–1253 [Pgs. 1251–1253 include portions of Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, and Doc. 699], 1263 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 704]

Financial Commission, discussions regarding, 1228–1231 [Pgs. 1228–1231 include portions of Doc. 684, Doc. 685, Doc. 686, and Doc. 687], 1258–1259 [Pg. 1258 is part of Doc. 702]

French position, 1214–1216 [Pgs. 1214–1216 include portions of Doc. 677, Doc. 678, and Doc. 679], 1225–1226 [Pgs. 1225–1226 include portions of Doc. 683 and Doc. 684], 1233–1234 [Pgs. 1233–1234 include portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689]

Neutral Committee of Experts, 1231–1235 [Pgs. 1231–1235 include portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 1238 [Pg. 1238 is part of Doc. 691], 1248–1249 [Pgs. 1248–1249 include portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696], 1275–1276 [Pgs. 1275–1276 include portions of Doc. 709, Doc. 710, and Doc. 711], 1278–1280 [Pgs. 1278–1280 include portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713], 1281n [Pg. 1281 includes portions of Doc. 714 and Doc. 715], 1282–1283 [Pgs. 1282–1283 include portions of Doc. 715 and Doc. 716]

Neutrals on Security Council, activities of (see also Resolution, infra), 1216–1220 [Pgs. 1216–1220 include portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, and Doc. 681], 1224n [Pg. 1224 is part of Doc. 683], 1226 [Pg. 1226 is part of Doc. 684], 1248–1251 [Pgs. 1248–1251 include portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, and Doc. 697], 1254–1259 [Pgs. 1254–1259 include portions of Doc. 700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702], 1263 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 704], 1265–1267 [Pgs. 1265–1267 include portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1269 [Pg. 1269 is part of Doc. 706], 1273 [Pg. 1273 is part of Doc. 708], 1274n [Pg. 1274 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709]

Referral of Berlin question, 456n [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 935 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 567], 954–956 [Pgs. 954–956 include portions of Doc. 576 and Doc. 577], 968n [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 582], 986 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 589], 993n [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 590], 1059 [Pg. 1059 is part of Doc. 617], 1114 [Pg. 1114 is part of Doc. 640], 1117 [Pg. 1117 is part of Doc. 640], 1128 [Pg. 1128 is part of Doc. 644], 1174 [Pg. 1174 is part of Doc. 661], 1184–1187 [Pgs. 1184–1187 include portions of Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, and Doc. 667], 1192–1194 [Pgs. 1192–1194 include portions of Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669], 1196–1197 [Pgs. 1196–1197 include portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 1200 [Pg. 1200 is part of Doc. 672], 1210 [Pg. 1210 includes portions of Doc. 673 and Doc. 674], 1212–1213 [Pgs. 1212–1213 include portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, and Doc. 677], 1216n [Pg. 1216 includes portions of Doc. 678 and Doc. 679]

Resolution of neutrals, 1231–1234 [Pgs. 1231–1234 include portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 1236 [Pg. 1236 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], 1238–1239 [Pgs. 1238–1239 include portions of Doc. 691 and Doc. 692], 1269 [Pg. 1269 is part of Doc. 706]; joint statement (U.S.–U.K–France) in suport of, Oct. 27, 1234 [Pg. 1234 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1238–1239 [Pgs. 1238–1239 include portions of Doc. 691 and Doc. 692]; Soviet veto of, 1233–1236 [Pgs. 1233–1236 include portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690], 1237n [Pg. 1237 is part of Doc. 690], 1238 [Pg. 1238 is part of Doc. 691]

Soviet blockade measures, questions regarding removal of, 1216–1219 [Pgs. 1216–1219 include portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, and Doc. 681], 1223 [Pg. 1223 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1226–1227 [Pg. 1226 is part of Doc. 684], 1233 [Pg. 1233 includes portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688], 1235–1237 [Pgs. 1235–1237 include portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], 1244–1245 [Pg. 1244 is part of Doc. 693], 1250–1252 [Pgs. 1250–1252 include portions of Doc. 696, Doc. 697, and Doc. 698], 1254 [Pg. 1254 is part of Doc. 700], 1263–1264 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 704], 1265n [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 704], 1266–1267 [Pgs. 1266–1267 include portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1279 [Pg. 1279 is part of Doc. 713]

Soviet position, 1210 [Pg. 1210 includes portions of Doc. 673 and Doc. 674], 1211n [Pg. 1211 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675], 1212–1213 [Pgs. 1212–1213 include portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, and Doc. 677], 1215 [Pg. 1215 is part of Doc. 678], 1219n [Pg. 1219 is part of Doc. 681], 1220 [Pg. 1220 is part of Doc. 681], 1226 [Pg. 1226 is part of Doc. 684], 1233–1236 [Pgs. 1233–1236 include portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690], 1237n [Pg. 1237 is part of Doc. 690], 1238 [Pg. 1238 is part of Doc. 691], 1264 [Pg. 1264 is part of Doc. 704]

Trade, question of controls over, 1224 [Pg. 1224 is part of Doc. 683], 1232 [Pg. 1232 is part of Doc. 687], 1235 [Pg. 1235 is part of Doc. 689], 1258–1259 [Pg. 1258 is part of Doc. 702], 1265n [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 704], 1267 [Pg. 1267 is part of Doc. 705], 1273 [Pg. 1273 is part of Doc. 708], 1279 [Pg. 1279 is part of Doc. 713]

U.S. position, 1223–1225 [Pgs. 1223–1225 include portions of Doc. 682, Doc. 683, and Doc. 684], 1231–1234 [Pgs. 1231–1234 include portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 775 and Doc. 776]

Western rights in Berlin, question of, 1223–1225 [Pgs. 1223–1225 include portions of Doc. 682, Doc. 683, and Doc. 684], 1243 [Pg. 1243 is part of Doc. 693], 1265n [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 704]

U.S. Air Force in Europe, reinforcement of, 927–928 [Pgs. 927–928 include portions of Doc. 561 and Doc. 562], 931 [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565], 965–967 [Pgs. 965–967 include portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582]

U.S. air lift to Berlin, 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 557 and Doc. 558], 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 560], 931–932 [Pgs. 931–932 include portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566], 954 [Pg. 954 is part of Doc. 576], 965 [Pg. 965 is part of Doc. 580], 976–977 [Pgs. 976–977 include portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 984 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 588], 994 [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 591], 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 602], 1046 [Pg. 1046 is part of Doc. 612], 1059–1060 [Pg. 1059 is part of Doc. 617], 1101 [Pg. 1101 is part of Doc. 635], 1111–1113 [Pgs. 1111–1113 include portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640], 1120 [Pg. 1120 is part of Doc. 641], 1139 [Pg. 1139 is part of Doc. 648], 1174 [Pg. 1174 is part of Doc. 661], 1178–1179 [Pg. 1178 is part of Doc. 662], 1195 [Pg. 1195 is part of Doc. 669], 1197–1199 [Pgs. 1197–1199 include portions of Doc. 669, Doc. 670, and Doc. 671], 1227–1228 [Pgs. 1227–1228 include portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685], 1242–1243 [Pg. 1242 is part of Doc. 693], 1246 [Pg. 1246 is part of Doc. 693], 1281 [Pg. 1281 includes portions of Doc. 714 and Doc. 715], 1284 [Pg. 1284 is part of Doc. 716]

U.S. position, 886–1225 [Pgs. 886–1225 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, Doc. 555, Doc. 556, Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, Doc. 683, and Doc. 684] passim, 1240–1248 [Pgs. 1240–1248 include portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 1266–1268 [Pgs. 1266–1268 include portions of Doc. 704, Doc. 705, and Doc. 706], 1272–1274 [Pgs. 1272–1274 include portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709]

War risk, considerations regarding, 879n [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 523 and Doc. 524], 899–900 [Pgs. 899–900 include portions of Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540], 915 [Pg. 915 includes portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554], 928 [Pg. 928 includes portions of Doc. 561 and Doc. 562], 931 [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565], 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 957–958 [Pgs. 957–958 include portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 969n [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 582], 970–973 [Pgs. 970–973 include portions of Doc. 582 and Doc. 583], 994 [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 591], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 598], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 1060 [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 617], 1161 [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 658], 1195–1196 [Pg. 1195 is part of Doc. 669], 1199 [Pg. 1199 is part of Doc. 671], 1216 [Pg. 1216 includes portions of Doc. 678 and Doc. 679], 1240–1242 [Pg. 1240 is part of Doc. 693], 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694], 1295 [Pg. 1295 is part of Doc. 719], 1430 [Pg. 1430 is part of Doc. 787]

Withdrawal of Western Powers and Soviet Union from Berlin, proposal regarding, 1244 [Pg. 1244 is part of Doc. 693], 1290 [Pg. 1290 is part of Doc. 719], 1323–1324 [Pg. 1323 is part of Doc. 721]

Withdrawal of Western Powers from Berlin, considerations regarding, 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 919–922 [Pgs. 919–922 include portions of Doc. 558, Doc. 559, and Doc. 560], 925 [Pg. 925 is part of Doc. 560], 934 [Pg. 934 is part of Doc. 567], 968–970 [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 582], 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 583], 982–983 [Pgs. 982–983 include portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 985 [Pg. 985 is part of Doc. 588], 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607], 1196 [Pg. 1196 is part of Doc. 669], 1241–1246 [Pg. 1241 is part of Doc. 693], 1269 [Pg. 1269 is part of Doc. 706], 1315 [Pg. 1315 is part of Doc. 720], 1430 [Pg. 1430 is part of Doc. 787]

Béthouart, Lt. Gen. M. E., 1360 [Pg. 1360 includes portions of Doc. 732 and Doc. 733], 1373 [Pg. 1373 is part of Doc. 743], 1376–1377 [Pgs. 1376–1377 include portions of Doc. 745 and Doc. 746], 1401 [Pg. 1401 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1403 [Pg. 1403 includes portions of Doc. 765 and Doc. 766], 1426–1427 [Pgs. 1426–1427 include portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785]

Bevin, Ernest: Attitude of Austrian Communists toward, 1382 [Pg. 1382 is part of Doc. 750]; Austrian peace treaty, 1451 [Pg. 1451 includes portions of Doc. 803 and Doc. 804], 1496 [Pg. 1496 is part of Doc. 840], 1498 [Pg. 1498 is part of Doc. 842]; Berlin blockade, 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541], 921–927 [Pgs. 921–927 include portions of Doc. 559, Doc. 560, and Doc. 561], 929n [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 562 and Doc. 563], 930 [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564], 932n [Pg. 932 is part of Doc. 566], 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 939–940 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 569], 942–948 [Pgs. 942–948 include portions of Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, and Doc. 574], 965–966 [Pgs. 965–966 include portions of Doc. 580 and Doc. 581], 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 583], 974n [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 584], 975–983 [Pgs. 975–983 include portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, and Doc. 587], 986–988 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 589], 993 [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 590], 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 594], 1006 [Pg. 1006 includes portions of Doc. 594 and Doc. 595], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 597], 1014 [Pg. 1014 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600], 1016–1017 [Pgs. 1016–1017 include portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1029 [Pg. 1029 is part of Doc. 605], 1031n [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 1038n [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610], 1041 [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 611], 1047n [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613], 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616], 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1074 [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 1077 [Pg. 1077 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624], 1082–1083 [Pgs. 1082–1083 include portions of Doc. 626 and Doc. 627], 1092 [Pg. 1092 includes portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 1095 [Pg. 1095 is part of Doc. 632], 1114 [Pg. 1114 is part of Doc. 640], 1118 [Pg. 1118 includes portions of Doc. 640 and Doc. 641], 1124 [Pg. 1124 includes portions of Doc. 642 and Doc. 643], 1126–1130 [Pgs. 1126–1130 include portions of Doc. 643, Doc. 644, and Doc. 645], 1147 [Pg. 1147 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652], 1149 [Pg. 1149 is part of Doc. 652], 1151 [Pg. 1151 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654], 1173–1179 [Pgs. 1173–1179 include portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662], 1185–1186 [Pgs. 1185–1186 include portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666], 1211–1212 [Pgs. 1211–1212 include portions of Doc. 674, Doc. 675, and Doc. 676], 1234 [Pg. 1234 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1237 [Pg. 1237 is part of Doc. 690], 1238n [Pg. 1238 is part of Doc. 691], 1248n [Pg. 1248 includes portions of Doc. 694 and Doc. 695], 1278–1279 [Pgs. 1278–1279 include portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713], 1281 [Pg. 1281 includes portions of Doc. 714 and Doc. 715]; Bizonal economic organizations, revision, 20–22 [Pgs. 20–22 include portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10], 24–25 [Pgs. 24–25 include portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 35–37 [Pgs. 35–37 include portions of Doc. 17, Doc. 18, and Doc. 19]; Bizonal government, possible establishment of, 318–319 [Pgs. 318–319 include portions of Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 226]; coal exports from Western zones of occupation, sliding scale agreement, 74n [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 46], 504n [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 327]; Foreign Minister’s meeting (U.S.–U.K.–France), opposition to, 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 226]; German problem, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]; Germany, policy toward, 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 318]; Germany, security against, 61–62 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70]; Italy, attitude toward, 146–147 [Pgs. 146–147 include portions of Doc. 96, Doc. 97, and Doc. 98], 856 [Pg. 856 is part of Doc. 511]; level Of industry in Germany, 843–844 [Pgs. 843–844 include portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502]; London Conference on Germany, 36–37 [Pgs. 36–37 include portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 40–42 [Pgs. 40–42 include portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 68–69 [Pgs. 68–69 include portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 146n [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 163–165 [Pgs. 163–165 include portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 200], 308–309 [Pgs. 308–309 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, and Doc. 208], 318–319 [Pgs. 318–319 include portions of Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 331–332 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 226], 364–365 [Pgs. 364–365 include portions of Doc. 242, Doc. 243, and Doc. 244], 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]; Military Governors Conference at Berlin, 145–146 [Pgs. 145–146 include portions of Doc. 95, Doc. 96, and Doc. 97]; occupation statute for West Germany, 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]; reparations from Germany, 89–90 [Pgs. 89–90 include portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 78], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 128–130 [Pgs. 128–130 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86], 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 214–215 [Pgs. 214–215 include portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439], 761–763 [Pgs. 761–763 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 776n [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 465], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 469], 803–808 [Pgs. 803–808 include portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, and Doc. 479], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 813–824 [Pgs. 813–824 include portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 826–829 [Pgs. 826–829 include portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 844 [Pg. 844 is part of Doc. 502]; Ruhr question, 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 522n [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 334]; Soviet Union, attitude toward, 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 213], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 226], 345n [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]; West Germany, provisional government for, 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 264]; Western European Union, proposals regarding, 61–63 [Pgs. 61–63 include portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 45], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67]

Bidault, Georges: Austrian peace treaty, 1496 [Pg. 1496 is part of Doc. 840], 1498 [Pg. 1498 is part of Doc. 842]; Berlin blockade, 917n [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 556 and Doc. 557], 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 586]; Bizonal economic organizations, revision, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 21n [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 24n [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 26–27 [Pgs. 26–27 include portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, and Doc. 14], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15], 34n [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 17], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 37–38 [Pgs. 37–38 include portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]; coal exports from Western zones of occupation, sliding scale agreement, 74n [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 46], 291n [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 504n [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 327]; disarmament and demilitarization treaty for Germany, proposed draft, 64n [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 38]; Foreign Ministers’ meeting (U.S.-U.K.-France), proposal for, 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 181]; Germany, policy toward, 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 71n [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]; Italian interest in German policy, 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]; London Conference on Germany, 273–274 [Pgs. 273–274 include portions of Doc. 177, Doc. 178, and Doc. 179], 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 299–300 [Pgs. 299–300 include portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 308–309 [Pgs. 308–309 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, and Doc. 208], 317–318 [Pgs. 317–318 include portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 322–326 [Pgs. 322–326 include portions of Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, and Doc. 222], 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 331–335 [Pgs. 331–335 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]; political position, 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 322n [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]; reparations from Germany, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 78], 755–756 [Pgs. 755–756 include portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]; Ruhr, control over, 333–334 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 226], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 331]; Saar question, 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16]; security against Germany, 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]; West German participation in European Recovery Program, 169 [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]; West German provisional government, 266n [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 273–274 [Pgs. 273–274 include portions of Doc. 177, Doc. 178, and Doc. 179], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 187, Doc. 188, and Doc. 189], 284n [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 189]

Bipartite Board (U.S.-U.K.), 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 12n [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5], 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 39n [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 59–60 [Pgs. 59–60 include portions of Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 457n [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 302], 459n [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 303], 460n [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 319], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 410], 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514], 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534]; Benelux association with, question of, 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 185–186 [Pgs. 185–186 include portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 319]; French association with, question of, 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 319]

Bipartite (U.S.-U.K.) Control Office (BICO), 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 386], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]

Bischoff, Norbert, 1508 [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, and Doc. 854]

Bizonal and Bipartite (U.S.-U.K.) Reorganization Committee, 7n [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2]

Bizonal (U.S.-U.K.) German economic organizations, revision of: Belgian attitude, 23–24 [Pgs. 23–24 include portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]; British-American consultations, 1–8 [Pgs. 1–8 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3]; British-American consultations with Germans, 8–16 [Pgs. 8–16 include portions of Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, and Doc. 5], 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 51–52 [Pgs. 51–52 include portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]; British Military Government ordinances promulgating cited, 59–60 [Pgs. 59–60 include portions of Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37]; British position, 1–4 [Pgs. 1–4 include portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 7–9 [Pgs. 7–9 include portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 24n [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 35–37 [Pgs. 35–37 include portions of Doc. 17, Doc. 18, and Doc. 19], 68–69 [Pgs. 68–69 include portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]; French attitude, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4], 20–23 [Pgs. 20–23 include portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11], 25–31 [Pgs. 25–31 include portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15], 34n [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 17], 37–48 [Pgs. 37–48 include portions of Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, Doc. 22, Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, Doc. 26, and Doc. 27], 54n [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 31], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 105], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 517]; German views, 12–15 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5], 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]; Luxembourg attitude, 23n [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]; Netherlands attitude, 23n [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]; Soviet attitude 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 517]; U.S. Military Government proclamations promulgating, cited, 59–60 [Pgs. 59–60 include portions of Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 720]; U.S. position, 1–10 [Pgs. 1–10 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, and Doc. 4], 15–16 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 5], 24–26 [Pgs. 24–26 include portions of Doc. 11, Doc. 12, and Doc. 13], 34–35 [Pgs. 34–35 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 53–54 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 31]

Bizonia (U.S.-U.K. combined zones of occupation in Germany) (see also Bipartite Board, Bipartite Control Office, Bizonal and Bipartite Reorganization Committee, Bizonal German economic organizations, Joint Export-Import Agency, West Germany and under France and Level of Industry in Germany): Administrative Council, 14–15 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5]; British-U.S. agreement, 674n [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]; budget, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 15–16 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 5], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15]; central bank, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 5–6 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 9–10 [Pgs. 9–10 include portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 14–16 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5], 29–31 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 15], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 102], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 107], 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 435–436 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 291], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 320], 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 410]; civil service, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5], 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 5]; coal and steel production, 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 339]; coal imports, 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]; currency conversion, 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]; currency reform, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 15]; 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 102], 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 337], 880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 524], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 524 and Doc. 525]; customs program, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 102]; Economic Council, 1–3 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 5–6 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 9–15 [Pgs. 9–15 include portions of Doc. 3, Doc. 4, and Doc. 5], 18–19 [Pgs. 18–19 include portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 46–47 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 26], 51–54 [Pgs. 51–54 include portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31], 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 108–109 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 72], 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 107], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 117], 376n [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 253], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 281], 868n [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 517], 908 [Pg. 908 includes portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547], 1313 [Pg. 1313 is part of Doc. 720]; establishment of (1946), 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 720]; European Recovery Program, relationship to, 87–89 [Pgs. 87–89 include portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 74], 115n [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 76], 117–118 [Pgs. 117–118 include portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 94], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 107], 169 [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 124], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 210], 422–423 [Pgs. 422–423 include portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 711n [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 422], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 422], 1298 [Pg. 1298 is part of Doc. 720], 1308–1309 [Pg. 1308 is part of Doc. 720], 1388 [Pg. 1388 includes portions of Doc. 755 and Doc. 756]; exchange rates, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1]; Executive Committee, 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4], 13–15 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 5], 46–47 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 26], 51–52 [Pgs. 51–52 include portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 31], 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 107]; exports and imports, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2]; food crisis in, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4], 17–19 [Pgs. 17–19 include portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 17]; foreign investment moratorium, 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]; foreign trade, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2], 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 29–30 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 15], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 74–75 [Pgs. 74–75 include portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 102], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 111], 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 123], 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 235–236 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 153], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 163], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]; French zone, cooperation with, 87–88 [Pgs. 87–88 include portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 148–149 [Pgs. 148–149 include portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 102], 157–158 [Pgs. 157–158 include portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 107], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 108], 167–168 [Pgs. 167–168 include portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 120], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120], 216–217 [Pgs. 216–217 include portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 242–244 [Pgs. 242–244 include portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158], 379–380 [Pgs. 379–380 include portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 291], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 572n [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366], 1298 [Pg. 1298 is part of Doc. 720]; high court, establishment of, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 13–16 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 5], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 15], 40–41 [Pgs. 40–41 include portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 26], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 30], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 31], 59–60 [Pgs. 59–60 include portions of Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 107], 868n [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 517]; inland waterways, 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]; iron and steel scrap, British-U.S. agreement concerning allocation of, Sept. 30, 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]; Joint Foreign Exchange Agency, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2], 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]; labor, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5], 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 5]; Laender, role and functions of, 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 5], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 5], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 46–47 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 26], 51–52 [Pgs. 51–52 include portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 70], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]; Laenderrat, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 13–15 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 5], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 26], 51–53 [Pgs. 51–53 include portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31], 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 107]; Landtag, 1n, 13–15 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 5], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 30], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]; Military Governors, 3n [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 5], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 6], 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 59–60 [Pgs. 59–60 include portions of Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 49], 145–146 [Pgs. 145–146 include portions of Doc. 95, Doc. 96, and Doc. 97], 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 208–210 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 135], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 218–220 [Pgs. 218–220 include portions of Doc. 140, Doc. 141, and Doc. 142], 223–224 [Pgs. 223–224 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 235–236 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 153], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 157], 251–252 [Pgs. 251–252 include portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 460n [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 378], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 380], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 386]; Organization for European Economic Cooperation (OEEC), relationship to, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]; political and economic organization, 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 1305 [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 720]; provisional government, consideration of, 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 298n [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 199], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 213], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 226], 376–378 [Pgs. 376–378 include portions of Doc. 252, Doc. 253, and Doc. 254]; social insurance, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5], 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 5]; Soviet attitude, 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 41], 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 236], 350–353 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 236], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 239], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 241], 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 517], 985 [Pg. 985 is part of Doc. 588], 1201 [Pg. 1201 includes portions of Doc. 672 and Doc. 673], 1314 [Pg. 1314 is part of Doc. 720]; steel production, 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 360], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 370]; steel scrap, 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]; taxes, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 26], 51–52 [Pgs. 51–52 include portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 31], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 107]; U.S. forces in, 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

Blaisdell, Thomas C., Jr., 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439]

Blum, Léon, 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 560], 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 560], 968 [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 582], 1382 [Pg. 1382 is part of Doc. 750]

Bock, Lorenz, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

Boehm, Johann, 1387 [Pg. 1387 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755]

Bohlen, Charles E.: Arms for Austrian military and police forces, 1377 [Pg. 1377 is part of Doc. 746]; Austrian Peace Treaty, 1509 [Pg. 1509 includes portions of Doc. 854 and Doc. 855]; Berlin blockade, 955n [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 576], 966–967 [Pgs. 966–967 include portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582], 971n [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 583], 986–989 [Pgs. 986–989 include portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 992–993 [Pg. 992 is part of Doc. 590], 1006–1007 [Pgs. 1006–1007 include portions of Doc. 594 and Doc. 595], 1013–1014 [Pgs. 1013–1014 include portions of Doc. 598, Doc. 599, and Doc. 600], 1058–1060 [Pgs. 1058–1060 include portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 1108–1109 [Pgs. 1108–1109 include portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 640], 1132n [Pg. 1132 is part of Doc. 647], 1137n [Pg. 1137 is part of Doc. 648], 1147n [Pg. 1147 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662], 1184n [Pg. 1184 includes portions of Doc. 664 and Doc. 665], 1194–1249 [Pgs. 1194–1249 include portions of Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, Doc. 683, Doc. 684, Doc. 685, Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696] passim, 1262–1278 [Pgs. 1262–1278 include portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, and Doc. 712] passim; French policy toward Germany, 434n [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]; reparations from Germany, 729n [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]; Ruhr question, 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334], 528n [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]: U.S. policy toward Germany, 1287 [Pg. 1287 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719]

Bolivia, 853–854 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 511]

Bolton, Kenyon C., 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125]

Bonbright, James C. H., 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

Bonnefous, Edouard, 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]

Bonnet, Henri, 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 26n [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 17], 37–39 [Pgs. 37–39 include portions of Doc. 18, Doc. 19, and Doc. 20], 40n [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 31], 54n [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 31], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 270–272 [Pgs. 270–272 include portions of Doc. 174, Doc. 175, and Doc. 176], 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 460n [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 502–503 [Pgs. 502–503 include portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327], 512n [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 331], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413], 735n [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 1058–1060 [Pgs. 1058–1060 include portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617]

Bourbon-Busset, Jacques de, 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661]

Boyer de Fonscolombe, André, 1024n [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 604], 1035n [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 609], 1042n [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 1065n [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1086n [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 629], 1093n [Pg. 1093 is part of Doc. 632], 1157n [Pg. 1157 is part of Doc. 657]

Bradley, Gen. Omar N., 887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 529 and Doc. 530], 928 [Pg. 928 includes portions of Doc. 561 and Doc. 562], 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 576 and Doc. 577], 1011 [Pg. 1011 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598]

Bramuglia, Juan Atilio, 1216–1217 [Pgs. 1216–1217 include portions of Doc. 678 and Doc. 679], 1219–1220 [Pg. 1219 is part of Doc. 681], 1224 [Pg. 1224 is part of Doc. 683], 1249–1251 [Pgs. 1249–1251 include portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, and Doc. 697], 1253–1257 [Pgs. 1253–1257 include portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702], 1263–1264 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 704], 1266 [Pg. 1266 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1275 [Pg. 1275 includes portions of Doc. 709 and Doc. 710], 1280 [Pg. 1280 is part of Doc. 713]

Brannan, Charles F., 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466], 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 467], 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 471]

Brauer, Max, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 257], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 269], 411–412 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 270], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 287], 831n [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494]

Bridges, Styles, 703n [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417], 711–712 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 422], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

Brill, Hermann Louis, 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 269]

British Dominions, 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 99], 181–182 [Pgs. 181–182 include portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

Brown, Benjamin H., 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 311], 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

Browne, Mallory, 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 640]

Brownjohn, Maj. Gen. N. C. D., 7n [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2], 396n [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 888 [Pg. 888 is part of Doc. 529], 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635]

Bruce, Howard, 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 792–793 [Pgs. 792–793 include portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

Bruins, John H., 339–340 [Pgs. 339–340 include portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231]

Brussels Treaty (Pact) between the United Kingdom, France, Belgium, Netherlands, and Luxembourg regarding regional economic and political cooperation, Mar. 17, 105n [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 173], 271–272 [Pgs. 271–272 include portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 181], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 227], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 339], 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 560]; Brussels treaty powers, 1195 [Pg. 1195 is part of Doc. 669], 1241 [Pg. 1241 is part of Doc. 693]; Brussels Union, 1291 [Pg. 1291 is part of Doc. 719]; Consultative Council, 966 [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 580 and Doc. 581], 978n [Pg. 978 is part of Doc. 586], 1498n [Pg. 1498 is part of Doc. 842]; Military Committee, 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 560]: U.S. support for, 271–272 [Pgs. 271–272 include portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 181], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 339], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 353], 1301 [Pg. 1301 is part of Doc. 720]

Budd, Ralph, 792–793 [Pgs. 792–793 include portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

Bulgaria, 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 916n [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 922n [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 560]

Byrnes, James F.: Address at Stuttgart, Sept. 6, 1946, 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 239]; disarmament and demilitarization treaty for Germany, proposal regarding, 61–63 [Pgs. 61–63 include portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 64n [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 38], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 61], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 73], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 82], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 152], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 239], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 338], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 358], 562–564 [Pgs. 562–564 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, and Doc. 362], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 362], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 370], 1329n [Pg. 1329 is part of Doc. 721], 1335 [Pg. 1335 is part of Doc. 721], 1339 [Pg. 1339 is part of Doc. 722]

Cadogan, Sir Alexander, 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 1216 [Pg. 1216 includes portions of Doc. 678 and Doc. 679], 1238n [Pg. 1238 is part of Doc. 691], 1248 [Pg. 1248 includes portions of Doc. 694 and Doc. 695], 1250–1251 [Pgs. 1250–1251 include portions of Doc. 696 and Doc. 697], 1257 [Pg. 1257 is part of Doc. 702]

Caffery, Jefferson: Berlin blockade, 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 529 and Doc. 530], 916–917 [Pgs. 916–917 include portions of Doc. 555, Doc. 556, and Doc. 557], 928 [Pg. 928 includes portions of Doc. 561 and Doc. 562], 933 [Pg. 933 is part of Doc. 567], 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 939n [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 569], 946–948 [Pgs. 946–948 include portions of Doc. 572, Doc. 573, and Doc. 574], 956n [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 576 and Doc. 577], 969n [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 582], 973n [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 583], 997n [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 593], 1006 [Pg. 1006 includes portions of Doc. 594 and Doc. 595], 1011 [Pg. 1011 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 1017–1018 [Pgs. 1017–1018 include portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602], 1024 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 604], 1031n [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 1032n [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607], 1033n [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 607], 1038n [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610], 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611], 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 1047n [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613], 1049 [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614], 1053 [Pg. 1053 includes portions of Doc. 614 and Doc. 615], 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1068 [Pg. 1068 is part of Doc. 619], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 620 and Doc. 621], 1074n [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 1079 [Pg. 1079 is part of Doc. 625], 1083 [Pg. 1083 includes portions of Doc. 626 and Doc. 627], 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], 1088 [Pg. 1088 is part of Doc. 630], 1092 [Pg. 1092 includes portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 1099–1100 [Pgs. 1099–1100 include portions of Doc. 633, Doc. 634, and Doc. 635], 1103 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 635], 1104n [Pg. 1104 is part of Doc. 636], 1109 [Pg. 1109 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 1122 [Pg. 1122 includes portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642], 1126 [Pg. 1126 includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644], 1128n [Pg. 1128 is part of Doc. 644], 1129 [Pg. 1129 includes portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1131 [Pg. 1131 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646], 1144 [Pg. 1144 is part of Doc. 650], 1149 [Pg. 1149 is part of Doc. 652], 1160 [Pg. 1160 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1162 [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662], 1211 [Pg. 1211 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675], 1238 [Pg. 1238 is part of Doc. 691], 1263 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 704], 1278n [Pg. 1278 includes portions of Doc. 711 and Doc. 712], 1279 [Pg. 1279 is part of Doc. 713]; Bizonal German economic organizations, 20–21 [Pgs. 20–21 include portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9], 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]; disarmament and demilitarization treaty for Germany, 64n [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 38]; London Conference on Germany, 270n [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 295–296 [Pgs. 295–296 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 321–328 [Pgs. 321–328 include portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, and Doc. 224], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 335–337 [Pgs. 335–337 include portions of Doc. 226, Doc. 227, and Doc. 228], 434n [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]; political situation in France, 295–296 [Pgs. 295–296 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197]; reparations from Germany, 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462], 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 802n [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 475]; Ruhr question, 472n [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 496–497 [Pgs. 496–497 include portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 501–502 [Pgs. 501–502 include portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 334], 528n [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 542–543 [Pgs. 542–543 include portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, and Doc. 348], 547 [Pg. 547 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 359]; territorial arrangements concerning Germany, 169 [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]; Trizonal fusion proposals, 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]; U.S. policy toward France, 567–568 [Pgs. 567–568 include portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]; West German provisional government, 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 266n [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 269n [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 272–274 [Pgs. 272–274 include portions of Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, and Doc. 179], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 278–279 [Pgs. 278–279 include portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 187, Doc. 188, and Doc. 189], 284n [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 189], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

Canada, 181–183 [Pgs. 181–183 include portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 1195 [Pg. 1195 is part of Doc. 669], 1233 [Pg. 1233 includes portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688], 1275 [Pg. 1275 includes portions of Doc. 709 and Doc. 710]

Carbonnel, Eric de, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4], 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 55–56 [Pgs. 55–56 include portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

Carinthia, 1348–1349 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723]

Carter, Marshall S., 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 1265 [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 704]

Chamberlin, Lt. Gen. Stephen J., 879n [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 523 and Doc. 524], 887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529]

Chapman, Oscar L., 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 439]

Chaput de Saintonge, R. A., 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 415n [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 598n [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Chase, Warren M., 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239], 900–902 [Pgs. 900–902 include portions of Doc. 539, Doc. 540, and Doc. 541]

Chataigneau, Yves Jean Joseph, 995n [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 997n [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 593], 1001–1002 [Pg. 1001 is part of Doc. 594], 1005–1006 [Pgs. 1005–1006 include portions of Doc. 594 and Doc. 595], 1011 [Pg. 1011 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 1017 [Pg. 1017 is part of Doc. 601], 1024 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 604], 1031n [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 1035n [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 609], 1041 [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 611], 1042n [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 1064 [Pg. 1064 is part of Doc. 618], 1065n [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1086n [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 629], 1091 [Pg. 1091 is part of Doc. 631], 1093n [Pg. 1093 is part of Doc. 632], 1096–1097 [Pgs. 1096–1097 include portions of Doc. 632 and Doc. 633], 1104n [Pg. 1104 is part of Doc. 636], 1151 [Pg. 1151 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654], 1157n [Pg. 1157 is part of Doc. 657], 1160 [Pg. 1160 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1162n [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 1166n [Pg. 1166 is part of Doc. 660], 1167 [Pg. 1167 is part of Doc. 660], 1169 [Pg. 1169 is part of Doc. 660]

Chauvel, Jean, 20–21 [Pgs. 20–21 include portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 182], 331–335 [Pgs. 331–335 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 368 [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248], 948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 573 and Doc. 574], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662]

Cherrière, Maj. Gen. Paul, 1463n [Pg. 1463 includes portions of Doc. 813 and Doc. 814], 1464–1467 [Pgs. 1464–1467 include portions of Doc. 814, Doc. 815, and Doc. 816], 1496 [Pg. 1496 is part of Doc. 840]

Cheseldine, Raymond L., 790n [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468]

Chile, 1275 [Pg. 1275 includes portions of Doc. 709 and Doc. 710]

China, 724–725 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 428], 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513], 1233 [Pg. 1233 includes portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688]

Churchill, Winston, 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 486], 895–896 [Pgs. 895–896 include portions of Doc. 535, Doc. 536, and Doc. 537], 942 [Pg. 942 is part of Doc. 571], 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 575]

Clappier, Bernard, 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661]

Clasen, André, 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 73], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 94], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 125], 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]

Clay, Gen. Lucius D.: Allied Control Council for Germany, 368n [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248], 868n [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 517]; Austria, 1415 [Pg. 1415 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773]; Benelux, consultation with, 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 140]; Berlin blockade, 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 123], 194–195 [Pgs. 194–195 include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127], 886–892 [Pgs. 886–892 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, and Doc. 533], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535], 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 538 and Doc. 539], 910–912 [Pgs. 910–912 include portions of Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, and Doc. 552], 916–918 [Pgs. 916–918 include portions of Doc. 555, Doc. 556, Doc. 557, and Doc. 558], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 559], 923–924 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 560], 926–929 [Pgs. 926–929 include portions of Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, and Doc. 563], 932 [Pg. 932 is part of Doc. 566], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 569], 946 [Pg. 946 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573], 950 [Pg. 950 includes portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575], 956–958 [Pgs. 956–958 include portions of Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578], 965n [Pg. 965 is part of Doc. 580], 970 [Pg. 970 is part of Doc. 582], 977n [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 586], 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 589], 995n [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 1006–1179 [Pgs. 1006–1179 include portions of Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662] passim, 1213–1278 [Pgs. 1213–1278 include portions of Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, Doc. 683, Doc. 684, Doc. 685, Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, and Doc. 712], passim; Bizonal German economic organizations, revision, 1–12 [Pgs. 1–12 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, and Doc. 5], 14–16 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5], 19–20 [Pgs. 19–20 include portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8], 22–23 [Pgs. 22–23 include portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11], 26n [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 27–28 [Pgs. 27–28 include portions of Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15], 35–36 [Pgs. 35–36 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 46–49 [Pgs. 46–49 include portions of Doc. 26, Doc. 27, Doc. 28, and Doc. 29], 51–52 [Pgs. 51–52 include portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 53n [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 31], 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 105], 294–295 [Pgs. 294–295 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196]; Bizonal government, 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]; Bizonia, 17–19 [Pgs. 17–19 include portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 163], 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]; boundaries of Western Germany, 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 414]; currency for West Berlin, 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533], 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 542], 913–914 [Pgs. 913–914 include portions of Doc. 552 and Doc. 553]; currency reform for Germany, 870n [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519], 871–875 [Pgs. 871–875 include portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521], 880–882 [Pgs. 880–882 include portions of Doc. 524 and Doc. 525]; currency reform for the Soviet Zone, 913–914 [Pgs. 913–914 include portions of Doc. 552 and Doc. 553]; currency reform for West Germany, 904–905 [Pgs. 904–905 include portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545], 907–910 [Pgs. 907–910 include portions of Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549], 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 557 and Doc. 558]; demilitarization of Germany, 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 522]; directive regarding foreign interests, 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 416]; ECA Act of 1948, adherence of British-U.S. zones, 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514]; industries in West Germany, prohibited and restricted, 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 832–834 [Pgs. 832–834 include portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 500], 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 505 and Doc. 506], 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510]; Joint Export-Import Agency, 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 496]; London Conference on Germany, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 44–45 [Pgs. 44–45 include portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 147–148 [Pgs. 147–148 include portions of Doc. 97, Doc. 98, and Doc. 99], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 164–165 [Pgs. 164–165 include portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 188–190 [Pgs. 188–190 include portions of Doc. 122, Doc. 123, and Doc. 124], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125], 194–196 [Pgs. 194–196 include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, and Doc. 128], 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 145], 302–303 [Pgs. 302–303 include portions of Doc. 201, Doc. 202, and Doc. 203], 329–330 [Pgs. 329–330 include portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 366–367 [Pgs. 366–367 include portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246]; Military Governors Conference in Berlin, 148–149 [Pgs. 148–149 include portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 156–157 [Pgs. 156–157 include portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 108], 169–170 [Pgs. 169–170 include portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114], 175–176 [Pgs. 175–176 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 179–183 [Pgs. 179–183 include portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]; Military Security Board, 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 73], 666–668 [Pgs. 666–668 include portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403]; occupation statute for West Germany, 597–600 [Pgs. 597–600 include portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, and Doc. 375], 606–607 [Pgs. 606–607 include portions of Doc. 375, Doc. 376, and Doc. 377], 607n [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 378], 614–615 [Pgs. 614–615 include portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380], 624n [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 625–626 [Pgs. 625–626 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, and Doc. 383], 627n [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385], 629n [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 385], 630–636 [Pgs. 630–636 include portions of Doc. 385, Doc. 386, and Doc. 387], 640–641 [Pgs. 640–641 include portions of Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 391], 645–646 [Pgs. 645–646 include portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 650n [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 651–654 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 394], 663–664 [Pgs. 663–664 include portions of Doc. 395, Doc. 396, and Doc. 397], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401] reparations from Germany, 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 128], 199–200 [Pgs. 199–200 include portions of Doc. 129, Doc. 130, and Doc. 131], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 137], 214–215 [Pgs. 214–215 include portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 144], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 147], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 375], 706–709 [Pgs. 706–709 include portions of Doc. 418, Doc. 419, and Doc. 420], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 422], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 422], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 425], 726–727 [Pgs. 726–727 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 439], 742–743 [Pgs. 742–743 include portions of Doc. 440, Doc. 441, and Doc. 442], 745–746 [Pgs. 745–746 include portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445], 748–749 [Pgs. 748–749 include portions of Doc. 445, Doc. 446, and Doc. 447], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc. 449], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 451], 756–766 [Pgs. 756–766 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460], 768–770 [Pgs. 768–770 include portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, and Doc. 464], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 465], 798–802 [Pgs. 798–802 include portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 477], 813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 482], 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488], 831–832 [Pgs. 831–832 include portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496]; restitution deliveries to Soviet Union and Soviet satellites, 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 137], 745–746 [Pgs. 745–746 include portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 470]; Ruhr question, 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 131], 205–206 [Pgs. 205–206 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 235–237 [Pgs. 235–237 include portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 449–455 [Pgs. 449–455 include portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 457–461 [Pgs. 457–461 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, and Doc. 305], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 309], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 315], 481n [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 315], 494–498 [Pgs. 494–498 include portions of Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, and Doc. 321], 500n [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 502–503 [Pgs. 502–503 include portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327], 504n [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 327], 508–509 [Pgs. 508–509 include portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, and Doc. 331], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 517n [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334], 519–520 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 334], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 335], 524n [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 525–528 [Pgs. 525–528 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 341], 540–541 [Pgs. 540–541 include portions of Doc. 344, Doc. 345, and Doc. 346], 546–547 [Pgs. 546–547 include portions of Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 551–553 [Pgs. 551–553 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 556–557 [Pgs. 556–557 include portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 568–569 [Pgs. 568–569 include portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365], 572–573 [Pgs. 572–573 include portions of Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc. 367], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 667n [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]; Saar question, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16], 55–59 [Pgs. 55–59 include portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36]; Soviet Union, concern regarding threat of (see also Berlin blockade, supra), 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 104], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 106], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 523 and Doc. 524] n; trizonal fusion proposals, 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 102], 157–158 [Pgs. 157–158 include portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 210–217 [Pgs. 210–217 include portions of Doc. 135, Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, Doc. 139, and Doc. 140], 242–244 [Pgs. 242–244 include portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158], 670–671 [Pgs. 670–671 include portions of Doc. 404, Doc. 405, and Doc. 406], 674–676 [Pgs. 674–676 include portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, and Doc. 412]; U.S. policy toward Gemany, 1320n [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 721], 1324 [Pg. 1324 is part of Doc. 721]; West German constitution and provisional government, preparation of, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 104], 158–160 [Pgs. 158–160 include portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107], 169–170 [Pgs. 169–170 include portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114], 175–176 [Pgs. 175–176 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 179–180 [Pgs. 179–180 include portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, and Doc. 119], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 145], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 154], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 171], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 173], 272–273 [Pgs. 272–273 include portions of Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, and Doc. 178], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 394–442 [Pgs. 394–442 include portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294] n passim

Coates, Sir Eric, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120], 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635]

Collins, Gen. Joseph Lawton, 887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529]

Collisson, Capt. Norman H., 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 439], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466], 790n [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 471], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486]

Colombia, 1233 [Pg. 1233 includes portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688], 1275 [Pg. 1275 includes portions of Doc. 709 and Doc. 710]

Combined Chiefs of Staff (U.S.-U.K.), 806 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 477], 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480], 923–924 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 560], 995n [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592]

Combined Travel Board, 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 291]

Cominform, 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 1348–1349 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723], 1495 [Pg. 1495 is part of Doc. 840]

Commander in Chief, European Command (CINCEUR), 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 25], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 267], 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 315], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc. 449]

Conference of Berlin (Potsdam Conference), July 12–Aug. 2, 1945, 6n [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 236], 349–350 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 236], 708n [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 486], 961–962 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 579], 1201 [Pg. 1201 includes portions of Doc. 672 and Doc. 673], 1305 [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 720], 1316–1317 [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 720], 1326 [Pg. 1326 is part of Doc. 721], 1519 [Pg. 1519 is part of Doc. 857]

Conference on European Economic Cooperation, Paris, Mar. 15–Apr. 16, 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514]

Conference on the Danube, Belgrade, 1348 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723], 1429 [Pg. 1429 includes portions of Doc. 786 and Doc. 787]

Congress (U.S.): Austrian Peace Treaty, 1494–1495 [Pgs. 1494–1495 include portions of Doc. 838, Doc. 839, and Doc. 840]; Bizonia, appropriation for, 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 421], 1338 [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722]; economic aid for Austria, 1500 [Pg. 1500 includes portions of Doc. 843 and Doc. 844]; Economic Cooperation Administration, 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 445], 1338 [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722]; European Recovery Program, 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 76], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 213], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239], 703–704 [Pgs. 703–704 include portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 420], 712–713 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 422], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 438], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 465], 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]; German assets in Austria, 1452 [Pg. 1452 is part of Doc. 804]; Germany, policy toward, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 25], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 163], 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 321], 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 1293 [Pg. 1293 is part of Doc. 719], 1311 [Pg. 1311 is part of Doc. 720]; London Conference on Germany, 756–757 [Pgs. 756–757 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453]; military foreign aid, 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 739 and Doc. 740]; reparations from Germany, 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 703–705 [Pgs. 703–705 include portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418], 708–709 [Pgs. 708–709 include portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 711–712 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 422], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 422], 717–721 [Pgs. 717–721 include portions of Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427], 727–731 [Pgs. 727–731 include portions of Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 438], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439], 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466], 792–793 [Pgs. 792–793 include portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 809–811 [Pgs. 809–811 include portions of Doc. 479, Doc. 480, and Doc. 481], 815 [Pg. 815 is part of Doc. 483], 817–821 [Pgs. 817–821 include portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 491], 1452 [Pg. 1452 is part of Doc. 804]; Vandenberg resolution, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 175]; Western Union, question of arms for, 1375 [Pg. 1375 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745]

Conklin, William G., 23–24 [Pgs. 23–24 include portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

Council of European Economic Cooperation (CEEC), 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 48], 112–113 [Pgs. 112–113 include portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 76], 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 77], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 94], 169–170 [Pgs. 169–170 include portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 131], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 190], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 466], 859 [Pg. 859 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 1384 [Pg. 1384 includes portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753], 1390 [Pg. 1390 includes portions of Doc. 757 and Doc. 758], 1492 [Pg. 1492 includes portions of Doc. 837 and Doc. 838]

Council of Foreign Ministers (see also under Austrian Peace Treaty and under Berlin blockade): Breakdown of, 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 720], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 720], 1314 [Pg. 1314 is part of Doc. 720]

Denazification directive, 1302 [Pg. 1302 is part of Doc. 720]

Establishment by Potsdam Declaration, 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 69], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 236], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 236], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 236]

German peace settlement, CFM responsibility for, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 94], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 236], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 236], 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 241], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 250], 1289 [Pg. 1289 is part of Doc. 719], 1297 [Pg. 1297 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720]; Benelux desire to participate in any sessions on, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 76], 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 95]

Multilateral questions, responsibility for, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 175]

Secretariat, 1506 [Pg. 1506 is part of Doc. 851]

Secretary General, 1509 [Pg. 1509 includes portions of Doc. 854 and Doc. 855]

Sessions: Paris, 1946, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37], 105n [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70], 1301n [Pg. 1301 is part of Doc. 720], 1329n [Pg. 1329 is part of Doc. 721]; Moscow, Mar. 10–Apr. 24, 1947, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 46], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 49], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 72], 348–350 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 236], 359–360 [Pgs. 359–360 include portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 504n [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 327], 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 339], 734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 436], 869 [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 518], 871–872 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 519], 1299n [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 720], 1304–1306 [Pg. 1304 is part of Doc. 720], 1316 [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 720], 1457 [Pg. 1457 includes portions of Doc. 808 and Doc. 809], 1506n [Pg. 1506 is part of Doc. 851], 1518n [Pg. 1518 is part of Doc. 857]; London, Nov. 25–Dec. 12, 1947, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 32n [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37], 67–68 [Pgs. 67–68 include portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 49], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 348–350 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 236], 359–360 [Pgs. 359–360 include portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 331], 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 499], 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 517], 878 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 523], 881 [Pg. 881 is part of Doc. 524], 919 [Pg. 919 includes portions of Doc. 558 and Doc. 559], 925 [Pg. 925 is part of Doc. 560], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 576], 1245 [Pg. 1245 is part of Doc. 693], 1268 [Pg. 1268 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1299n [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 720], 1305 [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 720], 1316 [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 720], 1350 [Pg. 1350 is part of Doc. 723], 1431 [Pg. 1431 is part of Doc. 787], 1457 [Pg. 1457 includes portions of Doc. 808 and Doc. 809], 1506n [Pg. 1506 is part of Doc. 851], 1518n [Pg. 1518 is part of Doc. 857]

Tripartite (U.S.–U.K.–Franee) meeting, Bevin opposition to, 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Unity of Germany, failure to implement, 1308 [Pg. 1308 is part of Doc. 720], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 720]

Veto, Soviet abuse of, 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]

Council of Foreign Ministers’ Deputies: Deputies for Austria. see under Austrian Peace Treaty.

Deputies for Germany, 247n [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 159], 259n [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 169], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 316], 1007 [Pg. 1007 is part of Doc. 595], 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 602], 1325–1326 [Pg. 1325 is part of Doc. 721]

Couve de Murville, Maurice, 27–28 [Pgs. 27–28 include portions of Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15], 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 131n [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 169–170 [Pgs. 169–170 include portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 179–180 [Pgs. 179–180 include portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, and Doc. 119], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 125], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 224–225 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 145], 294–295 [Pgs. 294–295 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662], 1184 [Pg. 1184 includes portions of Doc. 664 and Doc. 665]

Cuba, 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

Cullis, M. F., 1463n [Pg. 1463 includes portions of Doc. 813 and Doc. 814], 1466 [Pg. 1466 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815], 1508 [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, and Doc. 854]

Czechoslovakia (see also under London Conference on Germany): Austria, relations with, 1348 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723], 1408 [Pg. 1408 includes portions of Doc. 766 and Doc. 767]; Communist takeover, impact of, 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67], 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc. 449], 1007 [Pg. 1007 is part of Doc. 595], 1303 [Pg. 1303 is part of Doc. 720], 1349 [Pg. 1349 is part of Doc. 723], 1382–1387 [Pgs. 1382–1387 include portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, Doc. 752, Doc. 753, Doc. 754, and Doc. 755], 1414 [Pg. 1414 is part of Doc. 772], 1469–1470 [Pgs. 1469–1470 include portions of Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819], 1477 [Pg. 1477 is part of Doc. 825]; German displaced persons, 1303 [Pg. 1303 is part of Doc. 720]; Inter-Allied Reparations Agency, allocations to, 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 428], 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526]; Praha Foreign Ministers Conference, 339–340 [Pgs. 339–340 include portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231]; reparations from Germany (see also Reparations: Soviet Satellites), 212–213 [Pgs. 212–213 include portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 144], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 745n [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 746n [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 751–753 [Pgs. 751–753 include portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, and Doc. 450], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 758–760 [Pgs. 758–760 include portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, and Doc. 455]; Warsaw Foreign Ministers Conference, 916n [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 922n [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 560]

Dahrendorf, Gustav, 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 14–16 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 5]

Daspit, Alexander B., 715n [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 422], 830n [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493]

Davies, John Paton, Jr., 1194 [Pg. 1194 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669]

Dean, Patrick, 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 47], 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 83], 187n [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125], 987 [Pg. 987 is part of Doc. 589], 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662], 1179 [Pg. 1179 is part of Doc. 662], 1238n [Pg. 1238 is part of Doc. 691], 1427 [Pg. 1427 includes portions of Doc. 784 and Doc. 785], 1451 [Pg. 1451 includes portions of Doc. 803 and Doc. 804], 1454 [Pg. 1454 includes portions of Doc. 805 and Doc. 806]

de Bourbon-Busset. see Bourbon-Busset.

de Carbonnel. see Carbonnel.

Decontrol Act, Second (U.S.), 1397 [Pg. 1397 is part of Doc. 761]

De Gasperi, Alcide, 1408 [Pg. 1408 includes portions of Doc. 766 and Doc. 767]

de Gaulle, Maj. Gen. Charles, 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 227], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 493n [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 318], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 353], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 560]

de Gruben. see Gruben.

de Guirangaud. see Guirangaud.

de Merode. see Merode.

de Murville. see Couve de Murville.

Denmark, 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 123], 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 1303 [Pg. 1303 is part of Doc. 720]

de Noblet. see Noblet d’Anglure.

de Panafieu. see Panafieu.

Department of Agriculture, 732n [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 434], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 466]

Department of the Army: Arms for Austrian military and police forces, 1358–1360 [Pgs. 1358–1360 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733], 1362–1363 [Pgs. 1362–1363 include portions of Doc. 734, Doc. 735, and Doc. 736], 1367 [Pg. 1367 includes portions of Doc. 738 and Doc. 739], 1372 [Pg. 1372 includes portions of Doc. 741 and Doc. 742], 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 1396 [Pg. 1396 includes portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1409 [Pg. 1409 includes portions of Doc. 767 and Doc. 768], 1415n [Pg. 1415 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1444 [Pg. 1444 includes portions of Doc. 797 and Doc. 798], 1446 [Pg. 1446 is part of Doc. 799]; Austrian Peace Treaty, 1470 [Pg. 1470 includes portions of Doc. 818 and Doc. 819], 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 820 and Doc. 821]; Berlin blockade, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 104], 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 529 and Doc. 530], 911 [Pg. 911 includes portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551], 916–917 [Pgs. 916–917 include portions of Doc. 555, Doc. 556, and Doc. 557], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 559], 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 560], 926–927 [Pgs. 926–927 include portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 571 and Doc. 572], 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 576 and Doc. 577], 1011 [Pg. 1011 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 1015 [Pg. 1015 is part of Doc. 600], 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635], 1109 [Pg. 1109 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 1117 [Pg. 1117 is part of Doc. 640], 1122 [Pg. 1122 includes portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642], 1214n [Pg. 1214 includes portions of Doc. 677 and Doc. 678], 1260n [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703], 1268n [Pg. 1268 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1276 [Pg. 1276 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], 1279 [Pg. 1279 is part of Doc. 713]; Bizonal German economic organizations, revision, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]; currency control in Germany, 880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 524]; currency reform in West Germany and Berlin, 897–899 [Pgs. 897–899 include portions of Doc. 537, Doc. 538, and Doc. 539], 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 542], 904n [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543], 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 908 [Pg. 908 includes portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547]; industries in West Germany, prohibited and restricted, question of controls over, 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 505 and Doc. 506], 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510]; level of industry in Germany, 836n [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 499]; London Conference on Germany, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 25], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 147n [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 123], 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 303–304 [Pgs. 303–304 include portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 401–402 [Pgs. 401–402 include portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]; Military Government and occupation of Germany, responsibility for, 1299 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 720], 1311 [Pg. 1311 is part of Doc. 720], 1318 [Pg. 1318 is part of Doc. 720]; Military Security Board, 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]; occupation statute for West Germany, 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 600–608 [Pgs. 600–608 include portions of Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378], 614n [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 379], 625–627 [Pgs. 625–627 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 636–637 [Pgs. 636–637 include portions of Doc. 386, Doc. 387, and Doc. 388], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]; political and economic organization of West Germany, 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 271], 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]; reparations from Germany, 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 137], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 144], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 703–706 [Pgs. 703–706 include portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 732–733 [Pgs. 732–733 include portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 439], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 743–745 [Pgs. 743–745 include portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, and Doc. 444], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 751–752 [Pgs. 751–752 include portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, and Doc. 450], 757–760 [Pgs. 757–760 include portions of Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, and Doc. 455], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 769–770 [Pgs. 769–770 include portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, and Doc. 464], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 788–790 [Pgs. 788–790 include portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 475], 845n [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 502 and Doc. 503]; restitution policy, 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 470]; Ruhr question, 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 236–237 [Pgs. 236–237 include portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 251–253 [Pgs. 251–253 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 461–464 [Pgs. 461–464 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 309], 479–480 [Pgs. 479–480 include portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 481n [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 315], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 497n [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 320], 497–498 [Pgs. 497–498 include portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 508–509 [Pgs. 508–509 include portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, and Doc. 331], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 335], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 535–536 [Pgs. 535–536 include portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 356], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366]; Saar question, 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16]; transfer of civilian responsibilities to Department of State, proposed, 597n [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 1285–1286 [Pg. 1285 is part of Doc. 717]; Trizonal fusion proposals, 671–672 [Pgs. 671–672 include portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]; U.S. policy toward Germany, 1324 [Pg. 1324 is part of Doc. 721]

Department of Commerce, 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 425], 732n [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 434], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 439], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 466], 1398 [Pg. 1398 includes portions of Doc. 761 and Doc. 762]

Department of the Interior, 732n [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 434], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 466]

Department of State, postponement of assumption of civilian responsibilities in occupied Germany from Department of Army, 597n [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 1285–1286 [Pg. 1285 is part of Doc. 717], 1318 [Pg. 1318 is part of Doc. 720]

Department of the Treasury, 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 904n [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543], 908 [Pg. 908 includes portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547]

Deutsch, Gen. Julius, 1365–1366 [Pgs. 1365–1366 include portions of Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738], 1369–1371 [Pgs. 1369–1371 include portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741], 1373 [Pg. 1373 is part of Doc. 743], 1375 [Pg. 1375 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 1402 [Pg. 1402 is part of Doc. 765], 1470 [Pg. 1470 includes portions of Doc. 818 and Doc. 819]

de Vooys. see Vooys.

deWilde, John C., 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 47], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125], 1463n [Pg. 1463 includes portions of Doc. 813 and Doc. 814]

Diedrichs, Georg, 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284]

Displaced Persons Act of 1948, 1304 [Pg. 1304 is part of Doc. 720]

Dorr, Russell H., 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 222–223 [Pgs. 222–223 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 147], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 752–753 [Pgs. 752–753 include portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 759n [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]

Douglas, Lewis W.: Austrian Peace Treaty, 1506 [Pg. 1506 is part of Doc. 851]; Berlin blockade, 889–993 [Pgs. 889–993 include portions of Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, Doc. 555, Doc. 556, Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, and Doc. 590] passim, 1006–1145 [Pgs. 1006–1145 include portions of Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, and Doc. 651] passim, 1160 [Pg. 1160 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1162 [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 1172–1173 [Pgs. 1172–1173 include portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1175 [Pg. 1175 is part of Doc. 661], 1177–1179 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662], 1193–1194 [Pgs. 1193–1194 include portions of Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669], 1228 [Pg. 1228 includes portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685], 1234–1237 [Pgs. 1234–1237 include portions of Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690], 1248n [Pg. 1248 includes portions of Doc. 694 and Doc. 695], 1251 [Pg. 1251 includes portions of Doc. 696 and Doc. 697], 1255 [Pg. 1255 includes portions of Doc. 700 and Doc. 701], 1278–1279 [Pgs. 1278–1279 include portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713], 1281 [Pg. 1281 includes portions of Doc. 714 and Doc. 715]; Bizonal German economic organizations, revision, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]; Bizonal German government, 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]; industries in Germany, prohibited and restricted, 848–849 [Pgs. 848–849 include portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507]; level of industry in Germany, 836n [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 499], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500]; London Conference on Germany, 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 68n [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 75–84 [Pgs. 75–84 include portions of Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, and Doc. 53], 86–89 [Pgs. 86–89 include portions of Doc. 54, Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57], 91–95 [Pgs. 91–95 include portions of Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, and Doc. 63], 97–100 [Pgs. 97–100 include portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 103n [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 69], 104–141 [Pgs. 104–141 include portions of Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94] passim, 158–335 [Pgs. 158–335 include portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123, Doc. 124, Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, and Doc. 227] passim, 364–368 [Pgs. 364–368 include portions of Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]; London Conference on the Ruhr, 464–577 [Pgs. 464–577 include portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, Doc. 340, Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370] passim; Military Security Board, 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]; occupation statute for West Germany, 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]; reparations from Germany, 81–82 [Pgs. 81–82 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 89–90 [Pgs. 89–90 include portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 74], 118–122 [Pgs. 118–122 include portions of Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82], 128–130 [Pgs. 128–130 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86], 139–140 [Pgs. 139–140 include portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 730–776 [Pgs. 730–776 include portions of Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, and Doc. 465] passim, 796–851 [Pgs. 796–851 include portions of Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509] passim; Ruhr question, 124–128 [Pgs. 124–128 include portions of Doc. 83, Doc. 84, and Doc. 85], 130–131 [Pgs. 130–131 include portions of Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 136n [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 90], 140–141 [Pgs. 140–141 include portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94], 197–198 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 129], 205–206 [Pgs. 205–206 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 251–255 [Pgs. 251–255 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 285n [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190], 290n [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 333–334 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 226], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 267], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307]; security against Germany, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 48], 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 56], 94–95 [Pgs. 94–95 include portions of Doc. 61, Doc. 62, and Doc. 63], 104–107 [Pgs. 104–107 include portions of Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 110–111 [Pgs. 110–111 include portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 76], 138–139 [Pgs. 138–139 include portions of Doc. 90, Doc. 91, and Doc. 92], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 522n [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 334]; Trizonal fusion proposals, 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 150n [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 216–218 [Pgs. 216–218 include portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 242–244 [Pgs. 242–244 include portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158]; West German provisional government, 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 154], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 263–264 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 171], 268–269 [Pgs. 268–269 include portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 271–272 [Pgs. 271–272 include portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 200], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]; West German role in European economy, 226–227 [Pgs. 226–227 include portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]; West Germany, currency reform in, 904–905 [Pgs. 904–905 include portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545]; West Germany, nondiscrimination against Allied interests in, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 146]; West Germany, territorial arrangements for, 169 [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

Draper, William H.: Berlin blockade, 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 559], 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 1031 [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 1109 [Pg. 1109 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 1122 [Pg. 1122 includes portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642], 1132 [Pg. 1132 is part of Doc. 647], 1135n [Pg. 1135 is part of Doc. 648], 1148 [Pg. 1148 is part of Doc. 652], 1213 [Pg. 1213 includes portions of Doc. 676 and Doc. 677], 1265 [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 704]; Bizonal German economic organizations, revision, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]; currency reform in Germany, 881–882 [Pgs. 881–882 include portions of Doc. 524 and Doc. 525]; currency reform in West Germany, 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 546]; level of industry in Germany, 836n [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 499], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500]; London Conference on Germany, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 25], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 224]; occupation statute for West Germany, 597–598 [Pgs. 597–598 include portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 379]; reparations from Germany, 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc. 449], 756–757 [Pgs. 756–757 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 465], 794n [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 470], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472]; Ruhr question, 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 321], 503–504 [Pgs. 503–504 include portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 341], 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 547 [Pg. 547 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]; Saar question, 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]; Trizonal fusion proposals, 674–675 [Pgs. 674–675 include portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]; West German constitution and provisional government, preparation of, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 416n [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, and Doc. 278], 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 432n [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Dratvin, Lt. Gen. Mikhail Ivanovich, 886n [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529], 1111n [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 639]

Dulles, John Foster, 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 583], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1194 [Pg. 1194 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1248 [Pg. 1248 includes portions of Doc. 694 and Doc. 695], 1257–1260 [Pgs. 1257–1260 include portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703], 1262–1266 [Pgs. 1262–1266 include portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705]

Dunn, James C., 1355–1356 [Pgs. 1355–1356 include portions of Doc. 727, Doc. 728, and Doc. 729]

East Germany (see also Soviet zone of occupation under Germany): Association for Peasants’ Mutual Aid (VDGB), 66–67 [Pgs. 66–67 include portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]; commodities from 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425]; Communist Party, 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 239]; Free German Trade Union League (FDGB), 66–67 [Pgs. 66–67 include portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 1039 [Pg. 1039 is part of Doc. 610]; Independent Social Democrat Party (USPD), 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]; Kulturbund, 875–876 [Pgs. 875–876 include portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, and Doc. 522]; Laender, role and functions of, 67–68 [Pgs. 67–68 include portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]; People’s Congress Movement, 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 875–876 [Pgs. 875–876 include portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, and Doc. 522], 882–883 [Pgs. 882–883 include portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526], 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 1021 [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 1313 [Pg. 1313 is part of Doc. 720], 1315 [Pg. 1315 is part of Doc. 720]; political situation, 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 295]; Socialist Party, 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 239]; Socialist Unity Party (SED), 67–68 [Pgs. 67–68 include portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 239], 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 560], 1039–1040 [Pgs. 1039–1040 include portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611], 1092n [Pg. 1092 includes portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 1137 [Pg. 1137 is part of Doc. 648], 1221–1223 [Pgs. 1221–1223 include portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1261 [Pg. 1261 is part of Doc. 703], 1269 [Pg. 1269 is part of Doc. 706], 1271–1272 [Pgs. 1271–1272 include portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708], 1313 [Pg. 1313 is part of Doc. 720]; Soviet conduct, 422n [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 282]

East Prussia, 1316 [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 720]

Eaton, Charles A., 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 420], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 486]

Economic Commission for Europe (ECE), 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 32], 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 1311 [Pg. 1311 is part of Doc. 720]

Economic Cooperation Act (see also Foreign Assistance Act), 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 334], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 339], 790–791 [Pgs. 790–791 include portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 797–798 [Pgs. 797–798 include portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 479], 813–814 [Pgs. 813–814 include portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483], 817 [Pg. 817 is part of Doc. 485], 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514], 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 720]

Economic Cooperation Administration (ECA) (see also European Recovery Program and under Austria, Congress and Reparations): Administrator, 235–236 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 153], 243–244 [Pgs. 243–244 include portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 163], 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 785–786 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 466], 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 467], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 468], 1390 [Pg. 1390 includes portions of Doc. 757 and Doc. 758], 1393–1394 [Pgs. 1393–1394 include portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759]; agreements between the U.S., British, and French zones of occupation and ECA, 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 315], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 372], 865–866 [Pgs. 865–866 include portions of Doc. 513, Doc. 514, and Doc. 515]; allocations, 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 282]; economic aid, 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]; French zone relationship to Bizonia, 243–244 [Pgs. 243–244 include portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 406], 674n [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]; funds for, 1310–1311 [Pg. 1310 is part of Doc. 720]; industries in Germany, prohibited and restricted, control of, 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 505 and Doc. 506]; International Authority for the Ruhr, ECA relationship to, 235–236 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 153], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 309], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 508–509 [Pgs. 508–509 include portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, and Doc. 331], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 535 [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]

Edelstein, Comdr. Julius C. C., 722n [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 428], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 746–748 [Pgs. 746–748 include portions of Doc. 444, Doc. 445, and Doc. 446], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 466 and Doc. 467]

Eden, Anthony, 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568]

Egypt, 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419]

Ehard, Hans, 11–14 [Pgs. 11–14 include portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 5], 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 256], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 402–403 [Pgs. 402–403 include portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 270], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 287], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 295], 831n [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494]

Ehlert, Margarete, 1221 [Pg. 1221 is part of Doc. 682]

Eichler, Willy, 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]

Elbrick, C. Burke, 368 [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248]

Erhardt, John G.: Austria, 1358–1466 [Pgs. 1358–1466 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, Doc. 734, Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, Doc. 748, Doc. 749, Doc. 750, Doc. 751, Doc. 752, Doc. 753, Doc. 754, Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, Doc. 766, Doc. 767, Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, Doc. 772, Doc. 773, Doc. 774, Doc. 775, Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, Doc. 788, Doc. 789, Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, and Doc. 815] passim; Austrian Peace Treaty, 1447–1508 [Pgs. 1447–1508 include portions of Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, and Doc. 854] passim

Esthonia, 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

Ethiopia, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]

European Advisory Commission (EAC), 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 386], 885n [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 527], 1341 [Pg. 1341 is part of Doc. 723], 1416 [Pg. 1416 is part of Doc. 773], 1418–1420 [Pgs. 1418–1420 include portions of Doc. 775, Doc. 776, and Doc. 777], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 788]

European Command, U.S. Army (EU COM), 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 1318 [Pg. 1318 is part of Doc. 720], 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 745 and Doc. 746]

European Recovery Program (ERP) (Marshall Plan) (see also Economic Cooperation Administration and under Austria, Bizonia and Congress): Administrator, 1388–1389 [Pgs. 1388–1389 include portions of Doc. 755, Doc. 756, and Doc. 757]; Berlin situation, effect of, 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 582]; Congressional conditions, possibility of, 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]; continuation, threat to, 817 [Pg. 817 is part of Doc. 485]; countries participating, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 370], 742–743 [Pgs. 742–743 include portions of Doc. 440, Doc. 441, and Doc. 442], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 447], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 470], 806 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 477], 1397–1398 [Pgs. 1397–1398 include portions of Doc. 761 and Doc. 762], 1402 [Pg. 1402 is part of Doc. 765]; France, aid to, 70n [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]; French zone of occupation in Germany, relationship to, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 15], 87–89 [Pgs. 87–89 include portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57], 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 112–113 [Pgs. 112–113 include portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 115n [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 76], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 77], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 94], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 107], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 140], 243–244 [Pgs. 243–244 include portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 210], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350], 671–672 [Pgs. 671–672 include portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 674n [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 1388 [Pg. 1388 includes portions of Doc. 755 and Doc. 756]; Italian participation, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 236], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]; operation, 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 353]; period of operation, 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 434], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 468], 1461 [Pg. 1461 is part of Doc. 811]; Polish attitude, 355–356 [Pgs. 355–356 include portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239], 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 250]; reparations from Germany, problem of, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 74], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 139–140 [Pgs. 139–140 include portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 165], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 421], 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 451], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 455], 767 [Pg. 767 is part of Doc. 460], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 464], 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 466], 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 466], 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 823–824 [Pgs. 823–824 include portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488], 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491], 829–830 [Pgs. 829–830 include portions of Doc. 491, Doc. 492, and Doc. 493]; Ruhr question, 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]; Soviet attitude, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 94], 351–353 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 236], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 250], 1202 [Pg. 1202 is part of Doc. 673], 1314–1315 [Pg. 1314 is part of Doc. 720], 1393–1394 [Pgs. 1393–1394 include portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759], 1396 [Pg. 1396 includes portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1409 [Pg. 1409 includes portions of Doc. 767 and Doc. 768]; Soviet zone of occupation in Germany, relationship to, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 94]; Trizonal fusion, question of, 112–113 [Pgs. 112–113 include portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 107], 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]; United Kingdom, economic assistance to, 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]; U.S. objectives and requirements, 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 61], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 173], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 175], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 182], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 339], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 422], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 439], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 749–750 [Pgs. 749–750 include portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 783–785 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 466], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 466], 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 479], 815 [Pg. 815 is part of Doc. 483], 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 500], 1294 [Pg. 1294 is part of Doc. 719], 1297 [Pg. 1297 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720]; West German relationship to, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 5], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 29], 58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 42], 78–82 [Pgs. 78–82 include portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 87–89 [Pgs. 87–89 include portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57], 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 72], 115–117 [Pgs. 115–117 include portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 142–143 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 94], 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 169–170 [Pgs. 169–170 include portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 131], 250–251 [Pgs. 250–251 include portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 275–276 [Pgs. 275–276 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, and Doc. 181], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 236], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 270], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 309], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 339], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 370], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 375], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 426], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500], 865–866 [Pgs. 865–866 include portions of Doc. 513, Doc. 514, and Doc. 515], 1292–1319 [Pgs. 1292–1319 include portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720] passim

Evatt, Herbert V., 1250–1253 [Pgs. 1250–1253 include portions of Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, and Doc. 699]

Export-Import Bank of Washington, 1387–1388 [Pgs. 1387–1388 include portions of Doc. 754, Doc. 755, and Doc. 756], 1395 [Pg. 1395 is part of Doc. 760], 1397–1401 [Pgs. 1397–1401 include portions of Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, and Doc. 765]

Falck, Edward, 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466]

Far Eastern Commission (FEC), 724–725 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 428]

Feller, Abraham H., 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694]

Fierlinger, Zdenek, 1382 [Pg. 1382 is part of Doc. 750]

Figl, Leopold, 1364 [Pg. 1364 is part of Doc. 736], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 739 and Doc. 740], 1374 [Pg. 1374 includes portions of Doc. 743 and Doc. 744], 1387 [Pg. 1387 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755], 1390 [Pg. 1390 includes portions of Doc. 757 and Doc. 758], 1411–1412 [Pgs. 1411–1412 include portions of Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771], 1435 [Pg. 1435 includes portions of Doc. 789, Doc. 790, and Doc. 791], 1437–1438 [Pgs. 1437–1438 include portions of Doc. 792 and Doc. 793], 1443 [Pg. 1443 includes portions of Doc. 796 and Doc. 797], 1495–1496 [Pg. 1495 is part of Doc. 840], 1503 [Pg. 1503 is part of Doc. 848]

Filippi, Jean, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120]

Finland, 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 1491 [Pg. 1491 is part of Doc. 837]

Finletter, Thomas K., 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

Fischer, Ernst, 1382 [Pg. 1382 is part of Doc. 750], 1447 [Pg. 1447 is part of Doc. 800], 1456 [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 807]

Foreign Assistance Act of 1948 (see also Economic Cooperation Act), 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 199], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 372], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 451], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 455], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 464], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 466], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 486], 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492], 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 502 and Doc. 503]

Foreign Ministers (U.S.–U.K.–France). see under Berlin blockade: Moscow conversations: Breakdown, and under London Conference on Germany.

Foreign Ministers, Council of. see Council of Foreign Ministers.

Foreign Ministers’ Deputies. see Council of Foreign Ministers’ Deputies.

Forest, Alexander R., 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 391], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 393]

Forrestal, James V., 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 425], 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 730n [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 433], 928 [Pg. 928 includes portions of Doc. 561 and Doc. 562], 965n [Pg. 965 is part of Doc. 580], 977n [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 586], 994–995 [Pgs. 994–995 include portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 1367 [Pg. 1367 includes portions of Doc. 738 and Doc. 739], 1378 [Pg. 1378 includes portions of Doc. 747 and Doc. 748], 1474 [Pg. 1474 is part of Doc. 823]

France (see also Council of Foreign Ministers; French zone of occupation in Germany under Germany; London Conference on Germany, London Conference on the Ruhr; Military Governors Conference at Berlin; and Saar; and under Austria, Austrian Peace Treaty, Berlin blockade, Bizonal German economic organizations, German external assets, International Authority for the Ruhr, Reparations from Germany, Ruhr, Security against Germany, West Germany, and West Germany: Occupation statute): Bizonia, interest in, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4], 20–23 [Pgs. 20–23 include portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11], 25–31 [Pgs. 25–31 include portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15], 34n [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 17], 37–48 [Pgs. 37–48 include portions of Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, Doc. 22, Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, Doc. 26, and Doc. 27], 54n [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 31]

Brussels Treaty, 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

Devaluation of the franc, 38–39 [Pgs. 38–39 include portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

European Recovery Program aid to France, 70n [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]

Germany, policy toward, 70–71 [Pgs. 70–71 include portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, and Doc. 45], 78–80 [Pgs. 78–80 include portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 56], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 104–105 [Pgs. 104–105 include portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 72], 110–111 [Pgs. 110–111 include portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 151–152 [Pgs. 151–152 include portions of Doc. 100, Doc. 101, and Doc. 102], 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 158–159 [Pgs. 158–159 include portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 108], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 230–231 [Pgs. 230–231 include portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 229], 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]–. 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 728–729 [Pgs. 728–729 include portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535], 1294 [Pg. 1294 is part of Doc. 719]

Lorraine, possible inclusion in International Authority for the Ruhr, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 339]

Monnet Plan, 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 353]

National Assembly debates concerning German policy, 280–281 [Pgs. 280–281 include portions of Doc. 183, Doc. 184, and Doc. 185], 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 187, Doc. 188, and Doc. 189], 295–296 [Pgs. 295–296 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197], 298–302 [Pgs. 298–302 include portions of Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202], 308–309 [Pgs. 308–309 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, and Doc. 208], 317–318 [Pgs. 317–318 include portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 322–328 [Pgs. 322–328 include portions of Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, and Doc. 224], 330–332 [Pgs. 330–332 include portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226], 335–337 [Pgs. 335–337 include portions of Doc. 226, Doc. 227, and Doc. 228], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 309], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 313], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 331], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 334], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 334], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 339], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 342], 542–543 [Pgs. 542–543 include portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, and Doc. 348], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 353], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 359], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 362], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 451], 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458], 769n [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]

Political parties: Communists, 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 324–325 [Pgs. 324–325 include portions of Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221], 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 336–337 [Pgs. 336–337 include portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 472n [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 542–543 [Pgs. 542–543 include portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, and Doc. 348], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 353], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 560]; Gaullists, 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 327–328 [Pgs. 327–328 include portions of Doc. 222, Doc. 223, and Doc. 224], 336n [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 227], 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 472n [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 353]; independent republican, 327–328 [Pgs. 327–328 include portions of Doc. 222, Doc. 223, and Doc. 224]; Mouvement républicain populaire (MRP), 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 336n [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 227]; Partie républican de la liberté (PRL), 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]; Radical, 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]; Socialists, 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 218], 326n [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 226], 336n [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 227], 366–367 [Pgs. 366–367 include portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246]

Political situation, 1116n [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 640], 1117 [Pg. 1117 is part of Doc. 640]

Soviet Union, question of war with, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 169 [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 1456 [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 807]

Trade agreement with West Germany, 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

Francois Poncet, André, 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

Franks, Sir Oliver, 803–804 [Pgs. 803–804 include portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477], 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541], 941n [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 569 and Doc. 570], 965–966 [Pgs. 965–966 include portions of Doc. 580 and Doc. 581], 974n [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 584], 1147 [Pg. 1147 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652]

Friedrich, Carl J., 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 264], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Friedensburg, Ferdinand, 1221–1222 [Pg. 1221 is part of Doc. 682], 1261 [Pg. 1261 is part of Doc. 703], 1271–1272 [Pgs. 1271–1272 include portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708]

Fulbright, J. William, 426–427 [Pgs. 426–427 include portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287], 431n [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Gallman, Waldemar J., 21–22 [Pgs. 21–22 include portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10], 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 1358–1359 [Pgs. 1358–1359 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, and Doc. 732], 1451 [Pg. 1451 includes portions of Doc. 803 and Doc. 804]

Galloway, Lt. Gen. Alexander, 1360–1361 [Pgs. 1360–1361 include portions of Doc. 732, Doc. 733, and Doc. 734], 1377 [Pg. 1377 is part of Doc. 746], 1420 [Pg. 1420 is part of Doc. 777], 1426–1427 [Pgs. 1426–1427 include portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785]

Ganeval, Brig. Gen. Jean, 878n [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 523], 905n [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 908–909 [Pgs. 908–909 include portions of Doc. 546, Doc. 547, and Doc. 548], 1281–1282 [Pgs. 1281–1282 include portions of Doc. 714, Doc. 715, and Doc. 716]

Gannett, Michael R., 1463–1466 [Pgs. 1463–1466 include portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, and Doc. 815]

Gantenbein, James W., 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 5], 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

Gatow, airplane incident at, 890–891 [Pgs. 890–891 include portions of Doc. 530, Doc. 531, and Doc. 532]

Geier, Frederick V., 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 471], 841n [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504], 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508]

Geneva Conference on International Trade, 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 720]

Gerard, Olivier, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311]

German External Assets, disposition of (see also German assets under Austrian Peace Treaty): American Republics, nonavailability of funds from IARA for, 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]; Bolivia, 853–854 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 511]; China, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]; Ethiopia, 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 357], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]; France, 853–865 [Pgs. 853–865 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, and Doc. 514] passim; IARA countries, distribution to, 854–856 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 513]; Iceland, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]; Iran, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]; Iraq, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]; Italy, 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 189–190 [Pgs. 189–190 include portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 511], 856 [Pg. 856 is part of Doc. 511], 863–865 [Pgs. 863–865 include portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514]; Lebanon, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]; Liberia, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]; Non-IARA countries, distribution to, 861–862 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 513]; Portugal, 853–861 [Pgs. 853–861 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513] passim; Saudi Arabia, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]; Siam, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]; Spain, 853–860 [Pgs. 853–860 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513] passim; Sweden, 853–862 [Pgs. 853–862 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513] passim; Switzerland, 853–861 [Pgs. 853–861 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513] passim, Syria, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513] Tripartite (U.S.–U.K.–France) Conference on Economic Security, Paris, Apr. 26–May 7, 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 511], 855–865 [Pgs. 855–865 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, and Doc. 514]; Turkey, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862–863 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]; United Kingdom, 853–865 [Pgs. 853–865 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, and Doc. 514] passim; United States, 853–865 [Pgs. 853–865 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, and Doc. 514] passim; Uruguay, 853–854 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 511]

German peace conference, future, 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]

German peace settlement or treaty, 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 25], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 45], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 66], 103–104 [Pgs. 103–104 include portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 70], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 76], 127–128 [Pgs. 127–128 include portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 95], 206n [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 140], 231–232 [Pgs. 231–232 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 152], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 159], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 162], 256–257 [Pgs. 256–257 include portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 259–260 [Pgs. 259–260 include portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 264n [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 171], 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 287–289 [Pgs. 287–289 include portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 232], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 236], 348–349 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 236], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 269], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 290], 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 300], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 302], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 305], 468–469 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 309], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 316], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 317], 518–519 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 334], 521–522 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 334], 535 [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 551 [Pg. 551 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 358], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 360], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 371], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 371], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 378], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 394], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 415], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 416], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 416], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 496], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 499], 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 546], 925 [Pg. 925 is part of Doc. 560], 961 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 579], 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 583], 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 594], 1287–1299 [Pgs. 1287–1299 include portions of Doc. 718, Doc. 719, and Doc. 720] passim, 1315–1337 [Pgs. 1315–1337 include portions of Doc. 720 and Doc. 721] passim, 1430 [Pg. 1430 is part of Doc. 787], 1524 [Pg. 1524 is part of Doc. 857]

Germany (see also Allied Control Authority for Germany, Allied Control Council for Germany, Berlin, Berlin blockade, Bizonal German economic organizations, Bizonia, East Germany, German external assets, German peace conference, German peace settlement or treaty, International Authority for the Ruhr, London Conference on Germany, London Conference on the Ruhr, Military Governors Conference at Berlin, reparations from Germany, restitution from Germany, Ruhr, Saar, Security against Germany, and West Germany): Aggression: British approach to U.S. regarding, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 37]; Polish concern regarding, 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 250]; proposals concerning any future, 60–61 [Pgs. 60–61 include portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 73], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 132], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 295]; Soviet policy, 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 236]; U.S. policy regarding, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 37], 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 82], 138–139 [Pgs. 138–139 include portions of Doc. 90, Doc. 91, and Doc. 92], 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 250]

Army, disbandment of, 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 148], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 167], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 194], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 210]; question of reestablishment of, 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

Bremen, free city of, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 114]

British policy toward Germany, 24n [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 229]

Communists in, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 66]

Confederation of states, proposal regarding, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 70]

Constituent Assembly, proposed, 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 133–134 [Pgs. 133–134 include portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

Constitution, proposed, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 15], 107–109 [Pgs. 107–109 include portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 88]

Decentralization of political power, 105–106 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70]

Deconcentration of economic power, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70]

Demilitarization, 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 82], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 84], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 148], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 236], 349–351 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 236], 961 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 579], 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 594], 1201 [Pg. 1201 includes portions of Doc. 672 and Doc. 673], 1296 [Pg. 1296 is part of Doc. 719], 1298 [Pg. 1298 is part of Doc. 720], 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 720], 1317 [Pg. 1317 is part of Doc. 720], 1325 [Pg. 1325 is part of Doc. 721], 1327 [Pg. 1327 is part of Doc. 721], 1329 [Pg. 1329 is part of Doc. 721], 1333 [Pg. 1333 is part of Doc. 721]

Democratization, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 236], 349–351 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 236], 961 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 579], 1201 [Pg. 1201 includes portions of Doc. 672 and Doc. 673], 1298 [Pg. 1298 is part of Doc. 720], 1305–1308 [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 720], 1318 [Pg. 1318 is part of Doc. 720]

Denazification, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37], 1298 [Pg. 1298 is part of Doc. 720], 1302–1303 [Pg. 1302 is part of Doc. 720], 1317 [Pg. 1317 is part of Doc. 720]

Disarmament, 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 82], 127–128 [Pgs. 127–128 include portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 137–138 [Pgs. 137–138 include portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 148], 1298 [Pg. 1298 is part of Doc. 720], 1301 [Pg. 1301 is part of Doc. 720], 1325 [Pg. 1325 is part of Doc. 721], 1327–1330 [Pg. 1327 is part of Doc. 721], 1333 [Pg. 1333 is part of Doc. 721]

Disarmament and demilitarization treaty, draft U.S. proposals for four power (Byrnes proposal), 60–64 [Pgs. 60–64 include portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, and Doc. 38], 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 47], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 61], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 73], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 82], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 152], 342–343 [Pgs. 342–343 include portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 237], 361–362 [Pgs. 361–362 include portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 250], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 338], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 358], 562–564 [Pgs. 562–564 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, and Doc. 362], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 362], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 370], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 522], 1301 [Pg. 1301 is part of Doc. 720], 1329 [Pg. 1329 is part of Doc. 721], 1335 [Pg. 1335 is part of Doc. 721], 1339 [Pg. 1339 is part of Doc. 722]; proposals for three power treaty on, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 48], 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67], 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 358], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 1301 [Pg. 1301 is part of Doc. 720]

Division (dismemberment, partition), 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 11–12 [Pgs. 11–12 include portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 45], 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 48], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 218], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 224], 372–373 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 250], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 269], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 524 and Doc. 525], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535], 909 [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 547 and Doc. 548], 961–962 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 579], 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 602], 1060 [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 617], 1097 [Pg. 1097 includes portions of Doc. 632 and Doc. 633], 1182 [Pg. 1182 is part of Doc. 664], 1201–1202 [Pgs. 1201–1202 include portions of Doc. 672 and Doc. 673], 1210 [Pg. 1210 includes portions of Doc. 673 and Doc. 674], 1212 [Pg. 1212 includes portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676], 1288–1289 [Pg. 1288 is part of Doc. 719], 1292 [Pg. 1292 is part of Doc. 719], 1296 [Pg. 1296 is part of Doc. 719], 1319 [Pg. 1319 is part of Doc. 720], 1322 [Pg. 1322 is part of Doc. 721]

Elections, proposal regarding (see also under Berlin), 1331–1332 [Pg. 1331 is part of Doc. 721]

European Recovery Program, consideration regarding relationship of provisional all-German government to, 1330 [Pg. 1330 is part of Doc. 721]

Federal system, proposals regarding, 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 49], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 61], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 72], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 88], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 94]

Foreign relations, 1330 [Pg. 1330 is part of Doc. 721]

Foreign trade, 1308 [Pg. 1308 is part of Doc. 720], 1330 [Pg. 1330 is part of Doc. 721]

Four Power. see Quadripartite, infra.

General Staff, disbandment of, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 148], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 167], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 194], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 210]

German Advisory Council, 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 72]

Hamburg, free city of, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 114]

Industrial war potential, liquidation of, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37]

Industries, prohibited and restricted, question of control over. see under West Germany.

Laender, role and functions of, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 70], 108–109 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 72], 132–134 [Pgs. 132–134 include portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 114]

Land, 132–134 [Pgs. 132–134 include portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

Land reform, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37]

Landtage, 132–133 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 88]

Level of Industry. see Level of Industry in Germany.

Looted gold, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 856–857 [Pgs. 856–857 include portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 513], 863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 513]

Militarism, prevention of resurgence of, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67]

Military Government, 2–3 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 79–80 [Pgs. 79–80 include portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 163]

Most-favored-nation treatment, 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Nuremberg prisoners held at Spandau prison, treatment of, 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 291], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Occupation, 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 61], 230–231 [Pgs. 230–231 include portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Occupation authority, 935 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 567], 1050 [Pg. 1050 is part of Doc. 614]

Occupation controls, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Occupation troops, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67], 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 107], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 524 and Doc. 525]

Occupying powers, 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 93–94 [Pgs. 93–94 include portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 106–107 [Pgs. 106–107 include portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 83], 127–128 [Pgs. 127–128 include portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 136–138 [Pgs. 136–138 include portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 94], 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 135], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 357–358 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 239], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 372–373 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 250], 468–470 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 309], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 524 and Doc. 525], 935n [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 567], 962 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 579], 1028 [Pg. 1028 is part of Doc. 605], 1084 [Pg. 1084 is part of Doc. 627]

Palatinate, 173–174 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 114]

Polish-administered territories, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 281]

Pomerania, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 256]

Population problem, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 146]

Provisional government for, proposals regarding, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 594], 1305 [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 720], 1320 [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 721], 1324–1327 [Pg. 1324 is part of Doc. 721], 1332–1333 [Pg. 1332 is part of Doc. 721], 1335–1336 [Pg. 1335 is part of Doc. 721]

Prussia, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 114], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 291]

Quadripartite controls: Agreements concerning, 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 194], 316–317 [Pgs. 316–317 include portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 1090 [Pg. 1090 is part of Doc. 630], 1188 [Pg. 1188 is part of Doc. 667], 1192 [Pg. 1192 is part of Doc. 667], 1203 [Pg. 1203 is part of Doc. 673], 1208 [Pg. 1208 is part of Doc. 673], 1317 [Pg. 1317 is part of Doc. 720]; association in Berlin, 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]; breakdown of controls, 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 29], 1028 [Pg. 1028 is part of Doc. 605], 1279 [Pg. 1279 is part of Doc. 713], 1297 [Pg. 1297 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 720], 1314 [Pg. 1314 is part of Doc. 720], 1322 [Pg. 1322 is part of Doc. 721]; declaration regarding the defeat of Germany, June 1945, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 236]; statement on control machinery in Germany, June 5, 1945, 103–104 [Pgs. 103–104 include portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 229], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 236]

Refugees, distribution of, 869 [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 518], 1303 [Pg. 1303 is part of Doc. 720]

Reichstag, 108–109 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 72]

Saxony and Thuringia, withdrawal of American forces from, 915 [Pg. 915 includes portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554], 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 562 and Doc. 563], 933–934 [Pg. 933 is part of Doc. 567], 952–953 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 575], 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 579]

Silesia, question of return to Germany, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 256]

Socialist Unity Party (SED), 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4]

Socialists, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 66]

Soviet policy. see under Soviet Union.

Statute of capitulation and occupation, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5]

Territorial arrangements, 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 81–82 [Pgs. 81–82 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 173–174 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 114], 264n [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 171], 1299 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 720], 1316 [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 720], 1318 [Pg. 1318 is part of Doc. 720], 1337 [Pg. 1337 is part of Doc. 721]

Territorial integrity of, 274–275 [Pgs. 274–275 include portions of Doc. 178, Doc. 179, and Doc. 180]

Trademarks, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 56]

Unconditional surrender, 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 933 [Pg. 933 is part of Doc. 567], 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 575], 1055 [Pg. 1055 is part of Doc. 615], 1192 [Pg. 1192 is part of Doc. 667]

United Nations, question of admission to, 1337 [Pg. 1337 is part of Doc. 721]

U.S. forces, 1456–1457 [Pgs. 1456–1457 include portions of Doc. 807, Doc. 808, and Doc. 809], 1461 [Pg. 1461 is part of Doc. 811]

U.S. policy toward Germany, 60–63 [Pgs. 60–63 include portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, and Doc. 38], 71–73 [Pgs. 71–73 include portions of Doc. 44, Doc. 45, and Doc. 46], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 66], 107–108 [Pgs. 107–108 include portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 229], 356–360 [Pgs. 356–360 include portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 567–568 [Pgs. 567–568 include portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364], 1287–1319 [Pgs. 1287–1319 include portions of Doc. 718, Doc. 719, and Doc. 720]

Unity, economic and political, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 12–13 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5], 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 26], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 45], 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67], 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 94], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 210], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 218], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 224], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 236], 357–358 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 239], 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 382–383 [Pgs. 382–383 include portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 419–420 [Pgs. 419–420 include portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 291], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 337], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 375], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 378], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533], 925 [Pg. 925 is part of Doc. 560], 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 1288–1332 [Pgs. 1288–1332 include portions of Doc. 719, Doc. 720, and Doc. 721] passim, 1428 [Pg. 1428 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 1430 [Pg. 1430 is part of Doc. 787]

War claims against Germany, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511]

War crimes, 1302 [Pg. 1302 is part of Doc. 720]

War criminals adjudged by Nuremberg Military Tribunals, 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 375], 1298 [Pg. 1298 is part of Doc. 720], 1302 [Pg. 1302 is part of Doc. 720], 1317 [Pg. 1317 is part of Doc. 720]

War damage compensation, 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 416], 1316 [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 720], 1337 [Pg. 1337 is part of Doc. 721]

War prisoners, repatriation, 869–870 [Pgs. 869–870 include portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519]

Wehrmacht, liquidation of, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1]

Withdrawal of forces from, proposals regarding, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 198], 1246 [Pg. 1246 is part of Doc. 693], 1288–1289 [Pg. 1288 is part of Doc. 719], 1291 [Pg. 1291 is part of Doc. 719], 1320 [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 721], 1324–1327 [Pg. 1324 is part of Doc. 721], 1329–1330 [Pg. 1329 is part of Doc. 721], 1334–1335 [Pg. 1334 is part of Doc. 721]

Zones of occupation (see also Bizonia and West Germany): British Zone (see also Bizonia and West Germany): 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 48], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 85], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 144], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 290], 632–633 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 386], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 422]

French zone (see also under Bizonia and European Recovery Program): Benelux, cooperation with, 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 185–186 [Pgs. 185–186 include portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]; currency reform, 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]; food situation, 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]; Foreign Trade Office (OFICOMEX), 677–679 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 410]; Military Government, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 105], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 111]; Military Governor, 209–210 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 135], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 218–220 [Pgs. 218–220 include portions of Doc. 140, Doc. 141, and Doc. 142], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 145], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 157], 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 378], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 380]; occupation costs, 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 674n [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 408]; political and economic organization, 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 236]; revision, question of, 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 632–633 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 386]; trade, 29–31 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 15], 73–75 [Pgs. 73–75 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, and Doc. 47], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 111], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 289–290 [Pgs. 289–290 include portions of Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193]

Soviet zone (see also East Germany): Currency reform in (see also under Berlin blockade), 891n [Pg. 891 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533], 897–898 [Pgs. 897–898 include portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 542], 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 913–914 [Pgs. 913–914 include portions of Doc. 552 and Doc. 553], 930 [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564], 984 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 588], 1126 [Pg. 1126 includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644]; demilitarization, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 37]; denazification, 1313 [Pg. 1313 is part of Doc. 720]; Deutsche Notenbank, 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 291], 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611]; Economic Commission, reorganization of, 66–68 [Pgs. 66–68 include portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42], 1039–1040 [Pgs. 1039–1040 include portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611], 1313 [Pg. 1313 is part of Doc. 720]; elections, 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526]; European Recovery Program, relationship to, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 94]; German Export-Import Agency, 1030–1031 [Pgs. 1030–1031 include portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 607], 1045 [Pg. 1045 is part of Doc. 612]; German government, separate, possible establishment of, 1292 [Pg. 1292 is part of Doc. 719], 1313 [Pg. 1313 is part of Doc. 720], 1315 [Pg. 1315 is part of Doc. 720], 1328 [Pg. 1328 is part of Doc. 721]; organization, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 71–72 [Pgs. 71–72 include portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 1314 [Pg. 1314 is part of Doc. 720]; political activities, 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 239], 882–883 [Pgs. 882–883 include portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526]; Soviet policy, 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 108], 358–359 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 239], 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]; Soviet troops, 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 41], 1327 [Pg. 1327 is part of Doc. 721]; U.S. policy toward, 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 250]; West German relationship to, 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 256], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 281]

U.S. zone (see also Bizonia and West Germany), 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 144], 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 632–633 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 386], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 422], 1285–1286 [Pg. 1285 is part of Doc. 717]

Giesl-Gieslingen, Adolf, 1387 [Pg. 1387 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755]

Ginsburg, Charles David, 1452 [Pg. 1452 is part of Doc. 804]

Goethals, Lt. Gen. Georges, 149n [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 99], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 125], 458n [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 459n [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 303]

Graf, Ferdinand, 1265–1266 [Pgs. 1265–1266 include portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 739 and Doc. 740], 1375 [Pg. 1375 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745]

Graf, Julius, 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466]

Greece, 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 111], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 450], 1456 [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 807], 1500 [Pg. 1500 includes portions of Doc. 843 and Doc. 844]

Gregory, Sir Henry, 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416]

Griffis, Stanton, 341–343 [Pgs. 341–343 include portions of Doc. 231, Doc. 232, and Doc. 233], 360–362 [Pgs. 360–362 include portions of Doc. 239, Doc. 240, and Doc. 241]

Gros, André, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311]

Gruben, Baron Hervé de, 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 61], 104–106 [Pgs. 104–106 include portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 109–110 [Pgs. 109–110 include portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 125], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 131], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 162], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 171]

Gruber, Karl, 1356–1358 [Pgs. 1356–1358 include portions of Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, and Doc. 731], 1383–1385 [Pgs. 1383–1385 include portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753], 1390 [Pg. 1390 includes portions of Doc. 757 and Doc. 758], 1402–1403 [Pgs. 1402–1403 include portions of Doc. 765 and Doc. 766], 1410 [Pg. 1410 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 1422–1427 [Pgs. 1422–1427 include portions of Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785], 1441 [Pg. 1441 includes portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795], 1447–1448 [Pgs. 1447–1448 include portions of Doc. 800 and Doc. 801], 1450 [Pg. 1450 is part of Doc. 802], 1453 [Pg. 1453 includes portions of Doc. 804 and Doc. 805], 1455 [Pg. 1455 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1460–1462 [Pgs. 1460–1462 include portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, and Doc. 813], 1475 [Pg. 1475 includes portions of Doc. 823 and Doc. 824], 1477 [Pg. 1477 is part of Doc. 825], 1491–1492 [Pgs. 1491–1492 include portions of Doc. 837 and Doc. 838], 1497 [Pg. 1497 includes portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842], 1503 [Pg. 1503 is part of Doc. 848], 1507–1509 [Pgs. 1507–1509 include portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855]

Guillaume, Baron Jules, 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 322n [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

Guirangaud, Louis de, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311], 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662]

Gurney, Chan, 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452]

Haas, Friedrich, 1261 [Pg. 1261 is part of Doc. 703]

Habana Conference on International Trade, 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 720]

Hall-Patch, Sir Edmund L., 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 47], 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]

Hannaman, Forrest G., 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311], 479–481 [Pgs. 479–481 include portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 503–504 [Pgs. 503–504 include portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 341]

Harriman, W. Averell, 244–245 [Pgs. 244–245 include portions of Doc. 157, Doc. 158, and Doc. 159], 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 300], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 567–568 [Pgs. 567–568 include portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364], 716–717 [Pgs. 716–717 include portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425], 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 726–727 [Pgs. 726–727 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 433], 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 738–741 [Pgs. 738–741 include portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 475], 818–819 [Pgs. 818–819 include portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 821–824 [Pgs. 821–824 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 843–844 [Pgs. 843–844 include portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502]

Harris, David, 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]

Harrison, G. W., 1049 [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614]

Harvey, Sir Oliver Charles, 24n [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662]

Haviland, Dennis W. G. L. 770–771 [Pgs. 770–771 include portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464], 841n [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501]

Hayden, Carl, 432n [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Hays, Maj. Gen. George P., 396n [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 403n [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 746n [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 886n [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635]

Heine, Fritz, 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 264]

Heisbourg, Georges, 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]

Helmer, Oscar, 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 739 and Doc. 740], 1382 [Pg. 1382 is part of Doc. 750], 1440–1441 [Pgs. 1440–1441 include portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795]

Hemmindinger, Noel, 792–793 [Pgs. 792–793 include portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 797n [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 471]

Henderson, Lord (William Watson), 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 821–822 [Pgs. 821–822 include portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487], 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492]

Henderson, Loy W., 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 421]

Hendrick, James P., 818–823 [Pgs. 818–823 include portions of Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 841n [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504]

Herbert, Maj. Gen. E. O. 878n [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 523], 906 [Pg. 906 is part of Doc. 545], 908 [Pg. 908 includes portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547]

Herz, Martin F., 1447 [Pg. 1447 is part of Doc. 800]

Hibben, Thomas, 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 466 and Doc. 467]

Hickerson, John D.: Allied Control Council for Germany, 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533]; Austrian Peace Treaty, 1457–1459 [Pgs. 1457–1459 include portions of Doc. 808, Doc. 809, and Doc. 810], 1500 [Pg. 1500 includes portions of Doc. 843 and Doc. 844]; Berlin blockade, 886–887 [Pgs. 886–887 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, and Doc. 529], 911 [Pg. 911 includes portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551], 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 557 and Doc. 558], 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 590], 1013n [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599], 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 640], 1193n [Pg. 1193 includes portions of Doc. 667 and Doc. 668]; Bizonal German economic organizations, revision of, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 6], 19–20 [Pgs. 19–20 include portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8], 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 43–45 [Pgs. 43–45 include portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26], 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]; currency reform proposals 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519], 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520], 912 [Pg. 912 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 915 [Pg. 915 includes portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554]; London Conference on Germany, 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 252], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, and Doc. 278], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 293]; Military Governors Conference at Berlin, 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 168–169 [Pgs. 168–169 include portions of Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]; Military Security Board, 667n [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]; occupation statute for West Germany, 627n [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385], 631n [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 386], 634n [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 386], 637n [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 644n [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]; reparations from Germany, 214n [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 421], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496]; Ruhr question, 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 459n [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 303], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 523n [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 335], 547 [Pg. 547 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]; Saar question, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 32], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]; Trizonal fusion proposals, 671–672 [Pgs. 671–672 include portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]; U.S. policy toward Germany, 61n [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37], 1287n [Pg. 1287 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719]; West German provisional government, preparations for, 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 104], 176–177 [Pgs. 176–177 include portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117]

Hilliard, Charles C., 880n [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 524], 904n [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543]

Hirschfeld, H. R., 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 61], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 73], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 125], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Hitler, Adolf, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 56], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 72], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 159], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 236], 1296 [Pg. 1296 is part of Doc. 719], 1353 [Pg. 1353 includes portions of Doc. 725 and Doc. 726]

Hodges, Maj. Gen. James P., 666–667 [Pgs. 666–667 include portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401]

Hoepker-Aschoff, Herman, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 391], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 393], 1272 [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708]

Hoffman, Paul, 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 291], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 292], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 334], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 337], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 775–848 [Pgs. 775–848 include portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506] passim, 1408 [Pg. 1408 includes portions of Doc. 766 and Doc. 767]

Holmes, Julius C., 505–506 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 328], 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 397], 1508–1509 [Pgs. 1508–1509 include portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855]

Holvoet, Amaury, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311]

House of Representatives: Appropriations Committee, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 163], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 213]; Foreign Affairs Committee, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 175]; Resolution 365 concerning reparations, 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 711–712 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 422], 717–718 [Pgs. 717–718 include portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425]

Howley, Col. Frank, 878n [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 523], 906 [Pg. 906 is part of Doc. 545], 908–909 [Pgs. 908–909 include portions of Doc. 546, Doc. 547, and Doc. 548], 914 [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 552 and Doc. 553], 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 569 and Doc. 570]

Humelsine, Carlyle H., 757n [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453]

Humphrey, Donald D., 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125], 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

Humphrey, George M., 792–793 [Pgs. 792–793 include portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 471], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 486], 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 497], 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 499], 849–851 [Pgs. 849–851 include portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509]

Humphrey Committee: Establishment of, 792–793 [Pgs. 792–793 include portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 797–798 [Pgs. 797–798 include portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490]; references to, 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 334], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 353], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 357], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 360], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 362], 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 798–804 [Pgs. 798–804 include portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477], 807–814 [Pgs. 807–814 include portions of Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, and Doc. 483], 816–817 [Pgs. 816–817 include portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 486], 823–830 [Pgs. 823–830 include portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, and Doc. 493], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 496], 836–839 [Pgs. 836–839 include portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500], 841–843 [Pgs. 841–843 include portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502], 845–852 [Pgs. 845–852 include portions of Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc. 510]; report of, 851–852 [Pgs. 851–852 include portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc. 510]

Hungary, 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 916n [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 922n [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 560], 1303 [Pg. 1303 is part of Doc. 720], 1348 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723], 1408 [Pg. 1408 includes portions of Doc. 766 and Doc. 767], 1443 [Pg. 1443 includes portions of Doc. 796 and Doc. 797], 1489 [Pg. 1489 is part of Doc. 835], 1491 [Pg. 1491 is part of Doc. 837]

Iceland, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]

Igler, Hans, 1390 [Pg. 1390 includes portions of Doc. 757 and Doc. 758]

India, 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 1161 [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 658]

Industrial Committee on Reparations. see Humphrey Committee.

Inter Allied Reparations Agency (IARA) (see also under Reparations from Germany): Agreement concerning, 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 472 and Doc. 473]; assembly of, 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 137], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 759n [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 825–826 [Pgs. 825–826 include portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 498], 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 511]; establishment, 209n [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 135]; Portugal, question of German looted gold in, 856–857 [Pgs. 856–857 include portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 860–861 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 513]; Saar reparations, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 46], 748–749 [Pgs. 748–749 include portions of Doc. 445, Doc. 446, and Doc. 447]; Switzerland, problem of German external assets held in, 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 513]; United Kingdom, allocations to, 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419]

Inter American Conference for the Maintenance of Continental Peace and Security, Aug. 15–Sept. 2, 1947, 105n [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70]

Inter American Conference on Problems of War and Peace, Feb. 21–Mar. 8, 1945, 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 511]

International Authority for the Ruhr (IAR) (see also Ruhr): Benelux participation, 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 99–100 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 66], 203–204 [Pgs. 203–204 include portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 140], 231–232 [Pgs. 231–232 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190], 290–291 [Pgs. 290–291 include portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 210], 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 457–459 [Pgs. 457–459 include portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 309], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 309], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 319], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 320], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 332]

British position, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 90], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 226], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 300], 460–461 [Pgs. 460–461 include portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, and Doc. 305], 464–465 [Pgs. 464–465 include portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 332], 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508]

Control over, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 374], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 380], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380]

Draft charter (OMGUS), 440–455 [Pgs. 440–455 include portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, and Doc. 300], 461–464 [Pgs. 461–464 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 315]

Expansion, 533–534 [Pgs. 533–534 include portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 359]

French position, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 90], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 300], 466–467 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 309], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 509–512 [Pgs. 509–512 include portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 332], 542–543 [Pgs. 542–543 include portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, and Doc. 348], 1340 [Pg. 1340 is part of Doc. 722]

Functions, 451–452 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 300], 487–488 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 317], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 357], 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 370], 585–588 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 371], 1333 [Pg. 1333 is part of Doc. 721]

Informal Working Group (U.S.), 461–463 [Pgs. 461–463 include portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 465n [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 475n [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 479n [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 484n [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 317]

London Conference on Germany:

Agreement, May 26, 285–288 [Pgs. 285–288 include portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 210], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 300], 466–470 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 309], 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 494–495 [Pgs. 494–495 include portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 504–505 [Pgs. 504–505 include portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 512–513 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 331], 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 339], 535 [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 540–542 [Pgs. 540–542 include portions of Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, and Doc. 347], 547 [Pg. 547 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 358], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 360], 577–578 [Pgs. 577–578 include portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 409], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 465], 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 594], 1301 [Pg. 1301 is part of Doc. 720]; discussions, 125–128 [Pgs. 125–128 include portions of Doc. 83, Doc. 84, and Doc. 85], 136–138 [Pgs. 136–138 include portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 197–198 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 129], 202–204 [Pgs. 202–204 include portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 145], 235–237 [Pgs. 235–237 include portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 170], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 173], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 210], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 326–327 [Pgs. 326–327 include portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 224], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 226], 334–335 [Pgs. 334–335 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 377n [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 253], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 259], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 262], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 264], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 267], 448–449 [Pgs. 448–449 include portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, and Doc. 300], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 325], 510–512 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 331]; French reservations, 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 330–331 [Pgs. 330–331 include portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226], 333–335 [Pgs. 333–335 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 477–478 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 313], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 331], 518–519 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 334]

London Conference on the Ruhr, 477–478 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 313], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 316], 484–493 [Pgs. 484–493 include portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 498n [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 321], 503–504 [Pgs. 503–504 include portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 328], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 331], 530–542 [Pgs. 530–542 include portions of Doc. 338, Doc. 339, Doc. 340, Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, and Doc. 347], 544–547 [Pgs. 544–547 include portions of Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 549–562 [Pgs. 549–562 include portions of Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, and Doc. 360], 564–573 [Pgs. 564–573 include portions of Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc. 367], 575–581 [Pgs. 575–581 include portions of Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, and Doc. 371], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]; additional agreed minutes, 576–577 [Pgs. 576–577 include portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370], 596–597 [Pgs. 596–597 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]; draft agreement, Dec. 28, 573n [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 576–578 [Pgs. 576–578 include portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370], 580–595 [Pgs. 580–595 include portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

Membership, 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 309], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 317], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 317], 491–492 [Pgs. 491–492 include portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 371]

Organization for European Economic Cooperation (OEEC), relationship to, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 305], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 309], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 315], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 317], 498n [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 321], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 327], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 331], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 524–525 [Pgs. 524–525 include portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, and Doc. 337], 535–536 [Pgs. 535–536 include portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 575–576 [Pgs. 575–576 include portions of Doc. 367, Doc. 368, and Doc. 369], 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 370], 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 371], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 372], 866 [Pg. 866 includes portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515]

Policy Planning Staff proposal, 1336–1337 [Pg. 1336 is part of Doc. 721]

Saar, possible inclusion in, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 339]

Soviet reaction, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 173], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

Trusteeship proposals, 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 360]

United Nations, relationship to, 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 317], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 371]

West German relationship to, 449–455 [Pgs. 449–455 include portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 302], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 303], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 317], 489–490 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 317], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 328], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 332], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 341], 551 [Pg. 551 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 554–555 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 357], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 358], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 362], 568–569 [Pgs. 568–569 include portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 367], 579–583 [Pgs. 579–583 include portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 590–591 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 371], 593–594 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 371]

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), 1380 [Pg. 1380 is part of Doc. 748], 1493 [Pg. 1493 is part of Doc. 838]

International Conference of American States, Ninth, Mar. 30–Mdy 2, 1948, 889n [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 529 and Doc. 530], 1490n [Pg. 1490 includes portions of Doc. 835 and Doc. 836]

International Court of Justice (ICJ), 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 394], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 422], 954 [Pg. 954 is part of Doc. 576], 957 [Pg. 957 is part of Doc. 577]

International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg, 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 375], 1302 [Pg. 1302 is part of Doc. 720]

International Monetary Fund (IMF), 38–39 [Pgs. 38–39 include portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 1380 [Pg. 1380 is part of Doc. 748], 1497 [Pg. 1497 includes portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842]

International Refugee Organization (IRO), 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 380], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 386], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 394], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 394], 1479 [Pg. 1479 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827]

International Trade Organization (ITO), 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 84], 136n [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 90], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 146], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 380], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 394], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 720]

Inverchapel, Lord, 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 35–37 [Pgs. 35–37 include portions of Doc. 17, Doc. 18, and Doc. 19], 40–41 [Pgs. 40–41 include portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 69n [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 42], 146n [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 421], 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438]

Iran, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]

Iraq, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]

Italy (see also under Austria): Communism, 1383 [Pg. 1383 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752], 1387 [Pg. 1387 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755]; elections, 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 108], 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 1498 [Pg. 1498 is part of Doc. 842]; European Recovery Program, Italian participation in, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 236], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]; German assets in Italy, 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 189–190 [Pgs. 189–190 include portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 511], 856 [Pg. 856 is part of Doc. 511], 863–865 [Pgs. 863–865 include portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514]; London Conference on Germany, 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 146–147 [Pgs. 146–147 include portions of Doc. 96, Doc. 97, and Doc. 98]; Peace Treaty, 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 1353n [Pg. 1353 includes portions of Doc. 725 and Doc. 726], 1410 [Pg. 1410 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 1467–1468 [Pgs. 1467–1468 include portions of Doc. 815, Doc. 816, and Doc. 817], 1484n [Pg. 1484 is part of Doc. 831]; restitutions from Germany, 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]; security against Germany, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37]; Soviet policy toward Italy, 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 108], 165n [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 1456 [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 807]; trade with Germany, 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 123], 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]; Western Union, relationship to, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 236]

Jackson, Wayne G., 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 74], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 465n [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 311], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 328], 516–517 [Pgs. 516–517 include portions of Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and Doc. 334], 562n [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 360], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 365], 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

Jamieson, Kenneth D., 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662]

Japan, 724–726 [Pgs. 724–726 include portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 439]

Jessup, Philip, 517n [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334], 1193–1194 [Pgs. 1193–1194 include portions of Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669], 1211n [Pg. 1211 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675], 1210–1220 [Pgs. 1210–1220 include portions of Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, and Doc. 681], 1223 [Pg. 1223 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1225–1230 [Pgs. 1225–1230 include portions of Doc. 683, Doc. 684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686], 1233 [Pg. 1233 includes portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688], 1230–1238 [Pgs. 1230–1238 include portions of Doc. 685, Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, Doc. 690, and Doc. 691], 1247–1248 [Pgs. 1247–1248 include portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 1250–1251 [Pgs. 1250–1251 include portions of Doc. 696 and Doc. 697], 1253–1255 [Pgs. 1253–1255 include portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, and Doc. 701], 1262–1266 [Pgs. 1262–1266 include portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705], 1268n [Pg. 1268 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1272 [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708], 1274n [Pg. 1274 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709], 1278–1279 [Pgs. 1278–1279 include portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713], 1281–1282 [Pgs. 1281–1282 include portions of Doc. 714, Doc. 715, and Doc. 716]

Joint Chiefs of Staff (U.S.): Austria, 1349–1350 [Pg. 1349 is part of Doc. 723], 1356–1359 [Pgs. 1356–1359 include portions of Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, and Doc. 732], 1363 [Pg. 1363 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 736 and Doc. 737], 1367 [Pg. 1367 includes portions of Doc. 738 and Doc. 739], 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 745 and Doc. 746], 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 1415n [Pg. 1415 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1419 [Pg. 1419 is part of Doc. 777], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 788], 1474 [Pg. 1474 is part of Doc. 823]; Austrian Peace Treaty, 1470–1472 [Pgs. 1470–1472 include portions of Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, and Doc. 821], 1474 [Pg. 1474 is part of Doc. 823], 1476 [Pg. 1476 is part of Doc. 824], 1479 [Pg. 1479 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827], 1494 [Pg. 1494 includes portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1512–1513 [Pg. 1512 is part of Doc. 856]; Berlin blockade, 887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529], 925 [Pg. 925 is part of Doc. 560], 994 [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 591], 995n [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592]; restitutions from Germany, 794n [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 470]

Joint (U.S.-U.K.) Export-Import Agency (JEIA), 3–4 [Pgs. 3–4 include portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2], 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 102], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 107], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 123], 202–203 [Pgs. 202–203 include portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 153], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 257], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 504–505 [Pgs. 504–505 include portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 331], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 551 [Pg. 551 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 496]; adherence of French zone to, 216–218 [Pgs. 216–218 include portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 242–244 [Pgs. 242–244 include portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158], 379–380 [Pgs. 379–380 include portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 669–676 [Pgs. 669–676 include portions of Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409]; agreement, Oct. 18, 677–681 [Pgs. 677–681 include portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, and Doc. 412]; London Conference on Germany, agreed document on, 289–290 [Pgs. 289–290 include portions of Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 208], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 210], 669–671 [Pgs. 669–671 include portions of Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, and Doc. 406], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 408], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 410]

Kaisen, Wilhelm, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 257], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 402–403 [Pgs. 402–403 include portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 408–409 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 269], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 270], 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 282], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 287], 831n [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 517]

Keith, Gerald, 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464], 771n [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 464], 977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 586], 992 [Pg. 992 is part of Doc. 590], 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 640], 1508–1509 [Pgs. 1508–1509 include portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855]

Kennan, George F., 523n [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 335], 994n [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 591], 1013n [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599], 1014 [Pg. 1014 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600], 1194 [Pg. 1194 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1210–1211 [Pgs. 1210–1211 include portions of Doc. 673, Doc. 674, and Doc. 675], 1214 [Pg. 1214 includes portions of Doc. 677 and Doc. 678], 1287–1297 [Pgs. 1287–1297 include portions of Doc. 718, Doc. 719, and Doc. 720], 1320n [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 721], 1324–1325 [Pg. 1324 is part of Doc. 721]

Keyes, Lt Gen. Geoffrey: Austria, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 385], 807 [Pg. 807 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 1356–58 [Pgs. 1356–1358 include portions of Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, and Doc. 731], 1360–1369 [Pgs. 1360–1369 include portions of Doc. 732, Doc. 733, Doc. 734, Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, and Doc. 740], 1371–1372 [Pgs. 1371–1372 include portions of Doc. 740, Doc. 741, and Doc. 742], 1376–1378 [Pgs. 1376–1378 include portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748], 1384–1386 [Pgs. 1384–1386 include portions of Doc. 752, Doc. 753, and Doc. 754], 1390–1394 [Pgs. 1390–1394 include portions of Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759], 1396 [Pg. 1396 includes portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1398–1400 [Pgs. 1398–1400 include portions of Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, and Doc. 764], 1412 [Pg. 1412 includes portions of Doc. 770 and Doc. 771], 1415–1420 [Pgs. 1415–1420 include portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, Doc. 774, Doc. 775, Doc. 776, and Doc. 777], 1425–1431 [Pgs. 1425–1431 include portions of Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, and Doc. 787], 1436–1437 [Pgs. 1436–1437 include portions of Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793], 1444 [Pg. 1444 includes portions of Doc. 797 and Doc. 798]; Austrian Peace Treaty, 1450–1460 [Pgs. 1450–1460 include portions of Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, and Doc. 811], 1463n [Pg. 1463 includes portions of Doc. 813 and Doc. 814], 1466 [Pg. 1466 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815], 1468–1469 [Pgs. 1468–1469 include portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, and Doc. 818], 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 820 and Doc. 821], 1475–1476 [Pgs. 1475–1476 include portions of Doc. 823 and Doc. 824], 1479 [Pg. 1479 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827], 1481 [Pg. 1481 includes portions of Doc. 828 and Doc. 829], 1485 [Pg. 1485 includes portions of Doc. 831 and Doc. 832], 1487–1488 [Pgs. 1487–1488 include portions of Doc. 833, Doc. 834, and Doc. 835], 1494 [Pg. 1494 includes portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1504 [Pg. 1504 is part of Doc. 849]

Kiridus, Franz, 1433–1434 [Pg. 1433 is part of Doc. 789]

Kirk, Adm. Alan G., 321–322 [Pgs. 321–322 include portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Kirkpatrick, Sir Ivone, 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 47], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 48], 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334]

Kiselev, Evgeniy Dmitriyevich, 1429–1466 [Pgs. 1429–1466 include portions of Doc. 786, Doc. 787, Doc. 788, Doc. 789, Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, and Doc. 815]

Kleinwaechter, Ludwig, 1423 [Pg. 1423 is part of Doc. 780]

Klingelhoefer, Gustav, 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611], 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703]

Knapp, John B., 1253 [Pg. 1253 includes portions of Doc. 698 and Doc. 699], 1256 [Pg. 1256 is part of Doc. 701], 1263 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 704]

Koenig, Gen. Pierre: Allied Control Council for Germany, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 218], 368n [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535]; atomic energy in Germany, control over, 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 496]; Berlin blockade, 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 569], 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 571], 945–946 [Pgs. 945–946 include portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573], 1099–1100 [Pgs. 1099–1100 include portions of Doc. 633, Doc. 634, and Doc. 635], 1102–1103 [Pg. 1102 is part of Doc. 635], 1106–1107 [Pg. 1106 is part of Doc. 637], 1110–1111 [Pg. 1110 is part of Doc. 639], 1118–1122 [Pgs. 1118–1122 include portions of Doc. 640, Doc. 641, and Doc. 642], 1132 [Pg. 1132 is part of Doc. 647], 1134–1136 [Pgs. 1134–1136 include portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648], 1138 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 648], 1140 [Pg. 1140 includes portions of Doc. 648 and Doc. 649], 1170 [Pg. 1170 is part of Doc. 660], 1239 [Pg. 1239 is part of Doc. 692], 1274 [Pg. 1274 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709], 1278 [Pg. 1278 includes portions of Doc. 711 and Doc. 712]; Bizonal German economic organizations, revision of, 26n [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15], 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]; currency reform, 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 519], 875 [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521], 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543]; demilitarization of Germany, 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 522]; industries in Germany, prohibited and restricted, control over, 832–833 [Pgs. 832–833 include portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 852n [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510]; London Conference on Germany, 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 80], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 99], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 157–159 [Pgs. 157–159 include portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 125]; Military Governors Conference at Berlin, 181–183 [Pgs. 181–183 include portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 216–218 [Pgs. 216–218 include portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 154], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 500]; Military Security Board, 666–668 [Pgs. 666–668 include portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403]; occupation statute for West Germany, 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 378], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380], 631–634 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 386], 637n [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 641–654 [Pgs. 641–654 include portions of Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, and Doc. 394]; reparations from Germany, 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463], 807 [Pg. 807 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494]; Ruhr question, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 303], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 318], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 319], 572–573 [Pgs. 572–573 include portions of Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc. 367]; Trizonal fusion proposals, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 406], 676n [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 409], 677n [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 410], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, and Doc. 412]; West German provisional government, preparation of, 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 378–380 [Pgs. 378–380 include portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255], 396–400 [Pgs. 396–400 include portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 402–403 [Pgs. 402–403 include portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 404n [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 269], 406–408 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 269], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 270], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 425n [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 432n [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 434–441 [Pgs. 434–441 include portions of Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

Kohler (Koehler), Erich, 10–16 [Pgs. 10–16 include portions of Doc. 3, Doc. 4, and Doc. 5], 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

Kohler, Foy D., 1197–1198 [Pgs. 1197–1198 include portions of Doc. 669, Doc. 670, and Doc. 671], 1201 [Pg. 1201 includes portions of Doc. 672 and Doc. 673]

Koktomov, Nikolai Petrovich, 1464 [Pg. 1464 is part of Doc. 814], 1466–1468 [Pgs. 1466–1468 include portions of Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, and Doc. 817], 1478 [Pg. 1478 includes portions of Doc. 825 and Doc. 826], 1505 [Pg. 1505 is part of Doc. 850], 1507–1508 [Pgs. 1507–1508 include portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, and Doc. 854]

Kolarov, Vasil, 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Kopf, Hinrich Wilhelm, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 287], 831n [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494]

Koptelov, Mikhail Efremovich, 1429 [Pg. 1429 includes portions of Doc. 786 and Doc. 787], 1507 [Pg. 1507 is part of Doc. 852]

Kosanović, Sava N., 343n [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

Kotikov, Maj. Gen. Alexander G., 878n [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 523], 905–906 [Pgs. 905–906 include portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 908 [Pg. 908 includes portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547], 1271 [Pg. 1271 is part of Doc. 707]

Kroll, Gerhard, 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284]

Krug, Julius A., 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424], 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466], 788–792 [Pgs. 788–792 include portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 471]

Kurasov, Col. Gen. Vladimir Vaselyevich, 1386 [Pg. 1386 includes portions of Doc. 753 and Doc. 754], 1420 [Pg. 1420 is part of Doc. 777], 1429 [Pg. 1429 includes portions of Doc. 786 and Doc. 787], 1436 [Pg. 1436 includes portions of Doc. 791 and Doc. 792], 1495–1496 [Pg. 1495 is part of Doc. 840]

Laboulaye. see Lefebvre de Laboulaye.

La Follette, Robert M., 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

Laloy, Jean, 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Latvia, 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

Lausmann, Bohumil, 1382 [Pg. 1382 is part of Doc. 750]

Lebanon, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]

Lefebvre de Laboulaye, François, 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 269], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Le May, Lt. Gen. Curtis, 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 557 and Doc. 558]

Lend-Lease Act (U.S.), 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 739 and Doc. 740]

Leonard, Maj. Gen. John W., 479–481 [Pgs. 479–481 include portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315]

Leopold, Rudolf, 1390–1391 [Pgs. 1390–1391 include portions of Doc. 757 and Doc. 758]

Leroy Beaulieu, Paul, 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311], 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635]

Leusse, Pierre de, 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 125], 916–917 [Pgs. 916–917 include portions of Doc. 555, Doc. 556, and Doc. 557], 1466 [Pg. 1466 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815]

Level of Industry in Germany (see also Reparations from Germany): Bizonia, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 85], 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 250], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 337], 707–709 [Pgs. 707–709 include portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 422], 716–718 [Pgs. 716–718 include portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 464], 775–776 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 779–780 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 466], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 466], 799–800 [Pgs. 799–800 include portions of Doc. 472 and Doc. 473], 805–806 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 477], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 479], 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488], 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 497], 830–843 [Pgs. 830–843 include portions of Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502], 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 502 and Doc. 503], 1329 [Pg. 1329 is part of Doc. 721]; Germany, 104n [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 78], 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 148], 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 170], 292–293 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 194], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 210], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 262], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 337], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 375], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 394], 707–709 [Pgs. 707–709 include portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 712–714 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 422], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 428], 726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 466], 834n [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 497]

Lewis, Geoffrey W., 464–465 [Pgs. 464–465 include portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309]

Liberia, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]

Lie, Trygve Halvdan, 1247–1249 [Pgs. 1247–1249 include portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696], 1251–1253 [Pgs. 1251–1253 include portions of Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, and Doc. 699]

Liebitsky, Gen. Emil, 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 736 and Doc. 737], 1369–1371 [Pgs. 1369–1371 include portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

Liechtenstein, 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 542]

Lightner, Edwin Allen, 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125]

Linebaugh, John David, 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 640]

Litchfield, Edward, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 131n [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 155–156 [Pgs. 155–156 include portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 176n [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125], 376n [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]. 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 264], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 432–433 [Pgs. 432–433 include portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 598n [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 608n [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 414]

Lithuania, 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

London Conference on Germany, Feb. 23–Mar. 6, Apr. 20–June 1 (see also under Benelux, Berlin blockade, International Authority for the Ruhr, Office of Military Government in Germany (U.S.), Reparations from Germany, Ruhr, and Security against Germany): Agenda, 42–45 [Pgs. 42–45 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 68–71 [Pgs. 68–71 include portions of Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, Doc. 44, and Doc. 45], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 47], 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 187–191 [Pgs. 187–191 include portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123, Doc. 124, and Doc. 125], 194–196 [Pgs. 194–196 include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, and Doc. 128], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 236], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 426]

Agreed documents: International control of the Ruhr, May 26, 285–288 [Pgs. 285–288 include portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 298–299 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 199], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 210], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 302], 577–578 [Pgs. 577–578 include portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 409]; Agreed Minute relating to certain articles, May 26, 290–291 [Pgs. 290–291 include portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 199], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Letter of advice to Military Governors regarding German Constitution, May 11, 240–241 [Pgs. 240–241 include portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 171], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 208], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 291], 441n [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 293], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 375], 648–649 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 393]

Letter of advice to Military Governors regarding powers of civil and military governments, May 19, 260–262 [Pgs. 260–262 include portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 208], 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 601–604 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 375], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 391], 645–646 [Pgs. 645–646 include portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 650–651 [Pgs. 650–651 include portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

Political organization, May 81, 305–306 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205]

Protection of foreign interests, May 31, 307–308 [Pgs. 307–308 include portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416]

Provisional territorial arrangements, May 26, 288–289 [Pgs. 288–289 include portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]

Reorganization of the Laender, May 26, 306–307 [Pgs. 306–307 include portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

Report on Security, May 26, 291–294 [Pgs. 291–294 include portions of Doc. 193, Doc. 194, and Doc. 195], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 199], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 334], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 360], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 362], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403]

Trizonal Export/Import policy, May 26, 289–290 [Pgs. 289–290 include portions of Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193], 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]

Agreement, areas of, 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 720]

Albanian attitude, 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Anglo-American preliminary meetings, Feb. 19–21, 75–81 [Pgs. 75–81 include portions of Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50]; Apr. 19, 1188 [Pg. 1188 is part of Doc. 667]

Arrangements for, 25–26 [Pgs. 25–26 include portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 36–37 [Pgs. 36–37 include portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 40–41 [Pgs. 40–41 include portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 64–65 [Pgs. 64–65 include portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

Belgian participation, (see also Benelux), 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 85–86 [Pgs. 85–86 include portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 61], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 69], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 208], 321–322 [Pgs. 321–322 include portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 313], 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc. 449]

Berlin situation, 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 189–191 [Pgs. 189–191 include portions of Doc. 123, Doc. 124, and Doc. 125], 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537]

Boundaries of Germany. see under West Germany.

British position, 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 475–476 [Pgs. 475–476 include portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, and Doc. 313], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 316], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 317], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 317], 491–492 [Pgs. 491–492 include portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 518–519 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 334], 521–522 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 334], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 339], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 342], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 343], 544–546 [Pgs. 544–546 include portions of Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, and Doc. 351], 549–552 [Pgs. 549–552 include portions of Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, and Doc. 356], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 357], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 561–562 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 360], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 365], 574–575 [Pgs. 574–575 include portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 583–584 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 371], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 371], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 500]

Bulgarian attitude, 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Communiqués, 134–136 [Pgs. 134–136 include portions of Doc. 88, Doc. 89, and Doc. 90], 140–143 [Pgs. 140–143 include portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 152], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 263–264 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 171], 275–276 [Pgs. 275–276 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, and Doc. 181], 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 297n [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 198], 298–300 [Pgs. 298–300 include portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 312–317 [Pgs. 312–317 include portions of Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211], 328–329 [Pgs. 328–329 include portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 226], 334–335 [Pgs. 334–335 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 364–367 [Pgs. 364–367 include portions of Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 250], 577–578 [Pgs. 577–578 include portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 1023 [Pg. 1023 is part of Doc. 603]

Constituent Assembly. see under West Germany.

Constitution. see under West Germany.

Currency reform in West Germany, 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545]

Czechoslovak attitude, 339–340 [Pgs. 339–340 include portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231], 343–345 [Pgs. 343–345 include portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, and Doc. 236], 354–355 [Pgs. 354–355 include portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Delegations, 85–86 [Pgs. 85–86 include portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 191–193 [Pgs. 191–193 include portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Division of Europe, congealment of, 1290 [Pg. 1290 is part of Doc. 719]

Foreign Ministers meeting (U.S.-U.K.-France), French proposal for, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 173], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 277–278 [Pgs. 277–278 include portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 331–332 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 226], 333n [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 226]

German assets in Italy, 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 189–190 [Pgs. 189–190 include portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 856 [Pg. 856 is part of Doc. 511]

German machine tools, 187–188 [Pgs. 187–188 include portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

German steel scrap, 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]

German trade, 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 123], 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Hungarian attitude, 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Italian participation, question of, 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 146–147 [Pgs. 146–147 include portions of Doc. 96, Doc. 97, and Doc. 98]

Luxembourg participation, (see also Benelux), 85–86 [Pgs. 85–86 include portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 69], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 208], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 313], 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc. 449]

Military Governors, role and functions of. see under West Germany.

Netherlands participation, (see also Benelux), 85–86 [Pgs. 85–86 include portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 69], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 208], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 313], 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc. 449]

Occupation statute. see under West Germany.

Polish attitude, 339–340 [Pgs. 339–340 include portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231], 343–345 [Pgs. 343–345 include portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, and Doc. 236], 354–355 [Pgs. 354–355 include portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 368–371 [Pgs. 368–371 include portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]

Political and economic organization of Germany. see under West Germany.

Praha Declaration, 339n [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 343–344 [Pgs. 343–344 include portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, and Doc. 234], 354–356 [Pgs. 354–356 include portions of Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239], 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526]

Proceedings: Feb. 23–Mar. 6, 82–85 [Pgs. 82–85 include portions of Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, and Doc. 54], 87–89 [Pgs. 87–89 include portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57], 91–92 [Pgs. 91–92 include portions of Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61], 97–100 [Pgs. 97–100 include portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 104–110 [Pgs. 104–110 include portions of Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73], 114–116 [Pgs. 114–116 include portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 124–128 [Pgs. 124–128 include portions of Doc. 83, Doc. 84, and Doc. 85], 130–135 [Pgs. 130–135 include portions of Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, Doc. 89, and Doc. 90], 136n [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 90], 138–141 [Pgs. 138–141 include portions of Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94]; Apr. 20–June 1, 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 197–205 [Pgs. 197–205 include portions of Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 214–216 [Pgs. 214–216 include portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, and Doc. 140], 223–229 [Pgs. 223–229 include portions of Doc. 144, Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147], 231–233 [Pgs. 231–233 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, and Doc. 152], 237–240 [Pgs. 237–240 include portions of Doc. 153, Doc. 154, and Doc. 155], 242–251 [Pgs. 242–251 include portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163], 254–258 [Pgs. 254–258 include portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168], 260n [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 262–267 [Pgs. 262–267 include portions of Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173], 279–281 [Pgs. 279–281 include portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, and Doc. 185], 285n [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190], 288n [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 290n [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 291n [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 294–295 [Pgs. 294–295 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196], 298–299 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 199], 305n [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205], 306n [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 205], 307n [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 308–309 [Pgs. 308–309 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, and Doc. 208], 313n [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534]

Protection of foreign interests. see under West Germany.

Provisional Government. see under West Germany.

Recess of, 113–114 [Pgs. 113–114 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, and Doc. 76], 123–124 [Pgs. 123–124 include portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

Recommendations: Approval of: Benelux, 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]; France, 280–281 [Pgs. 280–281 include portions of Doc. 183, Doc. 184, and Doc. 185], 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 187, Doc. 188, and Doc. 189], 295–296 [Pgs. 295–296 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197], 298–304 [Pgs. 298–304 include portions of Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 308–309 [Pgs. 308–309 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, and Doc. 208], 317–328 [Pgs. 317–328 include portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, and Doc. 224], 330–337 [Pgs. 330–337 include portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, and Doc. 228], 376–378 [Pgs. 376–378 include portions of Doc. 252, Doc. 253, and Doc. 254], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 313], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 331], 518–519 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 334], 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466]; United Kingdom, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 200], 308–309 [Pgs. 308–309 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, and Doc. 208], 318–320 [Pgs. 318–320 include portions of Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, and Doc. 215], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 331–335 [Pgs. 331–335 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 309]; United States. 300–303 [Pgs. 300–303 include portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, and Doc. 203], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 319–320 [Pgs. 319–320 include portions of Doc. 213, Doc. 214, and Doc. 215], 324–325 [Pgs. 324–325 include portions of Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 226], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 339]

Implementation of, 375–702 [Pgs. 375–702 include portions of Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, Doc. 340, Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, Doc. 414, Doc. 415, and Doc. 416], 1289 [Pg. 1289 is part of Doc. 719], 1294–1295 [Pg. 1294 is part of Doc. 719], 1297 [Pg. 1297 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 1316 [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 720], 1319 [Pg. 1319 is part of Doc. 720], 1330 [Pg. 1330 is part of Doc. 721]

Reconvening, 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 163–165 [Pgs. 163–165 include portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109], 170n [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 175n [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 177n [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 120], 187–188 [Pgs. 187–188 include portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123]

Report, June 1, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 200], 303–304 [Pgs. 303–304 include portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 306n [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 205], 307n [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 309–313 [Pgs. 309–313 include portions of Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, and Doc. 210], 319n [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 213], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 226], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 339], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 668–670 [Pgs. 668–670 include portions of Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, and Doc. 405], 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 700–701 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 416], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 720]

Rumanian attitude, 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Soviet attitude, (see also under Berlin blockade), 313n [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 331–332 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 226], 338–341 [Pgs. 338–341 include portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232], 343–354 [Pgs. 343–354 include portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, and Doc. 237], 350–360 [Pgs. 350–360 include portions of Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240], 362–364 [Pgs. 362–364 include portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, and Doc. 243], 366–371 [Pgs. 366–371 include portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453], 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 883–885 [Pgs. 883–885 include portions of Doc. 525, Doc. 526, and Doc. 527], 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 573], 949–950 [Pgs. 949–950 include portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575], 954 [Pg. 954 is part of Doc. 576], 962 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 579], 998–1000 [Pgs. 998–1000 include portions of Doc. 593 and Doc. 594], 1002–1005 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 594], 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 639], 1202 [Pg. 1202 is part of Doc. 673], 1319 [Pg. 1319 is part of Doc. 720], 1322–1323 [Pg. 1322 is part of Doc. 721]

Warsaw Declaration of Foreign Ministers, June 24, 370–371 [Pgs. 370–371 include portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 560], 924–925 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 560]

West German reaction, 328–330 [Pgs. 328–330 include portions of Doc. 223, Doc. 224, and Doc. 225], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 769n [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]

Working Committee, 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 116–117 [Pgs. 116–117 include portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

Working Parties, 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 114–116 [Pgs. 114–116 include portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 83], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 130–138 [Pgs. 130–138 include portions of Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 131], 204–205 [Pgs. 204–205 include portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 135], 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 226–228 [Pgs. 226–228 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 288–289 [Pgs. 288–289 include portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 199]

Yugoslav attitude, 339–340 [Pgs. 339–340 include portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231], 343–345 [Pgs. 343–345 include portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, and Doc. 236], 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

London Conference on the Ruhr, Nov. 11–Dec. 24 (see also International Authority for the Ruhr; Military Security Board under Security against Germany; Ruhr; and West Germany: Industries, prohibited and restricted): Belgian participation 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 317], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 317], 491–492 [Pgs. 491–492 include portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 329], 524–525 [Pgs. 524–525 include portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, and Doc. 337], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 339], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 353], 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 371], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 371]

Benelux participation, 482–483 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 316], 506–507 [Pgs. 506–507 include portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 531–532 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 339], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 343], 540n [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 549–550 [Pgs. 549–550 include portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 556–557 [Pgs. 556–557 include portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 561–562 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 360], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 362], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 367]

Communiqué, Dec. 28, 558n [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 359], 562–564 [Pgs. 562–564 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, and Doc. 362], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 362], 577–581 [Pgs. 577–581 include portions of Doc. 369, Doc. 370, and Doc. 371]

Delegations, 473–475 [Pgs. 473–475 include portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]

Draft agreement for International Authority for the Ruhr, Dee. 28, 573n [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 576–578 [Pgs. 576–578 include portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370], 580–595 [Pgs. 580–595 include portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]; additional agreed minutes, 576–577 [Pgs. 576–577 include portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370], 596–597 [Pgs. 596–597 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

French position, 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 475–479 [Pgs. 475–479 include portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 316], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 317], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 317], 491–492 [Pgs. 491–492 include portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 512–514 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 331], 517–518 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 334], 523–525 [Pgs. 523–525 include portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, and Doc. 337], 530–533 [Pgs. 530–533 include portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 535 [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 537–539 [Pgs. 537–539 include portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 542–553 [Pgs. 542–553 include portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 555–556 [Pgs. 555–556 include portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 558–562 [Pgs. 558–562 include portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 564–565 [Pgs. 564–565 include portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 569–571 [Pgs. 569–571 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 574–575 [Pgs. 574–575 include portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 371], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 371]

Luxembourg participation, 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 317], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 317], 491–492 [Pgs. 491–492 include portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 339], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 371], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 371]

Netherlands participation, 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 316], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 317], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 317], 491–492 [Pgs. 491–492 include portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 339], 544–545 [Pgs. 544–545 include portions of Doc. 348, Doc. 349, and Doc. 350], 561–563 [Pgs. 561–563 include portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 367], 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 371], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 371]

Preparations, 448–456 [Pgs. 448–456 include portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 464–471 [Pgs. 464–471 include portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309]

Proceedings, Nov. 11–Dec. 24, 472–473 [Pgs. 472–473 include portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 475–479 [Pgs. 475–479 include portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 482–483 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 316], 505–508 [Pgs. 505–508 include portions of Doc. 328, Doc. 329, and Doc. 330], 524–525 [Pgs. 524–525 include portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, and Doc. 337], 530–534 [Pgs. 530–534 include portions of Doc. 338, Doc. 339, and Doc. 340], 537–540 [Pgs. 537–540 include portions of Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345], 543–546 [Pgs. 543–546 include portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, and Doc. 351], 549–550 [Pgs. 549–550 include portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 559–567 [Pgs. 559–567 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 569–577 [Pgs. 569–577 include portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370]

Soviet exploitation of Western differences regarding, possibility of, 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

U.S. draft agreement, 479–482 [Pgs. 479–482 include portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, Doc. 315, and Doc. 316], 484–492 [Pgs. 484–492 include portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 505–507 [Pgs. 505–507 include portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 341]

U.S. position, 465–471 [Pgs. 465–471 include portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 492–494 [Pgs. 492–494 include portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319], 513–514 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 331], 519–521 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 334], 525–528 [Pgs. 525–528 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 532–535 [Pgs. 532–535 include portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341], 537–539 [Pgs. 537–539 include portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350], 549–550 [Pgs. 549–550 include portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 356], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 357], 556–557 [Pgs. 556–557 include portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 559–564 [Pgs. 559–564 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, and Doc. 362], 566–568 [Pgs. 566–568 include portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364], 573–577 [Pgs. 573–577 include portions of Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370]

US. private financial interests in Ruhr, allegations regarding, 544–545 [Pgs. 544–545 include portions of Doc. 348, Doc. 349, and Doc. 350]

Loridan, Walter, 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

Lovett, Robert A.: Austria, 1362–1363 [Pgs. 1362–1363 include portions of Doc. 734, Doc. 735, and Doc. 736], 1366–1367 [Pgs. 1366–1367 include portions of Doc. 737, Doc. 738, and Doc. 739], 1378 [Pg. 1378 includes portions of Doc. 747 and Doc. 748], 1390–1393 [Pgs. 1390–1393 include portions of Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759], 1408–1411 [Pgs. 1408–1411 include portions of Doc. 766, Doc. 767, Doc. 768, Doc. 769, and Doc. 770], 1417–1418 [Pgs. 1417–1418 include portions of Doc. 774, Doc. 775, and Doc. 776], 1444–1445 [Pgs. 1444–1445 include portions of Doc. 797, Doc. 798, and Doc. 799]; Austrian peace treaty, 1459n [Pg. 1459 includes portions of Doc. 809 and Doc. 810], 1468 [Pg. 1468 includes portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817], 1482–1485 [Pgs. 1482–1485 include portions of Doc. 830, Doc. 831, and Doc. 832], 1487 [Pg. 1487 includes portions of Doc. 833 and Doc. 834], 1490 [Pg. 1490 includes portions of Doc. 835 and Doc. 836], 1492–1494 [Pgs. 1492–1494 include portions of Doc. 837, Doc. 838, and Doc. 839], 1497–1498 [Pgs. 1497–1498 include portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842], 1500 [Pg. 1500 includes portions of Doc. 843 and Doc. 844], 1508 [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, and Doc. 854]; Berlin blockade, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 889–890 [Pgs. 889–890 include portions of Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531], 895–897 [Pgs. 895–897 include portions of Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, and Doc. 538], 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 538 and Doc. 539], 900n [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 559 and Doc. 560], 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 590] passim, 1013n [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599], 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], 1099–1100 [Pgs. 1099–1100 include portions of Doc. 633, Doc. 634, and Doc. 635], 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 640], 1118 [Pg. 1118 includes portions of Doc. 640 and Doc. 641], 1126 [Pg. 1126 includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644], 1132 [Pg. 1132 is part of Doc. 647], 1135 [Pg. 1135 is part of Doc. 648], 1180–1256 [Pgs. 1180–1256 include portions of Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, Doc. 683, Doc. 684, Doc. 685, Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, and Doc. 701] passim, 1276–1283 [Pgs. 1276–1283 include portions of Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, and Doc. 716]; Bizonal German economic organizations, revision, 23–24 [Pgs. 23–24 include portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 34n [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 17]; currency reform in Germany, 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 523 and Doc. 524], 880n [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 524]; currency reform in West Germany, 904–905 [Pgs. 904–905 include portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545], 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 546]; industries in Germany, prohibited and restricted, control over, 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 505 and Doc. 506]; London Conference on Germany, 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 112–113 [Pgs. 112–113 include portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 78], 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 194–195 [Pgs. 194–195 include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127], 296–297 [Pgs. 296–297 include portions of Doc. 196, Doc. 197, and Doc. 198], 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 229], 343n [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 371–374 [Pgs. 371–374 include portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 426–427 [Pgs. 426–427 include portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287], 430–431 [Pgs. 430–431 include portions of Doc. 287, Doc. 288, and Doc. 289], 432n [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]; occupation statute for Germany, 636–637 [Pgs. 636–637 include portions of Doc. 386, Doc. 387, and Doc. 388], 662–664 [Pgs. 662–664 include portions of Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, and Doc. 397]; reparations from Germany, 120–122 [Pgs. 120–122 include portions of Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82], 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 199–200 [Pgs. 199–200 include portions of Doc. 129, Doc. 130, and Doc. 131], 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 711n [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 422], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 425], 726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 730–731 [Pgs. 730–731 include portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433], 742–743 [Pgs. 742–743 include portions of Doc. 440, Doc. 441, and Doc. 442], 749–750 [Pgs. 749–750 include portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 466 and Doc. 467], 790n [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 792–793 [Pgs. 792–793 include portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 810–814 [Pgs. 810–814 include portions of Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, and Doc. 483], 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 830–831 [Pgs. 830–831 include portions of Doc. 492, Doc. 493, and Doc. 494], 835–838 [Pgs. 835–838 include portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500], 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502]; Ruhr question, 205–206 [Pgs. 205–206 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 153], 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 460–524 [Pgs. 460–524 include portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, and Doc. 336] passim, 540n [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 541–569 [Pgs. 541–569 include portions of Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365] passim, 759n [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]; Saar question, 32n [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16]; security against Germany, 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 233–234 [Pgs. 233–234 include portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 198]; Trizonal fusion proposals, 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]; U.S. policy toward Germany, 1287 [Pg. 1287 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719], 1320n [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 721], 1338 [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722]; West German provisional government, preparations for, 154–155 [Pgs. 154–155 include portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 176–177 [Pgs. 176–177 include portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 272–273 [Pgs. 272–273 include portions of Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, and Doc. 178], 275–276 [Pgs. 275–276 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, and Doc. 181]

Luc, Robert, 1463n [Pg. 1463 includes portions of Doc. 813 and Doc. 814], 1466 [Pg. 1466 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815], 1508 [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, and Doc. 854]

Lucas, Scott W., 426–427 [Pgs. 426–427 include portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287], 431n [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Ludwig, Edward, 1385 [Pg. 1385 is part of Doc. 753]

Luebbes, Erich, 1221 [Pg. 1221 is part of Doc. 682]

Luedemann, Hermann, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 257], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 410–411 [Pgs. 410–411 include portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 287], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 296], 831n [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494]

Lukyantchenko, Lt. Gen. G. S., 888 [Pg. 888 is part of Doc. 529], 912 [Pg. 912 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552]

Lunghi, H. A., 1024n [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 604], 1035n [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 609], 1042n [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 1065n [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1086n [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 629], 1093n [Pg. 1093 is part of Doc. 632], 1157n [Pg. 1157 is part of Doc. 657]

Luns, Joseph M. A. H., 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311], 482n [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 316], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 360]

Luxembourg (see also Benelux and under London Conference on Germany; London Conference on the Ruhr; Ruhr; and West Germany: Occupation statute), 23n [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 288–289 [Pgs. 288–289 include portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 236], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 1339 [Pg. 1339 is part of Doc. 722]

Macready, Sir Gordon, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

Maier, Reinhold, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 381n [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 287], 831n [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494]

Makins, Roger M., 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 47], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 821–822 [Pgs. 821–822 include portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487], 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492]

Manchuria, 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 428]

Marek, Anton, 1406 [Pg. 1406 is part of Doc. 766], 1425 [Pg. 1425 includes portions of Doc. 781 and Doc. 782], 1427 [Pg. 1427 includes portions of Doc. 784 and Doc. 785], 1433–1434 [Pg. 1433 is part of Doc. 789], 1436 [Pg. 1436 includes portions of Doc. 791 and Doc. 792]

Margolies, Daniel 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 465n [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 360], 564n [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]

Marie, André, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 983 [Pg. 983 is part of Doc. 587]

Marjoribanks, James A. M., 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 311], 1362 [Pg. 1362 includes portions of Doc. 734 and Doc. 735], 1451 [Pg. 1451 includes portions of Doc. 803 and Doc. 804], 1454 [Pg. 1454 includes portions of Doc. 805 and Doc. 806], 1463–1464 [Pgs. 1463–1464 include portions of Doc. 813 and Doc. 814], 1466–1467 [Pgs. 1466–1467 include portions of Doc. 814, Doc. 815, and Doc. 816], 1482 [Pg. 1482 is part of Doc. 830], 1496 [Pg. 1496 is part of Doc. 840], 1508 [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, and Doc. 854]

Markgraf, Paul, 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610]

Maron, Karl, 1221 [Pg. 1221 is part of Doc. 682], 1223 [Pg. 1223 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683]

Marshall, George C.: Address at Chicago on problems of European revival and German and Austrian peace settlements, Nov. 18, 1947, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 331]; Allied Control Council for Germany, 869 [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 518], 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526], 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 527], 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533]; Allied Kommandatura for Berlin, 878 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 523]; Austria, 1358–1445 [Pgs. 1358–1445 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, Doc. 734, Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, Doc. 748, Doc. 749, Doc. 750, Doc. 751, Doc. 752, Doc. 753, Doc. 754, Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, Doc. 766, Doc. 767, Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, Doc. 772, Doc. 773, Doc. 774, Doc. 775, Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, Doc. 788, Doc. 789, Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, and Doc. 799] passim; Austrian peace treaty, 1447–1509 [Pgs. 1447–1509 include portions of Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855] passim; Berlin blockade, 886–1065 [Pgs. 886–1065 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, Doc. 555, Doc. 556, Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, and Doc. 619] passim, 1072–1108 [Pgs. 1072–1108 include portions of Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, and Doc. 638] passim, 1118–1197 [Pgs. 1118–1197 include portions of Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, and Doc. 670] passim, 1211–1281 [Pgs. 1211–1281 include portions of Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, Doc. 683, Doc. 684, Doc. 685, Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, and Doc. 715] passim; Bizonal German economic organizations, revision, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 12–56 [Pgs. 12–56 include portions of Doc. 5, Doc. 6, Doc. 7, Doc. 8, Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, Doc. 22, Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, Doc. 26, Doc. 27, Doc. 28, Doc. 29, Doc. 30, Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33] passim, 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517]; Bizonal government, question of, 376–378 [Pgs. 376–378 include portions of Doc. 252, Doc. 253, and Doc. 254]; boundaries of West Germany, rectification of, 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]; coal exports from West Germany, sliding scale agreement, 74n [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 46], 291n [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 504n [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 327]; communism in Germany, 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 524 and Doc. 525], 883n [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526]; currency reform for Berlin and West Germany, 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519], 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520], 881 [Pg. 881 is part of Doc. 524], 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543], 912 [Pg. 912 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 914–915 [Pgs. 914–915 include portions of Doc. 552, Doc. 553, and Doc. 554]; democratization of Germany, 1305–1306 [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 720]; disarmament and demilitarization of Germany, 876 [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 521 and Doc. 522]; East Germany, situation in, 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]; German external assets, disposition, 857n [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 512], 859n [Pg. 859 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513]; German problem, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]; London Conference on Germany, 25–26 [Pgs. 25–26 include portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 25], 49–51 [Pgs. 49–51 include portions of Doc. 28, Doc. 29, and Doc. 30], 65–146 [Pgs. 65–146 include portions of Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, Doc. 66, Doc. 67, Doc. 68, Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, and Doc. 97] passim, 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 188–284 [Pgs. 188–284 include portions of Doc. 122, Doc. 123, Doc. 124, Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, and Doc. 189] passim, 294–349 [Pgs. 294–349 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, and Doc. 236] passim, 354–428 [Pgs. 354–428 include portions of Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287] passim, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 293], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 297]; Military Governors Conference in Berlin, 147–148 [Pgs. 147–148 include portions of Doc. 97, Doc. 98, and Doc. 99], 155–156 [Pgs. 155–156 include portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]; Military Security Board, 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]; occupation statute for West Germany, 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 624–625 [Pgs. 624–625 include portions of Doc. 380, Doc. 381, and Doc. 382], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]; Poland, U.S. relations with, 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]; reparations from Germany, 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 86–87 [Pgs. 86–87 include portions of Doc. 54, Doc. 55, and Doc. 56], 89–90 [Pgs. 89–90 include portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 120–122 [Pgs. 120–122 include portions of Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82], 128–129 [Pgs. 128–129 include portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 211–214 [Pgs. 211–214 include portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, and Doc. 139], 222–223 [Pgs. 222–223 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 241–242 [Pgs. 241–242 include portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157], 265–266 [Pgs. 265–266 include portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173], 708–737 [Pgs. 708–737 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438] passim, 746–850 [Pgs. 746–850 include portions of Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, and Doc. 508] passim; restitutions to Soviet Union and Soviet satellites, 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]; Ruhr question, 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 83], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 130–131 [Pgs. 130–131 include portions of Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 205–207 [Pgs. 205–207 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, and Doc. 135], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 492–573 [Pgs. 492–573 include portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, Doc. 340, Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc. 367] passim; Saar question, 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 32], 57–58 [Pgs. 57–58 include portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, and Doc. 35]; security against Germany, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 189]; South Tyrol question, 1352–1355 [Pgs. 1352–1355 include portions of Doc. 724, Doc. 725, Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728]; statement approving recommendations of London Conference on Germany, June 9, 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 226], 367n [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]; statement at London, 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520]; statement condemning acts of the German People’s Congress, Mar. 25, 883n [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526]; statement of May 19, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]; statement of June 30 affirming U.S. intention to remain in Berlin, 931 [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565], 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568]; statement on reparations, Sept. 1, 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474], 802n [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 475]; statement on the Ruhr, Nov. 24, 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 528–530 [Pgs. 528–530 include portions of Doc. 337, Doc. 338, and Doc. 339], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 339], 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 358]; statement regarding Department of State assumption of responsibility for civilian affairs in U.S. zone of occupation, 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]; Trizonal fusion proposals, 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 150–152 [Pgs. 150–152 include portions of Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, and Doc. 102], 670–672 [Pgs. 670–672 include portions of Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, and Doc. 407]; U.S. policy toward Germany, 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 61n [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37], 71–73 [Pgs. 71–73 include portions of Doc. 44, Doc. 45, and Doc. 46], 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 101–102 [Pgs. 101–102 include portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 318], 1287 [Pg. 1287 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719], 1297 [Pg. 1297 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 1305–1306 [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 720], 1324 [Pg. 1324 is part of Doc. 721]; West German provisional government, plans for, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 104], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 275–276 [Pgs. 275–276 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, and Doc. 181], 283–284 [Pgs. 283–284 include portions of Doc. 187, Doc. 188, and Doc. 189]

Marshall Plan. see European Recovery Program.

Martin, Edwin M., 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 47], 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 96–97 [Pgs. 96–97 include portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65], 116n [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

Massigli, René: Berlin blockade, 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 560], 933 [Pg. 933 is part of Doc. 567], 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 943–944 [Pgs. 943–944 include portions of Doc. 571 and Doc. 572], 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 573], 951n [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 575], 956n [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 576 and Doc. 577], 965 [Pg. 965 is part of Doc. 580], 974n [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 584], 978–979 [Pg. 978 is part of Doc. 586], 983 [Pg. 983 is part of Doc. 587], 986–987 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 589], 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 590], 992–993 [Pg. 992 is part of Doc. 590], 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616], 1116–1118 [Pgs. 1116–1118 include portions of Doc. 640 and Doc. 641], 1124 [Pg. 1124 includes portions of Doc. 642 and Doc. 643], 1128–1130 [Pgs. 1128–1130 include portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1142n [Pg. 1142 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650], 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662], 1179 [Pg. 1179 is part of Doc. 662]; Bizonal German economic organizations, revision, 21–23 [Pgs. 21–23 include portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11], 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]; currency reform in Germany, 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543]; German population problem, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 146]; London Conference on Germany, 82–123 [Pgs. 82–123 include portions of Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, Doc. 66, Doc. 67, Doc. 68, Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82] passim, 138–139 [Pgs. 138–139 include portions of Doc. 90, Doc. 91, and Doc. 92], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 108], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125], 200–201 [Pgs. 200–201 include portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 132], 214n [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 139], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 140], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 145], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 146], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 154], 250–280 [Pgs. 250–280 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184] passim, 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 298n [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 199], 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 309n [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 226], 364–368 [Pgs. 364–368 include portions of Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 290]; Military Security Board, 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]; reparations from Germany, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 78], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 80], 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 214n [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 139], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439], 763n [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 457], 765–766 [Pgs. 765–766 include portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462], 769n [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]; Ruhr question, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 129], 200–201 [Pgs. 200–201 include portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 204–205 [Pgs. 204–205 include portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 320]; security against Germany, 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 146], 232–233 [Pgs. 232–233 include portions of Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, and Doc. 152], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 167], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]; Soviet threat, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 173], 301n [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]; territorial claims against Germany, 218–219 [Pgs. 218–219 include portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]; Trizonal fusion proposals, 216–217 [Pgs. 216–217 include portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]; West German provisional government, plans for, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 145], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 154], 255–256 [Pgs. 255–256 include portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 262–264 [Pgs. 262–264 include portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]; West Germany, political and economic organization of, 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]; zones of occupation in Germany, establishment of, 632–633 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 386]

Mather, Maj. Walter E., 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Mayer, René, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 218]

McCaffrey, John L., 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 471], 841n [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504], 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 506 and Doc. 507]

McDermott, Michael J., 528–530 [Pgs. 528–530 include portions of Doc. 337, Doc. 338, and Doc. 339], 532n [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 339], 534n [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

McNarney, Gen. Joseph R., 357–358 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 239], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 241]

McNeil, Hector, 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 509n [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 517–518 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334], 520–522 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 334], 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 926n [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662], 1278 [Pg. 1278 includes portions of Doc. 711 and Doc. 712]

Menzel, Dr. Walter, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 391], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 393]

Merode, Prince Werner de, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311]

Migsch, Alfred, 1411 [Pg. 1411 includes portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770], 1425 [Pg. 1425 includes portions of Doc. 781 and Doc. 782]

Military Governors Conference (France-United Kingdom-United States) at Berlin, Mar. 20–Apr. 12 (see also under Benelux and Reparations from Germany): Agenda, 148–149 [Pgs. 148–149 include portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]; Bizonia, question of economic cooperation with French zone, 148–149 [Pgs. 148–149 include portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 102], 157–158 [Pgs. 157–158 include portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 107], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 111], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 120], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120]; British Dominions, question regarding consultations with military missions of, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 99], 181–183 [Pgs. 181–183 include portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]; meetings, Mar. 20–Apr. 12, 149–150 [Pgs. 149–150 include portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 156–158 [Pgs. 156–158 include portions of Doc. 104, Doc. 105, and Doc. 106], 180–181 [Pgs. 180–181 include portions of Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534]; participants, 149n [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 99], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120]; political and economic organization of West Germany, 156–157 [Pgs. 156–157 include portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 170–176 [Pgs. 170–176 include portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 183–186 [Pgs. 183–186 include portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]; provisional government for West Germany, 151–159 [Pgs. 151–159 include portions of Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, Doc. 104, Doc. 105, and Doc. 106], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 175–177 [Pgs. 175–177 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 179–181 [Pgs. 179–181 include portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120]; report by, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 99], 180–183 [Pgs. 180–183 include portions of Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534]; Ruhr, protection of rights of foreign owners in, 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 177–179 [Pgs. 177–179 include portions of Doc. 116, Doc. 117, and Doc. 118], 183–185 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 120], 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]; security against Germany, 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]; territorial arrangements, 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 168–169 [Pgs. 168–169 include portions of Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113], 173–174 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 114]; Trizonal fusion proposals, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 105], 161–163 [Pgs. 161–163 include portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 120], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120]; working parties, 131n [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 88], 145–146 [Pgs. 145–146 include portions of Doc. 95, Doc. 96, and Doc. 97], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 99], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 154–158 [Pgs. 154–158 include portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, Doc. 104, Doc. 105, and Doc. 106], 161–163 [Pgs. 161–163 include portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 167–168 [Pgs. 167–168 include portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 170–186 [Pgs. 170–186 include portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 129], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 131], 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 208]

Military Security Board. see under Security against Germany.

Millard, Hugh, 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 95–96 [Pgs. 95–96 include portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64]

Moch, Jules, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 218]

Modzelewski, Zygmut, 341–344 [Pgs. 341–344 include portions of Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, and Doc. 234], 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 360–361 [Pgs. 360–361 include portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Molotov, Vyacheslay Mikhailovich: Berlin blockade, 979–982 [Pgs. 979–982 include portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 986–990 [Pgs. 986–990 include portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 993n [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 590], 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 1001–1002 [Pg. 1001 is part of Doc. 594], 1005–1007 [Pgs. 1005–1007 include portions of Doc. 594 and Doc. 595], 1016–1123 [Pgs. 1016–1123 include portions of Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, and Doc. 642] passim, 1139–1175 [Pgs. 1139–1175 include portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, and Doc. 661] passim, 1189–1190 [Pg. 1189 is part of Doc. 667], 1201–1210 [Pgs. 1201–1210 include portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674], 1219 [Pg. 1219 is part of Doc. 681], 1227–1230 [Pgs. 1227–1230 include portions of Doc. 684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686], 1232 [Pg. 1232 is part of Doc. 687]; Smith-Molotov notes, 1421 [Pg. 1421 includes portions of Doc. 778 and Doc. 779]; Smith-Molotov-Wallace-Stalin communications, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]; Warsaw Conference of Foreign Ministers, 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Morgenthau Plan, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 422]

Moscow Declaration, Nov. 1, 1943, 1341–1342 [Pg. 1341 is part of Doc. 723], 1345 [Pg. 1345 is part of Doc. 723], 1432–1433 [Pgs. 1432–1433 include portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789], 1467 [Pg. 1467 includes portions of Doc. 815 and Doc. 816], 1475 [Pg. 1475 includes portions of Doc. 823 and Doc. 824], 1493 [Pg. 1493 is part of Doc. 838]

Most-favored-nation treatment, 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 416], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 720]

Mueller, Gebhard, 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 287]

Mueller, Josef, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4], 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 295]

Murphy, Robert D.: Allied Control Council for Germany, 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 884–886 [Pgs. 884–886 include portions of Doc. 526, Doc. 527, and Doc. 528], 892–893 [Pgs. 892–893 include portions of Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534]; Allied Kommandatura in Berlin, 878–879 [Pgs. 878–879 include portions of Doc. 523 and Doc. 524]; Berlin blockade, 886–988 [Pgs. 886–988 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, Doc. 555, Doc. 556, Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, and Doc. 589] passim, 1006–1053 [Pgs. 1006–1053 include portions of Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615] passim, 1065–1177 [Pgs. 1065–1177 include portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662] passim, 1213–1282 [Pgs. 1213–1282 include portions of Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, Doc. 683, Doc. 684, Doc. 685, Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, and Doc. 716] passim; Bizonal German economic organizations, revision of, 1–20 [Pgs. 1–20 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8], 22–23 [Pgs. 22–23 include portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11], 26–31 [Pgs. 26–31 include portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15], 39n [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 45–49 [Pgs. 45–49 include portions of Doc. 25, Doc. 26, Doc. 27, Doc. 28, and Doc. 29], 51–52 [Pgs. 51–52 include portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 56–57 [Pgs. 56–57 include portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34], 294–295 [Pgs. 294–295 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]; Bizonal provisional government, question, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]; boundaries of Western Germany, rectification of, 694–696 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 414]; Communism in Germany, 882–883 [Pgs. 882–883 include portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526]; currency reform in Germany and Berlin, proposals regarding, 870–873 [Pgs. 870–873 include portions of Doc. 518, Doc. 519, and Doc. 520], 881 [Pg. 881 is part of Doc. 524], 912–915 [Pgs. 912–915 include portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, and Doc. 554]; disarmament and demilitarization of Germany, 876–877 [Pgs. 876–877 include portions of Doc. 521 and Doc. 522]; Economic Cooperation Act of 1948 adherence of British and American zones to, 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514]; industries in Germany, prohibited and restricted, control over, 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 505 and Doc. 506]; level of industry in Germany, 834n [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 497]; London Conference on Germany. 40n [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 44–45 [Pgs. 44–45 include portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 78], 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 188–192 [Pgs. 188–192 include portions of Doc. 122, Doc. 123, Doc. 124, and Doc. 125], 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 216–219 [Pgs. 216–219 include portions of Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141], 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 302–303 [Pgs. 302–303 include portions of Doc. 201, Doc. 202, and Doc. 203], 328–330 [Pgs. 328–330 include portions of Doc. 223, Doc. 224, and Doc. 225], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 366–367 [Pgs. 366–367 include portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246], 883–884 [Pgs. 883–884 include portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526]; Military Governors Conference at Berlin, 147–150 [Pgs. 147–150 include portions of Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99, and Doc. 100], 155–163 [Pgs. 155–163 include portions of Doc. 104, Doc. 105, Doc. 106, Doc. 107, and Doc. 108], 166–170 [Pgs. 166–170 include portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114], 175–180 [Pgs. 175–180 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, and Doc. 119], 186–187 [Pgs. 186–187 include portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122]; Military Security Board, 667–668 [Pgs. 667–668 include portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403]; occupation statute for West Germany, preparation of, 597–598 [Pgs. 597–598 include portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385], 631n [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 386], 634n [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 386], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 637n [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 644–646 [Pgs. 644–646 include portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, and Doc. 393], 662–664 [Pgs. 662–664 include portions of Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, and Doc. 397]; reparations from Germany, 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 80], 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458], 798n [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 802n [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 475], 807–808 [Pgs. 807–808 include portions of Doc. 477, Doc. 478, and Doc. 479], 830n [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 831n [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 832–833 [Pgs. 832–833 include portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 505 and Doc. 506]; Ruhr question, 205–206 [Pgs. 205–206 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134], 235–236 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 153], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 449n [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 456–460 [Pgs. 456–460 include portions of Doc. 301, Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 496–497 [Pgs. 496–497 include portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 498n [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 321], 508–509 [Pgs. 508–509 include portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, and Doc. 331], 517n [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334], 523–524 [Pgs. 523–524 include portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 528n [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 540n [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 547 [Pg. 547 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 551–553 [Pgs. 551–553 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357]; Saar question, 32n [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 55–57 [Pgs. 55–57 include portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34]; South Tyrol optants in Germany, repatriation, 1352–1353 [Pgs. 1352–1353 include portions of Doc. 724, Doc. 725, and Doc. 726]; Soviet Union, proposed démarche to regarding recommendations of the London Conference on Germany, 367–368 [Pgs. 367–368 include portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248]; Trizonal fusion proposals, 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 152–154 [Pgs. 152–154 include portions of Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103], 670–671 [Pgs. 670–671 include portions of Doc. 404, Doc. 405, and Doc. 406], 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 409]; U.S. policy toward Germany, 1320n [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 721], 1338–1340 [Pgs. 1338–1340 include portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722]; West German constitution and provisional government, preparation of, 154–155 [Pgs. 154–155 include portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104], 175–176 [Pgs. 175–176 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 173], 272–273 [Pgs. 272–273 include portions of Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, and Doc. 178], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 375–376 [Pgs. 375–376 include portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 380–384 [Pgs. 380–384 include portions of Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, and Doc. 258], 392–403 [Pgs. 392–403 include portions of Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 410–412 [Pgs. 410–412 include portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 414–426 [Pgs. 414–426 include portions of Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 427n [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 431–441 [Pgs. 431–441 include portions of Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 443–448 [Pgs. 443–448 include portions of Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299]

Mussolini, Benito, 1353 [Pg. 1353 includes portions of Doc. 725 and Doc. 726]

Myers, Robert, 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 466 and Doc. 467]

National Advisory Council (NAC) on International Monetary and Financial Problems (U.S.), 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 904n [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543]

National Security Council (U.S.): Austrian peace treaty, 1494 [Pg. 1494 includes portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1496 [Pg. 1496 is part of Doc. 840], 1498 [Pg. 1498 is part of Doc. 842], 1510 [Pg. 1510 includes portions of Doc. 855 and Doc. 856]; Berlin blockade, 965–966 [Pgs. 965–966 include portions of Doc. 580 and Doc. 581], 977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 586], 994n [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 591], 1147 [Pg. 1147 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652], 1194 [Pg. 1194 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1199n [Pg. 1199 is part of Doc. 671], 1240n [Pg. 1240 is part of Doc. 693], 1281 [Pg. 1281 includes portions of Doc. 714 and Doc. 715]; restitutions from Germany, 794n [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 470]; U.S. policy toward Germany, 1324 [Pg. 1324 is part of Doc. 721]

Nelson, Saul, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 309], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 315], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

Netherlands (see also Benelux and under International Authority for the Ruhr, London Conference on Germany, London Conference on the Ruhr, and Ruhr): Bizonal German economic organizations, interest in the revision of, 23n [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Brussels treaty, signatory of, 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

Germany: Economic recovery, effect of, 1309 [Pg. 1309 is part of Doc. 720]; policy toward, 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 1339 [Pg. 1339 is part of Doc. 722]; territorial arrangements and claims, 288–289 [Pgs. 288–289 include portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 316]

Reparations from Germany, 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419]

Western Union, relationship to, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 236]

Neuman, Franz, 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]

Nicholas, Harry I., 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]

Nicholls, John W., 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 47], 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 116n [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 311], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334]

Nitze, Paul H, 465–471 [Pgs. 465–471 include portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 523n [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 335], 562n [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 360], 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 499]

Noblet d’Anglure, Jean de, 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Noce, Maj. Gen. Daniel, 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 271], 739–740 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 439]

Noiret, Lt. Gen. Roger, 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 396n [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 432n [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 290], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 409], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, and Doc. 412], 891 [Pg. 891 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 948–950 [Pgs. 948–950 include portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, and Doc. 575]

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 194n [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 318], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 331], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 353], 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 1195n [Pg. 1195 is part of Doc. 669], 1240–1241 [Pg. 1240 is part of Doc. 693], 1301n [Pg. 1301 is part of Doc. 720]

Norway, 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

Nuremberg Military Tribunals, 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 375]

Obert de Thieusies, Vicomte Alain, 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 94], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 125], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311]

Oechsner, Frederick, 1194 [Pg. 1194 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1412 [Pg. 1412 includes portions of Doc. 770 and Doc. 771]

Office of Military Government in German (U.S.) (OMGUS): Administrative costs, responsibility for, 1318 [Pg. 1318 is part of Doc. 720]; Austrian question, 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 1410 [Pg. 1410 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 1444 [Pg. 1444 includes portions of Doc. 797 and Doc. 798]; Berlin blockade, 932 [Pg. 932 is part of Doc. 566], 1283–1284 [Pg. 1283 is part of Doc. 716]; Civil Affairs Division (CAD), 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 264], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 441n [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 293], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]; Communist Party in Germany, 1313 [Pg. 1313 is part of Doc. 720]; Council of European Economic Cooperation, representation in, 169–170 [Pgs. 169–170 include portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114]; Information Control Division (ICD), 911 [Pg. 911 includes portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551]; London Conference on Germany, participation in, 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]; occupation statute for West Germany, preparation of, 597–598 [Pgs. 597–598 include portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374], 607–613 [Pgs. 607–613 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 397]; People’s Congress, prohibition of activities of, 1313 [Pg. 1313 is part of Doc. 720]; provisional government of West Germany, plans for, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 425–426 [Pgs. 425–426 include portions of Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 431n [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 432n [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 498n [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 321]; reparations from Germany, 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 471]; Ruhr question, 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 267], 449–455 [Pgs. 449–455 include portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 461–464 [Pgs. 461–464 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 313], 480–481 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 315], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 321], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 540–541 [Pgs. 540–541 include portions of Doc. 344, Doc. 345, and Doc. 346]; Saar question, 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]; South Tyrol optants in Germany, repatriation, 1353–1354 [Pgs. 1353–1354 include portions of Doc. 725, Doc. 726, and Doc. 727]; Trizonal fusion proposals, 671–672 [Pgs. 671–672 include portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]; West German boundaries, 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]; West Germany, preparation of constitution for, 441n [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 293]

Oliver, Covey T., 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 790n [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 1463n [Pg. 1463 includes portions of Doc. 813 and Doc. 814]

Ollenhauer, Erich, 1272 [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708]

Oppenheimer, Fritz E., 32n [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125], 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 200], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 328], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 551–553 [Pgs. 551–553 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357]

Organization for European Economic Cooperation (OEEC) (see also under Austria and International Authority for the Ruhr): Bizonia, relationship to, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]; Charter, 235–236 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 153]; Convention concerning, 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 315], 487–488 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 317], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 317], 585–586 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 371], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 372]; countries participating, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 210], 1347 [Pg. 1347 is part of Doc. 723]; programs, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 146], 235–236 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 153], 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 252–253 [Pgs. 252–253 include portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]; West German relationship to, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 210], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 370], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 393]

Ottillinger, Margarethe, 1442 [Pg. 1442 includes portions of Doc. 795 and Doc. 796]

Overseas Consultants, Inc., 792–793 [Pgs. 792–793 include portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

Pakistan, 1161 [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 658]

Panafieu, François de, 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492], 841n [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 512]

Panuch, J. Anthony, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

Panyushkin, Alexander, 338–339 [Pgs. 338–339 include portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 343–354 [Pgs. 343–354 include portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, and Doc. 237], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239], 362–363 [Pgs. 362–363 include portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 942n [Pg. 942 is part of Doc. 571], 947n [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 573], 950 [Pg. 950 includes portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575], 960–964 [Pgs. 960–964 include portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579], 990 [Pg. 990 is part of Doc. 590], 1180–1184 [Pgs. 1180–1184 include portions of Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, and Doc. 665], 1187 [Pg. 1187 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667]

Paris, Jacques-Camille, 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 151–152 [Pgs. 151–152 include portions of Doc. 100, Doc. 101, and Doc. 102], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 125]

Parisot, Georges Louis, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311]

Parker, Lt. Col. Theodore W., 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 47], 1359–1361 [Pgs. 1359–1361 include portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, and Doc. 734]

Parodi, Alexandre, 1215 [Pg. 1215 is part of Doc. 678], 1223 [Pg. 1223 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1248 [Pg. 1248 includes portions of Doc. 694 and Doc. 695], 1250 [Pg. 1250 is part of Doc. 696]

Pauley, Edwin W., 722–726 [Pgs. 722–726 include portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 486]

Pavlov, Vladimir Nikolayevich, 1024n [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 604], 1025 [Pg. 1025 is part of Doc. 604], 1035n [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 609], 1042n [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 1065n [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1086n [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 629], 1088 [Pg. 1088 is part of Doc. 630], 1093n [Pg. 1093 is part of Doc. 632]

Pearson, Lester B., 1250 [Pg. 1250 is part of Doc. 696], 1263–1264 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 704]

Penson, Hubert, 460–461 [Pgs. 460–461 include portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, and Doc. 305], 464–465 [Pgs. 464–465 include portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309]

Perrineau, Georges, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311]

Peterson, Sir Maurice Drummond, 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 586], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 586], 986–987 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 589], 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 590], 995n [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592]

Pfeiffer, Anton, 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 269], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 391], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 393]

Philip, André, 326n [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222]

Philippines, 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 428]

Poland (see also under London Conference on Germany): European Recovery Program, attitude toward, 355–356 [Pgs. 355–356 include portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239], 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 250]

Germany, relations with: Border question, 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 1316 [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 720]; German displaced persons, disposition of, 1303 [Pg. 1303 is part of Doc. 720]; menace of, 361–362 [Pgs. 361–362 include portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 248]; remilitarization of, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 232]

Praha Conference of Foreign Ministers, 339–341 [Pgs. 339–341 include portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232], 343–345 [Pgs. 343–345 include portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, and Doc. 236], 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Reparations from Germany (see also Reparations: Soviet satellites), 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 124], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 714n [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 422], 726–728 [Pgs. 726–728 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, and Doc. 431], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439]

Soviet armed forces in Poland, 1329 [Pg. 1329 is part of Doc. 721]

Soviet Union, relations with, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 232], 354–355 [Pgs. 354–355 include portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 240], 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 1291 [Pg. 1291 is part of Doc. 719]

United States, relations with, 341–343 [Pgs. 341–343 include portions of Doc. 231, Doc. 232, and Doc. 233], 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 237], 361–362 [Pgs. 361–362 include portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Warsaw Conference of Foreign Ministers, 916n [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 922n [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 560]

Policy Planning Staff of the Department of State: Berlin question, 1194–1199 [Pgs. 1194–1199 include portions of Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, and Doc. 671], 1240–1247 [Pgs. 1240–1247 include portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694]; U.S. policy toward Germany, 1287–1297 [Pgs. 1287–1297 include portions of Doc. 718, Doc. 719, and Doc. 720], 1320–1338 [Pgs. 1320–1338 include portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722]

Portugal, 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 511], 856–857 [Pgs. 856–857 include portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 860–861 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 513]

Potsdam Conference. see Conference of Berlin.

Potsdam Declaration, Aug. 2, 1945, 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 69], 734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 436], 1465 [Pg. 1465 is part of Doc. 814]

Praha Foreign Ministers Conference (Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Yugoslavia), Feb. 17–18 (see also Praha Declaration under London Conference on Germany), 339–341 [Pgs. 339–341 include portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232], 343–345 [Pgs. 343–345 include portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, and Doc. 236], 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Prawin, Maj. Gen. Jakub, 368n [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248]

Preparatory Commission of the International Refugee Organization (PCIRO), 1303 [Pg. 1303 is part of Doc. 720]

Price, Gwilym A., 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 471], 841n [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508]

Public Law 84 and Public Law 389. see under Austria.

Public Law 472, 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 466], 787n [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 466], 1406 [Pg. 1406 is part of Doc. 766]

Raab, Julius, 1375 [Pg. 1375 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 1384–1385 [Pgs. 1384–1385 include portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753]

Rawlings, Thomas, 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 466 and Doc. 467], 790n [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468]

Reber, Samuel: Austrian armed forces, 1358–1359 [Pgs. 1358–1359 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, and Doc. 732], 1361–1366 [Pgs. 1361–1366 include portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738]; Austrian peace treaty, 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 775 and Doc. 776], 1460 [Pg. 1460 includes portions of Doc. 810 and Doc. 811], 1463–1472 [Pgs. 1463–1472 include portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, and Doc. 821], 1474–1481 [Pgs. 1474–1481 include portions of Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, and Doc. 829], 1483 [Pg. 1483 includes portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831], 1485–1490 [Pgs. 1485–1490 include portions of Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, and Doc. 836], 1492 [Pg. 1492 includes portions of Doc. 837 and Doc. 838], 1494–1497 [Pgs. 1494–1497 include portions of Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842], 1500–1506 [Pgs. 1500–1506 include portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, and Doc. 851], 1508–1509 [Pgs. 1508–1509 include portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855], 1515n [Pg. 1515 is part of Doc. 857]; Berlin blockade, 965 [Pg. 965 is part of Doc. 580], 977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 586], 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 590], 994n [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 591], 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 640], 1142 [Pg. 1142 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650], 1149 [Pg. 1149 is part of Doc. 652], 1236n [Pg. 1236 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690]; Bizonal German economic organizations, revision, 37n [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]; disarmament and demilitarization of Germany, 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38]; London Conference on Germany, 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 47], 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 124n [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 83], 151–152 [Pgs. 151–152 include portions of Doc. 100, Doc. 101, and Doc. 102], 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 187n [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 124], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 173], 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]; Ruhr question, 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 493n [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 318], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 562n [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 360], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366]; security against Germany, 61n [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37], 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC), 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1]

Reimann, Max, 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

Reinhardt, George F., 1211n [Pg. 1211 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675]

Reinstein, Jacques J., 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 550–551 [Pgs. 550–551 include portions of Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, and Doc. 356], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 841n [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 1287n [Pg. 1287 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719]

Renner, Karl, 1453 [Pg. 1453 includes portions of Doc. 804 and Doc. 805]

Reparations from Germany (see also German External Assets and West Germany: Industries, prohibited and restricted; see also under Allied Control Authority for Germany, Congress (U.S.), Department of the Army, Economic Cooperation Administration, European Recovery Program and Saar): Allied Control Council for Germany, 118–119 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 78], 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462]

Belgium, 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Benelux, 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

British policy, 128–130 [Pgs. 128–130 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86], 139–140 [Pgs. 139–140 include portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93], 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 704–707 [Pgs. 704–707 include portions of Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 421], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 422], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424], 710–720 [Pgs. 710–720 include portions of Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, and Doc. 426], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439], 762–764 [Pgs. 762–764 include portions of Doc. 456, Doc. 457, and Doc. 458], 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 770–71 [Pgs. 770–771 include portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 465], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 469], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 802–807 [Pgs. 802–807 include portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478], 811–816 [Pgs. 811–816 include portions of Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 819–823 [Pgs. 819–823 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 827–829 [Pgs. 827–829 include portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 838–841 [Pgs. 838–841 include portions of Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc. 501], 845–846 [Pgs. 845–846 include portions of Doc. 502, Doc. 503, and Doc. 504], 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508]

Cabinet (U.S.), policy considerations by, 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 421], 711n [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 422], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424], 719–721 [Pgs. 719–721 include portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 726–731 [Pgs. 726–731 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433], 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 466 and Doc. 467], 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 467]; Ad Hoc Committee, 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 467], 790n [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 468], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 471]; Cabinet Committee, 790–793 [Pgs. 790–793 include portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 796–797 [Pgs. 796–797 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]; Working Group to reexamine dismantling lists, 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 731–733 [Pgs. 731–733 include portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 438], 740–742 [Pgs. 740–742 include portions of Doc. 439, Doc. 440, and Doc. 441], 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 764–767 [Pgs. 764–767 include portions of Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 778–779 [Pgs. 778–779 include portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466], 788–789 [Pgs. 788–789 include portions of Doc. 466 and Doc. 467]

Cabinet Technical Mission on Reparations (U.S.), 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 128], 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 265–266 [Pgs. 265–266 include portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173], 740–743 [Pgs. 740–743 include portions of Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, and Doc. 442], 746–751 [Pgs. 746–751 include portions of Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc. 449], 764–769 [Pgs. 764–769 include portions of Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, and Doc. 463], 775–776 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 778–779 [Pgs. 778–779 include portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466], 790–791 [Pgs. 790–791 include portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 469], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 471], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477], 807–808 [Pgs. 807–808 include portions of Doc. 477, Doc. 478, and Doc. 479], 813–814 [Pgs. 813–814 include portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 486]; draft report, 774–778 [Pgs. 774–778 include portions of Doc. 464, Doc. 465, and Doc. 466], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 466 and Doc. 467]; final report, 778–792 [Pgs. 778–792 include portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 796–797 [Pgs. 796–797 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 477]

Capital equipment removals, 722–723 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 428], 726–727 [Pgs. 726–727 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430], 734–735 [Pgs. 734–735 include portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc. 449], 754–755 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 451], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458], 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 772–773 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 464], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 466], 799 [Pg. 799 is part of Doc. 472], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 479], 819–820 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 486]

Completion, question of, 1298 [Pg. 1298 is part of Doc. 720], 1336 [Pg. 1336 is part of Doc. 721]

Controls over, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 374], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 378], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 394], 1333 [Pg. 1333 is part of Doc. 721]

Current production, question of removals from, 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 428], 726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 486], 925 [Pg. 925 is part of Doc. 560], 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 1452 [Pg. 1452 is part of Doc. 804]

Deliveries from Germany, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 48], 81–82 [Pgs. 81–82 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 96–97 [Pgs. 96–97 include portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 78], 139–140 [Pgs. 139–140 include portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 124], 199–200 [Pgs. 199–200 include portions of Doc. 129, Doc. 130, and Doc. 131], 222–223 [Pgs. 222–223 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 228–229 [Pgs. 228–229 include portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 241–242 [Pgs. 241–242 include portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 422], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 426], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439], 744–746 [Pgs. 744–746 include portions of Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445], 751–752 [Pgs. 751–752 include portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, and Doc. 450], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 451], 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458], 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]

Dismantling and removal of plants, questions regarding, 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 89–90 [Pgs. 89–90 include portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 104n [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 74], 118–119 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 78], 121–122 [Pgs. 121–122 include portions of Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82], 139–140 [Pgs. 139–140 include portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 334], 527n [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 337], 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 353], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 703–705 [Pgs. 703–705 include portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418], 708–709 [Pgs. 708–709 include portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 711–719 [Pgs. 711–719 include portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, and Doc. 426], 726–733 [Pgs. 726–733 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 438], 738–740 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439], 747–750 [Pgs. 747–750 include portions of Doc. 445, Doc. 446, and Doc. 447], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 451], 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 464], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 465], 779–788 [Pgs. 779–788 include portions of Doc. 466 and Doc. 467], 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 797–799 [Pgs. 797–799 include portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 477], 807–832 [Pgs. 807–832 include portions of Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 499], 841n [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504], 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509], 1340 [Pg. 1340 is part of Doc. 722]

Economic claims, question concerning inclusion, in reparations settlement, 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 159], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 169]

Economic Cooperation Administration interest in (see also Industrial Advisory Committee of the ECA, infra), 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 797–798 [Pgs. 797–798 include portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474], 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 497], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 500], 849–850 [Pgs. 849–850 include portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, and Doc. 508]

Four Power allocations. see Quadripartite allocations, infra.

French attitude, 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 144], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 291], 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 334], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 337], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 339], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 342], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 419], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 422], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 425], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 426], 738–739 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439], 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 465], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 801–802 [Pgs. 801–802 include portions of Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475], 807–808 [Pgs. 807–808 include portions of Doc. 477, Doc. 478, and Doc. 479], 812–813 [Pgs. 812–813 include portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482], 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 845–846 [Pgs. 845–846 include portions of Doc. 502, Doc. 503, and Doc. 504], 850–851 [Pgs. 850–851 include portions of Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509]

House Resolution 365, 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 711–712 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 422], 717–718 [Pgs. 717–718 include portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425]

Industrial Advisory Committee of the ECA (Humphrey Committee), 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 334], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 353], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 357], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 360], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 362], 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 797–804 [Pgs. 797–804 include portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477], 807–814 [Pgs. 807–814 include portions of Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, and Doc. 483], 816–817 [Pgs. 816–817 include portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 486], 823–830 [Pgs. 823–830 include portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, and Doc. 493], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 496], 836–839 [Pgs. 836–839 include portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500], 841–851 [Pgs. 841–851 include portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509]; final report, 851–852 [Pgs. 851–852 include portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc. 510]

Inter Allied Reparations Agency: Allocations, 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 139], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 422], 723–724 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 428], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 439], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 451], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 482], 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 828–829 [Pgs. 828–829 include portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492]; allocations from Soviet zone, 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 419], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453]; allocations from Western zones of Germany, 81–82 [Pgs. 81–82 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 222–223 [Pgs. 222–223 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 241–242 [Pgs. 241–242 include portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157], 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 254–255 [Pgs. 254–255 include portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 265–266 [Pgs. 265–266 include portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173], 704–705 [Pgs. 704–705 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 711n [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 422], 734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 436], 754–755 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 451], 760–762 [Pgs. 760–762 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 767 [Pg. 767 is part of Doc. 460], 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464], 772–774 [Pgs. 772–774 include portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 465], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 466], 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 486], 824–825 [Pgs. 824–825 include portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489], 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508]; allocations to member countries, 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 76], 119–121 [Pgs. 119–121 include portions of Doc. 78, Doc. 79, and Doc. 80], 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 422], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 426], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 436], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 447], 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 763–764 [Pgs. 763–764 include portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458], 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 472 and Doc. 473], 806 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 477], 815 [Pg. 815 is part of Doc. 483], 825–826 [Pgs. 825–826 include portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 498], 854–856 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 859 [Pg. 859 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 513]; allocations to Soviet satellites, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 78], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 147], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 422], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 422], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 428], 751–752 [Pgs. 751–752 include portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, and Doc. 450], 758n [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 455]; representations regarding suspension of allocations from Western zones, 734–735 [Pgs. 734–735 include portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 752–753 [Pgs. 752–753 include portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 758–759 [Pgs. 758–759 include portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, and Doc. 455], 825–826 [Pgs. 825–826 include portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 498]

London Conference on Germany, discussions of, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 48], 81–82 [Pgs. 81–82 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 89–90 [Pgs. 89–90 include portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 104n [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 74], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 76], 118–122 [Pgs. 118–122 include portions of Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 94], 187–190 [Pgs. 187–190 include portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123, and Doc. 124], 194–196 [Pgs. 194–196 include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, and Doc. 128], 199–200 [Pgs. 199–200 include portions of Doc. 129, Doc. 130, and Doc. 131], 211–216 [Pgs. 211–216 include portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, Doc. 139, and Doc. 140], 241–242 [Pgs. 241–242 include portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157], 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 254–255 [Pgs. 254–255 include portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 170], 265–266 [Pgs. 265–266 include portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173], 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 236], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 250], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 428], 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431], 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 735–736 [Pgs. 735–736 include portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc. 449], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 465]

Military Governors Conference at Berlin, discussion of, 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

Quadripartite allocations, 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 417], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 419], 713–715 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 422], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 426]

Quadripartite machinery, breakdown of, 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 241–242 [Pgs. 241–242 include portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 165], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 308n [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 451], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 455 and Doc. 456], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 464]

Quadripartite plan for reparations (1946), 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 194], 961 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 579]

Revised reparations procedures for Western zones, London Conference agreement on instructions to Military Governors regarding, 754–756 [Pgs. 754–756 include portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 759n [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 760–774 [Pgs. 760–774 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, and Doc. 465], 812–813 [Pgs. 812–813 include portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Ruhr, 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

Soviet satellites (see also under Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Yugoslavia), questions regarding continuation of deliveries to, 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 139], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 144], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 147], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 265n [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 422], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 422], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 428], 726–728 [Pgs. 726–728 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, and Doc. 431], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 439], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442], 745–746 [Pgs. 745–746 include portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445], 751–753 [Pgs. 751–753 include portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, and Doc. 450], 758–760 [Pgs. 758–760 include portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, and Doc. 455]

Soviet Union: Attitude toward, 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 486], 962 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 579], 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 594], 1007 [Pg. 1007 is part of Doc. 595], 1330 [Pg. 1330 is part of Doc. 721]; deliveries from Germany, 81–82 [Pgs. 81–82 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 86–87 [Pgs. 86–87 include portions of Doc. 54, Doc. 55, and Doc. 56], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 118–120 [Pgs. 118–120 include portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 129–130 [Pgs. 129–130 include portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 139–140 [Pgs. 139–140 include portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 124], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 128], 199–200 [Pgs. 199–200 include portions of Doc. 129, Doc. 130, and Doc. 131], 213–214 [Pgs. 213–214 include portions of Doc. 137, Doc. 138, and Doc. 139], 222–223 [Pgs. 222–223 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 241–242 [Pgs. 241–242 include portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157], 254–255 [Pgs. 254–255 include portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 422], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 426], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 428], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 439], 754–755 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 451], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453], 760–763 [Pgs. 760–763 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 464], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 466]; reciprocal deliveries, questions regarding, 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 704–707 [Pgs. 704–707 include portions of Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 420], 714–715 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 422], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 719–721 [Pgs. 719–721 include portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 727–728 [Pgs. 727–728 include portions of Doc. 429, Doc. 430, and Doc. 431], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 433], 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 739–740 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 439], 743–744 [Pgs. 743–744 include portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 451], 757–758 [Pgs. 757–758 include portions of Doc. 452, Doc. 453, and Doc. 454], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 455], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 457], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 464], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 466]; removals of reparations from Soviet zone, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 236], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 419], 714–715 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 422], 1308 [Pg. 1308 is part of Doc. 720]; Soviet reaction, question of, 807 [Pg. 807 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478]; suspension of deliveries from Western zones, 703–707 [Pgs. 703–707 include portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 420], 711–717 [Pgs. 711–717 include portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 426], 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 726–728 [Pgs. 726–728 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, and Doc. 431], 739–741 [Pgs. 739–741 include portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 442], 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 464], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 486]

Tripartite (U.S.-U.K.-France) discussions in London, Dec. 6–14, 548n [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 353], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 553n [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 357], 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

U.S. policy, 703–704 [Pgs. 703–704 include portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 708–723 [Pgs. 708–723 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, and Doc. 428], 730–733 [Pgs. 730–733 include portions of Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435], 742–744 [Pgs. 742–744 include portions of Doc. 440, Doc. 441, and Doc. 442], 761–762 [Pgs. 761–762 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458], 771n [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 464], 796–798 [Pgs. 796–798 include portions of Doc. 470, Doc. 471, and Doc. 472], 808–812 [Pgs. 808–812 include portions of Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483], 818–819 [Pgs. 818–819 include portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 497], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 720]

West German reactions, 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494]

Wolf Mission regarding German steel industry, Map-June, 802–803 [Pgs. 802–803 include portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 820n [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 486], 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 500], 841–842 [Pgs. 841–842 include portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504]; report, 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 486], 842n [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 501],

Restitutions from Germany: Allied Control Authority for Germany, 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 470]; Austria, 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]; Bulgaria, 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]; completion, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 374], 1298 [Pg. 1298 is part of Doc. 720], 1336 [Pg. 1336 is part of Doc. 721]: Esthonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]; Finland, 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]; Hungary, 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]; Italy, 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]; monetary gold, 709n [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 420], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]; program, 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 375], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 375], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 378], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 380], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 388], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 394]; Rumania, 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]; Soviet Union and Soviet satellites, deliveries to, 212–213 [Pgs. 212–213 include portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 745–746 [Pgs. 745–746 include portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445], 759n [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 794–796 [Pgs. 794–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]; U.S. directive to Gen. Clay, 794–796 [Pgs. 794–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]; U.S. policy, 794–796 [Pgs. 794–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 720]; U.S. policy regarding restitution of property removed from Esthonia, Latvia, and Lithuania to the Soviet Union, 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]; Yugoslavia, 759n [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]

Reuter, Ernst, 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 282], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 1222 [Pg. 1222 is part of Doc. 682], 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703]

Reynaud, Paul, 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

Riddleberger, James W., 29–42 [Pgs. 29–42 include portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23], 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 66–68 [Pgs. 66–68 include portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42], 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 132], 672–674 [Pgs. 672–674 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, and Doc. 408], 867–870 [Pgs. 867–870 include portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, and Doc. 519], 873–875 [Pgs. 873–875 include portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521], 1230–1231 [Pgs. 1230–1231 include portions of Doc. 685, Doc. 686, and Doc. 687]

Roberts, Frank, 987 [Pg. 987 is part of Doc. 589], 992 [Pg. 992 is part of Doc. 590], 995n [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 592 and Doc. 593], 1001–1003 [Pg. 1001 is part of Doc. 594], 1005–1006 [Pgs. 1005–1006 include portions of Doc. 594 and Doc. 595], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 597], 1015–1017 [Pgs. 1015–1017 include portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1018n [Pg. 1018 is part of Doc. 602], 1024 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 604], 1029n [Pg. 1029 is part of Doc. 605], 1031n [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 1035n [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 609], 1037 [Pg. 1037 is part of Doc. 609], 1041 [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 611], 1042n [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 1049 [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614], 1064 [Pg. 1064 is part of Doc. 618], 1065n [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1074 [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 1077n [Pg. 1077 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624], 1082 [Pg. 1082 is part of Doc. 626], 1086n [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 629], 1091–1092 [Pgs. 1091–1092 include portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 1093n [Pg. 1093 is part of Doc. 632], 1096 [Pg. 1096 is part of Doc. 632], 1128 [Pg. 1128 is part of Doc. 644], 1151 [Pg. 1151 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654], 1157n [Pg. 1157 is part of Doc. 657], 1160 [Pg. 1160 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1162n [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 1166n [Pg. 1166 is part of Doc. 660], 1167–1169 [Pg. 1167 is part of Doc. 660], 1172 [Pg. 1172 is part of Doc. 660], 1211 [Pg. 1211 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675], 1238n [Pg. 1238 is part of Doc. 691]

Robertson, Sir Brian H.: Allied Control Council for Germany, 368n [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248], 868n [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 517], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535]; Berlin blockade, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 888 [Pg. 888 is part of Doc. 529], 890–892 [Pgs. 890–892 include portions of Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, and Doc. 533], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535], 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 538 and Doc. 539], 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 548 and Doc. 549], 917 [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 556 and Doc. 557], 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 559 and Doc. 560], 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 560], 930 [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564], 932 [Pg. 932 is part of Doc. 566], 936–937 [Pgs. 936–937 include portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 939–941 [Pgs. 939–941 include portions of Doc. 569 and Doc. 570], 943–946 [Pgs. 943–946 include portions of Doc. 571, Doc. 572, and Doc. 573], 948–950 [Pgs. 948–950 include portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, and Doc. 575], 984n [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 588], 1074 [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 1099–1140 [Pgs. 1099–1140 include portions of Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, and Doc. 649] passim, 1168 [Pg. 1168 is part of Doc. 660], 1172 [Pg. 1172 is part of Doc. 660], 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662], 1274 [Pg. 1274 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709], 1278–1279 [Pgs. 1278–1279 include portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713]; Bizonal German economic organizations, revision, 1–10 [Pgs. 1–10 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, and Doc. 4], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5], 19–21 [Pgs. 19–21 include portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9], 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 26n [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 46–47 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 26], 51–52 [Pgs. 51–52 include portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 56–57 [Pgs. 56–57 include portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 105]; Bizonal government, consideration of, 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]; Bizonia, food situation in, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 6]; constitution for West Germany, preparation of, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 264], 396n [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 397–400 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 266], 403–410 [Pgs. 403–410 include portions of Doc. 268, Doc. 269, and Doc. 270], 422–424 [Pgs. 422–424 include portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 425n [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 427n [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 432n [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 290], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 291], 438–439 [Pgs. 438–439 include portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 293]; currency reform in Germany, 871–875 [Pgs. 871–875 include portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521], 909 [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 547 and Doc. 548], 913–914 [Pgs. 913–914 include portions of Doc. 552 and Doc. 553]; demilitarization of Germany, 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 522]; ECA Act of 1948, adherence of Bizonia to, 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514]; ERP relationship to West Germany, 169 [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]; industries in Germany, prohibited and restricted, question of control over, 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 496]; London Conference on Germany, 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 47], 77–78 [Pgs. 77–78 include portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125], 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 154], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]; Military Governors Conference at Berlin, 149n [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 99], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 156–158 [Pgs. 156–158 include portions of Doc. 104, Doc. 105, and Doc. 106], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 181–183 [Pgs. 181–183 include portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]; Military Security Board, 665–667 [Pgs. 665–667 include portions of Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401]; occupation statute for West Germany, preparation of, 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 378], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380], 631–636 [Pgs. 631–636 include portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 644–646 [Pgs. 644–646 include portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, and Doc. 393], 651–654 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 394]; political and economic organization of West Germany, 223–225 [Pgs. 223–225 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 154], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]; reparations from Germany, 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 80], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 451], 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 761–762 [Pgs. 761–762 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 486], 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492], 831n [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496]; Ruhr, 458–459 [Pgs. 458–459 include portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]; Saar, 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]; Soviet menace, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 106]; Trizonal fusion proposals, 157–158 [Pgs. 157–158 include portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 670–671 [Pgs. 670–671 include portions of Doc. 404, Doc. 405, and Doc. 406], 676n [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 409], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, and Doc. 412]; U.S.–British Coal Control Group, 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366]; U.S.–British Steel Control Group, 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]

Robinson, Hamlin, 841n [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501]

Ross, Irving, 1442 [Pg. 1442 includes portions of Doc. 795 and Doc. 796]

Royall, Kenneth C.: Arms for Austrian military and police forces, 1367–1369 [Pgs. 1367–1369 include portions of Doc. 738, Doc. 739, and Doc. 740]; Berlin blockade, 887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 529 and Doc. 530], 917 [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 556 and Doc. 557], 928–929 [Pgs. 928–929 include portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, and Doc. 563], 965n [Pg. 965 is part of Doc. 580], 1011 [Pg. 1011 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 1148 [Pg. 1148 is part of Doc. 652], 1213 [Pg. 1213 includes portions of Doc. 676 and Doc. 677], 1278 [Pg. 1278 includes portions of Doc. 711 and Doc. 712]; political and economic organization of West Germany, 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 432n [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]; reparations from Germany, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 422], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc. 449], 756–757 [Pgs. 756–757 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 759n [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 455 and Doc. 456], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 467], 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510]; Ruhr question, 251–253 [Pgs. 251–253 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 461n [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]

Rueff Jacques, 734n [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 436], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 450], 825–826 [Pgs. 825–826 include portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 498], 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 502 and Doc. 503], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 504], 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509]

Ruhr, question of international control (see also International Authority for the Ruhr, London Conference on the Ruhr, and under Office of Military Government in Germany (US) (OMGUS)): Advisory Group with Benelux participation, proposal for, 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 99–100 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 66]

Belgian participation, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 83], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 90], 203–204 [Pgs. 203–204 include portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190], 290–291 [Pgs. 290–291 include portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 300], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 309], 1337 [Pg. 1337 is part of Doc. 721]

Benelux attitude, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 66], 125–126 [Pgs. 125–126 include portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 131], 205–206 [Pgs. 205–206 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

Coal, coke, and steel allocations, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 15], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15], 55–56 [Pgs. 55–56 include portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 451–453 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 300], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 300], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 309], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 317], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 318]

ERP relationship to, 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]

Food conditions in the Ruhr, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4], 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 5], 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 6]

Foreign-owned holdings in the Ruhr, protection of, 145–146 [Pgs. 145–146 include portions of Doc. 95, Doc. 96, and Doc. 97], 148–149 [Pgs. 148–149 include portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 177–179 [Pgs. 177–179 include portions of Doc. 116, Doc. 117, and Doc. 118], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 120], 200–201 [Pgs. 200–201 include portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 204–205 [Pgs. 204–205 include portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 190], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 292], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 300], 456–457 [Pgs. 456–457 include portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 316], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 317], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 318], 502–503 [Pgs. 502–503 include portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 328], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 331], 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 370], 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 371]

French policy, 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 38], 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 48], 97–98 [Pgs. 97–98 include portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 127–128 [Pgs. 127–128 include portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 438–439 [Pgs. 438–439 include portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 302], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 509–511 [Pgs. 509–511 include portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

Iron, coal, and steel industries in the Ruhr: British-American reorganization of, Nov. 6, 457–458 [Pgs. 457–458 include portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 464–465 [Pgs. 464–465 include portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 309], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 313], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 316], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 494–497 [Pgs. 494–497 include portions of Doc. 318, Doc. 319, and Doc. 320], 501–502 [Pgs. 501–502 include portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 512–513 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 331], 515–516 [Pgs. 515–516 include portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 334], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 537n [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 342], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 1263 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 704]; consultation with Benelux concerning, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 319], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 320], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 331]; French protest, 460–461 [Pgs. 460–461 include portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, and Doc. 305], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 309], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 478–479 [Pgs. 478–479 include portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 316], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 494–496 [Pgs. 494–496 include portions of Doc. 318, Doc. 319, and Doc. 320], 499–501 [Pgs. 499–501 include portions of Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325], 512–513 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 331], 517–518 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 338], 537n [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 342], 542–543 [Pgs. 542–543 include portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, and Doc. 348], 547 [Pg. 547 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]

Ownership, question of, 93–94 [Pgs. 93–94 include portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 99–100 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 66], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 291], 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 302], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 303], 460n [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 466–467 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 309], 477–478 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 313], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 316], 492–493 [Pgs. 492–493 include portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 319], 501–503 [Pgs. 501–503 include portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327], 509–515 [Pgs. 509–515 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332], 517–518 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334], 520–521 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 334], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 335], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 545–548 [Pgs. 545–548 include portions of Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 356], 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 370], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 416]

Trusteeship proposals, 457–459 [Pgs. 457–459 include portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 316], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 495–496 [Pgs. 495–496 include portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 501–503 [Pgs. 501–503 include portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 332], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 334], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 337], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 339], 535 [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 547 [Pg. 547 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 357], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 416]

London Conference on Germany, discussions on Ruhr, 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 29], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 38], 69–70 [Pgs. 69–70 include portions of Doc. 42, Doc. 43, and Doc. 44], 72–73 [Pgs. 72–73 include portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 47], 92–95 [Pgs. 92–95 include portions of Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, and Doc. 63], 97–100 [Pgs. 97–100 include portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 73], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 123–128 [Pgs. 123–128 include portions of Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, and Doc. 85], 130–131 [Pgs. 130–131 include portions of Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 135–138 [Pgs. 135–138 include portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91], 140–141 [Pgs. 140–141 include portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 94], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 197–203 [Pgs. 197–203 include portions of Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, and Doc. 132], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 145], 230–232 [Pgs. 230–232 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 234–235 [Pgs. 234–235 include portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 251–252 [Pgs. 251–252 include portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 167], 268–269 [Pgs. 268–269 include portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 194], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 198], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 208], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 218], 325–327 [Pgs. 325–327 include portions of Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 226], 333–334 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 226], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 229], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 236], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 250], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 300], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 302], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 309], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 309], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 502–503 [Pgs. 502–503 include portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 331], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 394]; agreement, May 26, 285–291 [Pgs. 285–291 include portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194], 298–299 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 199], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 210], 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 720]

Luxembourg participation, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 83], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 90], 203–204 [Pgs. 203–204 include portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190], 290–291 [Pgs. 290–291 include portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 309], 1337 [Pg. 1337 is part of Doc. 721]

Military Governors, role and functions, 235–237 [Pgs. 235–237 include portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Military occupation, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 48], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Netherlands participation, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 83], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 90], 203–204 [Pgs. 203–204 include portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190], 290–291 [Pgs. 290–291 include portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 309], 1337 [Pg. 1337 is part of Doc. 721]

Reparations from the Ruhr, 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

Soviet participation, question of, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37], 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 236], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 309], 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 510–511 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 331], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 335], 962 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 579], 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 985 [Pg. 985 is part of Doc. 588], 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 594], 1430 [Pg. 1430 is part of Doc. 787]

Status of the Ruhr, 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 73], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 82]

U.S.-British Coal Control Group, 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 90], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 117], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 157], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 547 [Pg. 547 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 356], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 358], 559–562 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 360], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 362], 579–580 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 370]; French participation, question of, 520–522 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 334], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 540n [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 356], 572–573 [Pgs. 572–573 include portions of Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc. 367], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 370], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, and Doc. 412]

U.S.-British Steel Control Group, 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 547 [Pg. 547 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 358], 559–562 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 360], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 362], 579–580 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 370]; French participation, question of, 520–522 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 334], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 540n [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 370]

U.S. policy on Ruhr, 205–207 [Pgs. 205–207 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, and Doc. 135], 465–471 [Pgs. 465–471 include portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 510–511 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 331]

Rumania, 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 916n [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 922n [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 560], 1449 [Pg. 1449 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802], 1458 [Pg. 1458 is part of Doc. 809], 1489 [Pg. 1489 is part of Doc. 835]

Rusk, Dean, 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 590], 1193 [Pg. 1193 includes portions of Doc. 667 and Doc. 668]

Saar: Boundaries, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 56n [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 413], 693–697 [Pgs. 693–697 include portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]; coal allocations, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 15], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 32], 58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]; economic separation from Germany, 29–30 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 15], 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16], 74n [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 46], 748–749 [Pgs. 748–749 include portions of Doc. 445, Doc. 446, and Doc. 447], 1316 [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 720]; French financial interests, 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]; future status, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 29], 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 281]; integration into French economy, 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 15], 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16], 41–42 [Pgs. 41–42 include portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23], 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 1316 [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 720]; International Authority for the Ruhr, possible inclusion of the Saar, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 339]; reparations, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 41–42 [Pgs. 41–42 include portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23], 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 46], 748–749 [Pgs. 748–749 include portions of Doc. 445, Doc. 446, and Doc. 447]; trade, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 15], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 55–56 [Pgs. 55–56 include portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 74–75 [Pgs. 74–75 include portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]; Tripartite agreement regarding the Saar, Feb. 20, 73–75 [Pgs. 73–75 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, and Doc. 47], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]; Tripartite conversations in Berlin regarding, 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 26–27 [Pgs. 26–27 include portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, and Doc. 14], 29–30 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 15], 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16], 41–42 [Pgs. 41–42 include portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23], 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 55–59 [Pgs. 55–59 include portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36]; U.S. policy, 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16], 56n [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 1337 [Pg. 1337 is part of Doc. 721]

Sabatier, Maurice, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 291], 598n [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Sagmeister, Otto, 1392 [Pg. 1392 is part of Doc. 758]

Saint Hardouin. see Tarbé de Saint-Hardouin.

Saintonge. see Chaput de Saintonge.

Salmon, Jean, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311]

Saltzman, Charles E.: Austrian occupation costs, 1441 [Pg. 1441 includes portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795]; Berlin blockade, 886–887 [Pgs. 886–887 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, and Doc. 529], 891 [Pg. 891 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 557 and Doc. 558], 977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 586], 1213–1214 [Pgs. 1213–1214 include portions of Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678]; Bizonal German economic organizations, revision, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 6], 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 43–45 [Pgs. 43–45 include portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26], 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]; currency reform in Germany and Berlin, 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519], 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520], 904n [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543], 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 907–908 [Pgs. 907–908 include portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547], 912 [Pg. 912 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 915 [Pg. 915 includes portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554]; industries in Germany, prohibited and restricted, control of, 848n [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 505 and Doc. 506], 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 506 and Doc. 507]; London Conference on Germany, 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 124], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 128], 301–302 [Pgs. 301–302 include portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202], 303n [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 252], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, and Doc. 278], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 432n [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 293]; Military Governors Conference at Berlin, 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 711n [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 422]; occupation statute for West Germany, preparation of, 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]; reparations from Germany, 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 80], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 722n [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 428], 726–727 [Pgs. 726–727 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430], 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 741–742 [Pgs. 741–742 include portions of Doc. 439, Doc. 440, and Doc. 441], 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 751–752 [Pgs. 751–752 include portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, and Doc. 450], 756–757 [Pgs. 756–757 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 759n [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 761–762 [Pgs. 761–762 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 764–765 [Pgs. 764–765 include portions of Doc. 457, Doc. 458, and Doc. 459], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462], 774–790 [Pgs. 774–790 include portions of Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 794n [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 470], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480], 812–814 [Pgs. 812–814 include portions of Doc. 481, Doc. 482, and Doc. 483], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 497], 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 502 and Doc. 503], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 504], 850–851 [Pgs. 850–851 include portions of Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509]; Ruhr question, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 449n [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 459n [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 303], 460–461 [Pgs. 460–461 include portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, and Doc. 305], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 320], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 335], 547 [Pg. 547 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]; Saar question, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 32], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]; Trizonal fusion proposals, 671–672 [Pgs. 671–672 include portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 674–675 [Pgs. 674–675 include portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 676n [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 409]; U.S. policy toward Germany, 1287n [Pg. 1287 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719]; West German provisional Government, preparation of, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 104]

Saudi Arabia, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]

Savage, Carlton, 1194 [Pg. 1194 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669]

Sawyer, Charles, 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466], 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 467], 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 471], 1397–1398 [Pgs. 1397–1398 include portions of Doc. 761 and Doc. 762]

Schaerf, Adolf, 1375 [Pg. 1375 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 1382 [Pg. 1382 is part of Doc. 750], 1384 [Pg. 1384 includes portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753], 1390 [Pg. 1390 includes portions of Doc. 757 and Doc. 758], 1402 [Pg. 1402 is part of Doc. 765], 1408 [Pg. 1408 includes portions of Doc. 766 and Doc. 767], 1453 [Pg. 1453 includes portions of Doc. 804 and Doc. 805]

Schlange-Schoeningen, Hans, 18–19 [Pgs. 18–19 include portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

Schmid, Carlo, 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 257], 420–422 [Pgs. 420–422 include portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 296], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 391], 647–648 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 393], 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 1272 [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708]

Schmidt, Waldemar Paul , 1039 [Pg. 1039 is part of Doc. 610], 1221–1223 [Pgs. 1221–1223 include portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1261 [Pg. 1261 is part of Doc. 703]

Schneiter, Pierre , 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

Schoenfelder, Adolf , 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 281]

Schroeder, Frau Louise, 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 264], 914 [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 552 and Doc. 553]

Schubert, Mr., 906 [Pg. 906 is part of Doc. 545]

Schumacher, Kurt, 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 517]

Schuman, Robert: Berlin blockade, 1128 [Pg. 1128 is part of Doc. 644], 1173–1179 [Pgs. 1173–1179 include portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662], 1184–1186 [Pgs. 1184–1186 include portions of Doc. 664, Doc. 665, and Doc. 666], 1227 [Pg. 1227 is part of Doc. 684], 1234 [Pg. 1234 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1237 [Pg. 1237 is part of Doc. 690], 1248n [Pg. 1248 includes portions of Doc. 694 and Doc. 695], 1263 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 704], 1273n [Pg. 1273 is part of Doc. 708], 1278n [Pg. 1278 includes portions of Doc. 711 and Doc. 712]; currency question in Berlin, 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 320]; Germany, policy toward, 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 444–445 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 295], 493–494 [Pgs. 493–494 include portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 338]; London Conference on Germany, 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 71n [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]; Military Security Board, 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]; occupation statute for West Germany, 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]; political situation in France, 320n [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 983 [Pg. 983 is part of Doc. 587], 1117 [Pg. 1117 is part of Doc. 640]; reparations from Germany, 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 292], 811–812 [Pgs. 811–812 include portions of Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482], 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490]; Ruhr question, 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 472n [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 496–497 [Pgs. 496–497 include portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 499–501 [Pgs. 499–501 include portions of Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 509n [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 517–522 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 534–535 [Pgs. 534–535 include portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 342], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 353], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 359], 559n [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 360], 562n [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 360], 564–565 [Pgs. 564–565 include portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]; Trizonal fusion proposals, 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

Searles, Fred T., Jr., 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441]

Security against Germany (see also Western European Security): French position, 61–62 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 38], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 48], 110–111 [Pgs. 110–111 include portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 523–524 [Pgs. 523–524 include portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 530–531 [Pgs. 530–531 include portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 339], 1339–1340 [Pg. 1339 is part of Doc. 722]

London Conference on Germany, discussions regarding security, 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 60–64 [Pgs. 60–64 include portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, and Doc. 38], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 42], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 48], 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 56], 94–95 [Pgs. 94–95 include portions of Doc. 61, Doc. 62, and Doc. 63], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67], 104–107 [Pgs. 104–107 include portions of Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 110–111 [Pgs. 110–111 include portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 76], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 83], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 85], 138–139 [Pgs. 138–139 include portions of Doc. 90, Doc. 91, and Doc. 92], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 94], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 230–234 [Pgs. 230–234 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, and Doc. 152], 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 256–258 [Pgs. 256–258 include portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 268–270 [Pgs. 268–270 include portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175], 274–275 [Pgs. 274–275 include portions of Doc. 178, Doc. 179, and Doc. 180], 279–281 [Pgs. 279–281 include portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, and Doc. 185], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 189], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 198], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 229], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 236], 377n [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 253], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 318], 535 [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 720]; Report on Security, May 26, 291–294 [Pgs. 291–294 include portions of Doc. 193, Doc. 194, and Doc. 195], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 199], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 316–317 [Pgs. 316–317 include portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 226], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 331], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 360], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 362], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 560]

Military Governors Conference at Berlin, discussions at, 158–159 [Pgs. 158–159 include portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Military Security Board, proposals regarding establishment of, 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 73], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 82], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 231–232 [Pgs. 231–232 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 152], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 257–258 [Pgs. 257–258 include portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 194], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 210], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 316], 520–522 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 334], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 338], 531–533 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 339], 537–539 [Pgs. 537–539 include portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 547 [Pg. 547 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 353], 552–553 [Pgs. 552–553 include portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 555–556 [Pgs. 555–556 include portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 559–566 [Pgs. 559–566 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, and Doc. 362], 569–571 [Pgs. 569–571 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 370], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 370], 587–588 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 371], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 394], 665–668 [Pgs. 665–668 include portions of Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 496], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 500]

Soviet association or participation, question of, 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

Treaty for consultation and guarantee, French proposal regarding 230–232 [Pgs. 230–232 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150]

U.S. position, 62–64 [Pgs. 62–64 include portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 82], 138–139 [Pgs. 138–139 include portions of Doc. 90, Doc. 91, and Doc. 92], 233–234 [Pgs. 233–234 include portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 535 [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 342]

Seebohm, Hans Christoph, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 391], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 393]

Selective Service Act, 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 589]

Semmler, Johannes, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4]

Senate, 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 305], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 309]

Senate Appropriations Committee, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 163]

Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 233n [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 422], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424]

Seydoux Fournier de Clausonne, Francois, 39–40 [Pgs. 39–40 include portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 125], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662]

Seynaeve, Fernand , 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416]

Sforza, Count Carlo , 1409 [Pg. 1409 includes portions of Doc. 767 and Doc. 768]

Siam, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513]

Silvercruys, Baron , 23–24 [Pgs. 23–24 include portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]

Simons, Hans, 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 295], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Smirnov, Andrey Andreyevich, 1018 [Pg. 1018 is part of Doc. 602], 1024n [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 604], 1035 [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 609], 1042n [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 1065n [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1157 [Pg. 1157 is part of Doc. 657]

Smith, Walter Bedell: Berlin blockade, 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 529 and Doc. 530], 894–895 [Pgs. 894–895 include portions of Doc. 534, Doc. 535, and Doc. 536], 956n [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 576 and Doc. 577], 969n [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 582], 973n [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 583], 981–982 [Pgs. 981–982 include portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 984–989 [Pgs. 984–989 include portions of Doc. 588, Doc. 589, and Doc. 590], 991n [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 590], 992 [Pg. 992 is part of Doc. 590], 993n [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 590], 995–1008 [Pgs. 995–1008 include portions of Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596], 1010–1012 [Pgs. 1010–1012 include portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 1014–1028 [Pgs. 1014–1028 include portions of Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, and Doc. 605], 1031n [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607], 1034n [Pg. 1034 is part of Doc. 608], 1035–1038 [Pgs. 1035–1038 include portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610], 1040–1053 [Pgs. 1040–1053 include portions of Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615], 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 1061–1072 [Pgs. 1061–1072 include portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, and Doc. 622], 1076n [Pg. 1076 is part of Doc. 623], 1077–1083 [Pgs. 1077–1083 include portions of Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627], 1085–1100 [Pgs. 1085–1100 include portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, and Doc. 635], 1103–1104 [Pgs. 1103–1104 include portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636], 1109 [Pg. 1109 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 1114 [Pg. 1114 is part of Doc. 640], 1122 [Pg. 1122 includes portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642], 1124 [Pg. 1124 includes portions of Doc. 642 and Doc. 643], 1129 [Pg. 1129 includes portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1131 [Pg. 1131 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646], 1139 [Pg. 1139 is part of Doc. 648], 1142–1145 [Pgs. 1142–1145 include portions of Doc. 649, Doc. 650, and Doc. 651], 1147 [Pg. 1147 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652], 1149–1151 [Pgs. 1149–1151 include portions of Doc. 652, Doc. 653, and Doc. 654], 1157–1162 [Pgs. 1157–1162 include portions of Doc. 657, Doc. 658, and Doc. 659], 1166–1173 [Pgs. 1166–1173 include portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1175 [Pg. 1175 is part of Doc. 661], 1194–1196 [Pgs. 1194–1196 include portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1206n [Pg. 1206 is part of Doc. 673], 1214 [Pg. 1214 includes portions of Doc. 677 and Doc. 678], 1228 [Pg. 1228 includes portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685], 1233n [Pg. 1233 includes portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688], 1237 [Pg. 1237 is part of Doc. 690], 1251 [Pg. 1251 includes portions of Doc. 696 and Doc. 697], 1255 [Pg. 1255 includes portions of Doc. 700 and Doc. 701]; London Conference on Germany, 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]; Smith-Molotov notes, 1421 [Pg. 1421 includes portions of Doc. 778 and Doc. 779]; Smith-Molotov-Wallace-Stalin communications, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]; West German provisional government, plans for, 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122]

Sobolev, Arkady Alexandrovich, 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694]

Sokolovsky, Marshal Vasiliy Danilovich: Allied Control Council for Germany, 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 241], 884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 526]; Berlin blockade, 890–954 [Pgs. 890–954 include portions of Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, Doc. 555, Doc. 556, Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576] passim, 1099–1170 [Pgs. 1099–1170 include portions of Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, and Doc. 660] passim, 1189–1191 [Pg. 1189 is part of Doc. 667], 1206 [Pg. 1206 is part of Doc. 673], 1224 [Pg. 1224 is part of Doc. 683], 1227–1228 [Pgs. 1227–1228 include portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685], 1273n [Pg. 1273 is part of Doc. 708], 1274 [Pg. 1274 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709]; Bizonal German economic organizations, revision of, 867–868 [Pgs. 867–868 include portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517]; currency reform proposals, 870–875 [Pgs. 870–875 include portions of Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521], 909–910 [Pgs. 909–910 include portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549], 913–915 [Pgs. 913–915 include portions of Doc. 552, Doc. 553, and Doc. 554], 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 562 and Doc. 563]; demilitarization of Germany, 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 522]; Soviet zone, reorganization of, 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]

Southam, Alexander W., 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 1463n [Pg. 1463 includes portions of Doc. 813 and Doc. 814], 1466 [Pg. 1466 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815]

Soviet satellites (see also under Reparations), U.S. restrictions on trade with, 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]

Soviet Union (see also under Allied Control Council for Germany, Berlin, Berlin blockade, Bizonia, European Recovery Program, London Conference on Germany, Poland, Reparations from Germany, Ruhr): Aggression by, possibility of, 266n [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 173]

Aggressive tactics, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 106], 169 [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

Atomic bomb, considerations regarding Soviet capability for producing, 1196–1197 [Pgs. 1196–1197 include portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670]

Break with, fears concerning, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Czechoslovakia. see Communist takeover under Czechoslovakia.

Disarmament and demilitarization treaty, Soviet attitude toward, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 250]

German government, Soviet unwillingness to agree to creation of, 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582]

Germany: Partition of Germany, Soviet attitude, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4]; peace settlement, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 45]; restitutions from, 212–213 [Pgs. 212–213 include portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]; Soviet bargaining position in, 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 66]; Soviet claim to North East Prussia, 1316 [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 720]; Soviet domination, threat of, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 45]; Soviet policy toward, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 104], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 108], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 224], 358–359 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 239], 624n [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 728–729 [Pgs. 728–729 include portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432], 806 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 477], 1006 [Pg. 1006 includes portions of Doc. 594 and Doc. 595], 1015 [Pg. 1015 is part of Doc. 600], 1245 [Pg. 1245 is part of Doc. 693], 1312–1315 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 720]; Soviet territorial claims, 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 264n [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 171]; unity, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 224], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 239]

Government at Berlin, concern regarding possible unilateral Soviet establishment of, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 34n [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 17], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 164–165 [Pgs. 164–165 include portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 154], 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 597], 1013 [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599], 1022 [Pg. 1022 is part of Doc. 603]

Italian elections, concern regarding possible Soviet actions to affect, 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 108], 165n [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]

Potsdam agreement, violation of, 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 422]

Reparations from Japan, 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 428]

Reparations from Manchuria, 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 428]

Trade, U.S. restrictions on, 212–213 [Pgs. 212–213 include portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 743–744 [Pgs. 743–744 include portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442], 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]

United States, relations with, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 104], 270–271 [Pgs. 270–271 include portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

Veto, abuse of, 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]

Western European Union, Soviet attitude toward, 352–353 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 236]

Western Powers, relations with, 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 264]

Withdrawal of troops from Germany, Soviet proposal for, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 198], 1246 [Pg. 1246 is part of Doc. 693]

Yugoslavia, Soviet pressure on, 1456 [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 807]

Spaak, Paul-Henri, 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 237], 1077 [Pg. 1077 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624]

Spain, 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 511], 856–857 [Pgs. 856–857 include portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 513]

Special Consultative Group on German Policy Questions (U.S.), 1321n [Pg. 1321 is part of Doc. 721]

Stalin, Generalissimo Iosif Vissarionovich: Berlin blockade, 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 561], 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 562 and Doc. 563], 933 [Pg. 933 is part of Doc. 567], 942 [Pg. 942 is part of Doc. 571], 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 575], 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 579], 971–1123 [Pgs. 971–1123 include portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, and Doc. 642] passim, 1139–1174 [Pgs. 1139–1174 include portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, and Doc. 661] passim, 1188 [Pg. 1188 is part of Doc. 667], 1203–1205 [Pg. 1203 is part of Doc. 673], 1207 [Pg. 1207 is part of Doc. 673], 1224 [Pg. 1224 is part of Doc. 683], 1228–1230 [Pgs. 1228–1230 include portions of Doc. 684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686]; Smith-Molotov-Wallace-Stalin communications, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee (SANACC), 794n [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 470]

Stebbins, Henry E., 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 640]

Steel, Christopher E., 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2], 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 47], 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 149n [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 99], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 264], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 890–891 [Pgs. 890–891 include portions of Doc. 530, Doc. 531, and Doc. 532]

Steelman, John R., 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 469]

Stevens, Roger B., 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 47], 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 187n [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 311], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 316], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 328], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 343], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 561–562 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 360], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 362], 747n [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 445], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 457], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 821–823 [Pgs. 821–823 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492], 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 845–847 [Pgs. 845–847 include portions of Doc. 502, Doc. 503, and Doc. 504], 849–850 [Pgs. 849–850 include portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, and Doc. 508]

Stock, Christian, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 257], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 408–410 [Pgs. 408–410 include portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 270], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 420–421 [Pgs. 420–421 include portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 287], 831n [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494]

Strang, Sir William: Austrian peace treaty, 1509 [Pg. 1509 includes portions of Doc. 854 and Doc. 855]; Berlin blockade, 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 538 and Doc. 539], 921–922 [Pgs. 921–922 include portions of Doc. 559 and Doc. 560], 926n [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 938–939 [Pgs. 938–939 include portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 947n [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 573], 951n [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 575], 956n [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 576 and Doc. 577], 965 [Pg. 965 is part of Doc. 580], 974n [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 584], 978 [Pg. 978 is part of Doc. 586], 981–982 [Pgs. 981–982 include portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 986–987 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 589], 993 [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 590], 1114 [Pg. 1114 is part of Doc. 640], 1116 [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 640], 1126 [Pg. 1126 includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644], 1128–1130 [Pgs. 1128–1130 include portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1142n [Pg. 1142 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662], 1179 [Pg. 1179 is part of Doc. 662]; London Conference on Germany, 76–78 [Pgs. 76–78 include portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 82–85 [Pgs. 82–85 include portions of Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, and Doc. 54], 88–94 [Pgs. 88–94 include portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, and Doc. 62], 99–100 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 66], 103n [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 69], 105–107 [Pgs. 105–107 include portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 109–111 [Pgs. 109–111 include portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 76], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 118–121 [Pgs. 118–121 include portions of Doc. 78, Doc. 79, and Doc. 80], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 82], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 144n [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 95], 187n [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 129], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 131], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 132], 214–215 [Pgs. 214–215 include portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 227–228 [Pgs. 227–228 include portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 154], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 162], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 167], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 171], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 173], 298n [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 199], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 200], 301n [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 309n [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 313n [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 331–335 [Pgs. 331–335 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 364–368 [Pgs. 364–368 include portions of Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248]; Military Security Board, 665–666 [Pgs. 665–666 include portions of Doc. 398, Doc. 399, and Doc. 400]; occupation statute for West Germany, 640n [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]; reparations from Germany, 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 214–215 [Pgs. 214–215 include portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 159], 762–763 [Pgs. 762–763 include portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 765–766 [Pgs. 765–766 include portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462], 769n [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]; Ruhr question, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 129], 201–202 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 131], 204–205 [Pgs. 204–205 include portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 226]; security against Germany, 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 167], 522n [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 334]; territorial claims against Germany, 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]; Trizonal fusion proposals, 217–218 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 140], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]; West German provisional government, plans for, 218–219 [Pgs. 218–219 include portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 223–224 [Pgs. 223–224 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 154], 263–264 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 171], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 173], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Suesterhenn, Adolf, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 391], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 393]

Suhr, Otto, 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 1131 [Pg. 1131 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646], 1222 [Pg. 1222 is part of Doc. 682]

Supreme Command, Allied Powers, Japan (SCAP), 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 428]

Supreme Court (U.S.), 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 26]

Sweden, 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 511], 855–856 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 511], 862–863 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513], 1402 [Pg. 1402 is part of Doc. 765]

Switzerland, 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 853–855 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 511], 857–861 [Pgs. 857–861 include portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 542], 1348 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723], 1402 [Pg. 1402 is part of Doc. 765]

Syria, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513], 1233 [Pg. 1233 includes portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688], 1275 [Pg. 1275 includes portions of Doc. 709 and Doc. 710]

Tarbé de Saint-Hardouin, Jacques, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4], 22–23 [Pgs. 22–23 include portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11], 26–29 [Pgs. 26–29 include portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 41–43 [Pgs. 41–43 include portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24], 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 99], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 125], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Tarchiani, Alberto, 91n [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 146n [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Thompson, Llewellyn, 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]

Thorp, Willard, 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 91n [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 146n [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 497], 1287n [Pg. 1287 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719], 1480–1481 [Pgs. 1480–1481 include portions of Doc. 828 and Doc. 829]

Tito, Marshal (Josip Broz), 1408 [Pg. 1408 includes portions of Doc. 766 and Doc. 767]

Todd, Joseph A., 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445]

Tomkins, Edward E., 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1177 [Pg. 1177 is part of Doc. 662]

Treaties, conventions, agreements, etc.: Agreement between the United States and Austria regarding occupation costs, 1422 [Pg. 1422 is part of Doc. 779]

Agreement between the United States and the United Kingdom for the allocation of iron and steel scrap from Germany (1948), 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]

Agreement for air traffic over occupied zones of Austria, 1437 [Pg. 1437 includes portions of Doc. 792 and Doc. 793]

Agreement on the zones of occupation and the administration of the city of Vienna, 1341n [Pg. 1341 is part of Doc. 723]

Agreement regarding the Inter Allied Reparations Agency, 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 428]

Agreement regarding repatriation of South Tyroleans (1946), 1353–1355 [Pgs. 1353–1355 include portions of Doc. 725, Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728], 1410 [Pg. 1410 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769]

Agreement regarding travel between occupied zones in Austria (1945), 1416 [Pg. 1416 is part of Doc. 773], 1418–1420 [Pgs. 1418–1420 include portions of Doc. 775, Doc. 776, and Doc. 777]

Allied agreement on zones of occupation and control machinery, for Germany (1944), 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 527], 933–934 [Pg. 933 is part of Doc. 567], 951–952 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 575], 961–963 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 579], 1201 [Pg. 1201 includes portions of Doc. 672 and Doc. 673], 1203 [Pg. 1203 is part of Doc. 673], 1207 [Pg. 1207 is part of Doc. 673], 1314 [Pg. 1314 is part of Doc. 720]

Allied agreement with Portugal regarding German external assets (1941), 856–857 [Pgs. 856–857 include portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 513]

Allied agreement with Sweden regarding German external assets (1946), 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 511], 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 512], 859–860 [Pgs. 859–860 include portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 513]

Anglo-Soviet treaty of reciprocal assistance, 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 236]

Bizonal Fusion agreements (U.S.–U.K.): (1946), 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 56], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 107], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 140], 235–236 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 153], 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 290–291 [Pgs. 290–291 include portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 236], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 239], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 315], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 327], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 367], 674n [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 410], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 866 [Pg. 866 includes portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515], 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 720]; (1947), 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 107], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 123], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 140], 235n [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 153], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 289–291 [Pgs. 289–291 include portions of Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 465], 866 [Pg. 866 includes portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515]; (1948), 866 [Pg. 866 includes portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515]

Brioni agreement, (1942), 1528 [Pg. 1528 is part of Doc. 857]

Brussels Treaty (Pact) (1948), 105n [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 173], 271–272 [Pgs. 271–272 include portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 181], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 227], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

Control machinery agreements (Austria): (1945), 1341 [Pg. 1341 is part of Doc. 723], 1432–1433 [Pgs. 1432–1433 include portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789]; (1946), 1342 [Pg. 1342 is part of Doc. 723], 1375–1377 [Pgs. 1375–1377 include portions of Doc. 744, Doc. 745, and Doc. 746], 1388 [Pg. 1388 includes portions of Doc. 755 and Doc. 756], 1406–1408 [Pgs. 1406–1408 include portions of Doc. 766 and Doc. 767], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 788], 1435–1436 [Pgs. 1435–1436 include portions of Doc. 789, Doc. 790, Doc. 791, and Doc. 792], 1493 [Pg. 1493 is part of Doc. 838]

Convention for European Economic Cooperation (1948), 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

Convention for OEEC (1948), 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 315], 487–488 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 317], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 317], 585–586 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 371], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 372]

Danube Convention (1921), 1411 [Pg. 1411 includes portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770]

Danube Convention (1948), 1411 [Pg. 1411 includes portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770]

European Advisory Commission agreement, 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 386]

Final Act of the Meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the American Republics, Rio de Janeiro (1942), 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 511]

Franco-Soviet Treaty of reciprocal assistance, 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 236]

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 84], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 720]

General Convention on Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 371]

Hague Convention, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 388]

Havana Charter for an International Trade Organization, 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 380], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 394]

Hitler-Mussolini agreement regarding South Tyrol (1939), 1353–1354 [Pgs. 1353–1354 include portions of Doc. 725, Doc. 726, and Doc. 727]

Inter American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, Rio de Janeiro (1947), 105n [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70]

Italian Peace Treaty, 795–796 [Pgs. 795–796 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 1353n [Pg. 1353 includes portions of Doc. 725 and Doc. 726], 1410 [Pg. 1410 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 1467–1468 [Pgs. 1467–1468 include portions of Doc. 815, Doc. 816, and Doc. 817], 1484n [Pg. 1484 is part of Doc. 831]

Level of industry agreement (U.S.–British) (1947), 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 420], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 465], 834n [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 497], 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 499], 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 501]

Paris agreements on reparations from Germany: (1945), 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 78], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 80], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 159], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 420], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 422], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 422], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425]; (1946), 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 162], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 428], 727–728 [Pgs. 727–728 include portions of Doc. 429, Doc. 430, and Doc. 431], 739–740 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 439], 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 455], 825–826 [Pgs. 825–826 include portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 498], 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 511], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 512], 1465 [Pg. 1465 is part of Doc. 814]

Potsdam agreements (1945), 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 48], 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 89–90 [Pgs. 89–90 include portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 118–119 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 78], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 80], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 85], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 106], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 139], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 210], 338–340 [Pgs. 338–340 include portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 236], 348–350 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 236], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 236], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 239], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 239], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 248], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 250], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 706–708 [Pgs. 706–708 include portions of Doc. 418, Doc. 419, and Doc. 420], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 421], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 422], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 426], 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 433], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 439], 757–758 [Pgs. 757–758 include portions of Doc. 452, Doc. 453, and Doc. 454], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 455], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 464], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 466], 807 [Pg. 807 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 517], 878 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 523], 884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 526], 1076 [Pg. 1076 is part of Doc. 623], 1080 [Pg. 1080 is part of Doc. 626], 1202 [Pg. 1202 is part of Doc. 673], 1207–1208 [Pg. 1207 is part of Doc. 673], 1210 [Pg. 1210 includes portions of Doc. 673 and Doc. 674], 1212 [Pg. 1212 includes portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676], 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 720], 1314 [Pg. 1314 is part of Doc. 720], 1336 [Pg. 1336 is part of Doc. 721], 1344 [Pg. 1344 is part of Doc. 723], 1428 [Pg. 1428 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 1448 [Pg. 1448 includes portions of Doc. 800 and Doc. 801], 1457–1459 [Pgs. 1457–1459 include portions of Doc. 808, Doc. 809, and Doc. 810], 1464 [Pg. 1464 is part of Doc. 814], 1467 [Pg. 1467 includes portions of Doc. 815 and Doc. 816], 1475 [Pg. 1475 includes portions of Doc. 823 and Doc. 824], 1511–1512 [Pg. 1511 is part of Doc. 856], 1519 [Pg. 1519 is part of Doc. 857]

Rio Pact. see Inter American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, supra.

Rome Agreement (1923), 1528 [Pg. 1528 is part of Doc. 857]

Sliding scale agreement between the United States, United Kingdom, and France regarding coal exports from Western German zones (1947), 74n [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 46], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 327], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 370], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442]

Treaty of Alliance and Mutual Assistance between the United Kingdom and France (1947), 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 37], 63–64 [Pgs. 63–64 include portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 236]

Treaty of Versailles (1919), 1340 [Pg. 1340 is part of Doc. 722]

Washington accord with Switzerland on German external assets (1946), 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511]

Yalta agreement (1945), 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 349–350 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 236], 1076 [Pg. 1076 is part of Doc. 623], 1080 [Pg. 1080 is part of Doc. 626]

Trieste, 1241 [Pg. 1241 is part of Doc. 693], 1290 [Pg. 1290 is part of Doc. 719], 1348 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723], 1456 [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 807]

Trimble, William C., 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311], 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]

Tripartite (United States-United Kingdom-France) conversations regarding Germany, London, 1947, 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

Tripartite Merchant Marine Commission (TMMC), report, Dec. 7, 1945, 796n [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

Trizonal fusion (U.S., British, and French zones of occupation in Germany): European Recovery Program, relationship to, 112–113 [Pgs. 112–113 include portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 107], 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]; London Conference on Germany, agreed document on Trizonal export-import policy, 289–290 [Pgs. 289–290 include portions of Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 208], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 210], 669–671 [Pgs. 669–671 include portions of Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, and Doc. 406], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 408]; Military Governors Conference at Berlin, discussion regarding, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 99]; proposals regarding, 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 44–45 [Pgs. 44–45 include portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 38], 69–70 [Pgs. 69–70 include portions of Doc. 42, Doc. 43, and Doc. 44], 77–80 [Pgs. 77–80 include portions of Doc. 47, Doc. 48, and Doc. 49], 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 56], 101–102 [Pgs. 101–102 include portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 111–113 [Pgs. 111–113 include portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75], 115–116 [Pgs. 115–116 include portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 82], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 149–154 [Pgs. 149–154 include portions of Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 105], 161–162 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 107], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 120], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120], 216–217 [Pgs. 216–217 include portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 153], 242–244 [Pgs. 242–244 include portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158], 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 432n [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 291], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 291], 439–440 [Pgs. 439–440 include portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 316], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 327], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 334], 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 572n [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 371], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385], 669–674 [Pgs. 669–674 include portions of Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, and Doc. 408], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 409], 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 527]

Troyanovsky, Oleg Aleksandrovich, 1157n [Pg. 1157 is part of Doc. 657]

Truman, Harry S.: Berlin, exchange of letters between Truman and Stalin, regarding right of free access to, June 14 and 16, 1945, 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 561], 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 562 and Doc. 563], 933 [Pg. 933 is part of Doc. 567], 942 [Pg. 942 is part of Doc. 571], 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 572], 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 575], 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 579]; Berlin blockade, 817n [Pg. 817 is part of Doc. 485], 887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529], 928 [Pg. 928 includes portions of Doc. 561 and Doc. 562], 930–931 [Pgs. 930–931 include portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565], 965n [Pg. 965 is part of Doc. 580], 966–967 [Pgs. 966–967 include portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582], 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 583], 977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 586], 1108 [Pg. 1108 is part of Doc. 638], 1199n [Pg. 1199 is part of Doc. 671], 1252–1253 [Pgs. 1252–1253 include portions of Doc. 697, Doc. 698, and Doc. 699], 1263 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 704], 1266 [Pg. 1266 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1268 [Pg. 1268 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1281 [Pg. 1281 includes portions of Doc. 714 and Doc. 715]; Brussels Pact, support for, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 173]; Economic Mission to Germany and Austria, 1947, 783n [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 466]; European Recovery Program, 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]; France, U.S. policy toward, 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]; reparations from Germany, 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424], 719n [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 426], 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 433], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 465], 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 466], 789–790 [Pgs. 789–790 include portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 792–793 [Pgs. 792–793 include portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 796–797 [Pgs. 796–797 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]; security against Germany, 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]; statement of Mar. 17 regarding continued U.S. occupation of Germany, 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 152], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 173], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 181], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]; statement on Italy, Dec. 13, 1947, 1462 [Pg. 1462 includes portions of Doc. 811, Doc. 812, and Doc. 813], 1501 [Pg. 1501 includes portions of Doc. 844 and Doc. 845]; Western European security, 233n [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 276–277 [Pgs. 276–277 include portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

Truman Doctrine, 1500 [Pg. 1500 includes portions of Doc. 843 and Doc. 844]

Tulpanov, Col. Sergei I., 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 295]

Turkey, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 511], 862–863 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 513], 1500 [Pg. 1500 includes portions of Doc. 843 and Doc. 844]

Übeleis, Vinzenz, 1443 [Pg. 1443 includes portions of Doc. 796 and Doc. 797]

Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, 1059 [Pg. 1059 is part of Doc. 617], 1213 [Pg. 1213 includes portions of Doc. 676 and Doc. 677]

Ulbricht, Walter, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

Union of South Africa, 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. see Soviet Union.

United Kingdom (see also Allied Bank Commission, Bipartite Board, Bipartite Control Office, Bizonal German economic organizations, revision of, Bizonia, Joint Export-Import Agency, London Conference on Germany, London Conference on the Ruhr, Ruhr: U.S.-British coal and steel control groups; and under Austria, Austrian peace treaty, Berlin blockade, German external assets, Germany: Zones of occupation, International Authority for the Ruhr, Reparations from Germany, West Germany: Occupation statute for): Bizonia, possible establishment of German government in, 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 298n [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 199], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 213], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 226]; Brussels Pact 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]; Czechoslovakia, British reaction to situation in, 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]; European Recovery Program assistance to, 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]; Germany, policy toward, 24n [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 229]; IARA allocations to, 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419]; Labor Party, 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 264]; Soviet participation in London Conference recommendations, 364–365 [Pgs. 364–365 include portions of Doc. 242, Doc. 243, and Doc. 244]; Soviet Union, relations with, 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]; West German provisional government, concern regarding possible Soviet reaction to, 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 213]

United Nations (see also under Austria), 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 69], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 175], 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 309], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 317], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 378], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 380] Admission of Germany, question of, 1337 [Pg. 1337 is part of Doc. 721]

Berlin blockade. see under Berlin blockade.

General Assembly, 456n [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 810n [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480], 811n [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 834n [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 497], 1046 [Pg. 1046 is part of Doc. 612], 1173n [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661]

Regional arrangements, 104–105 [Pgs. 104–105 include portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

Security Council:

Berlin blockade. see under Berlin blockade.

Veto, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 976 [Pg. 976 is part of Doc. 585], 1058–1059 [Pgs. 1058–1059 include portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 1215 [Pg. 1215 is part of Doc. 678]

Supervision of all-German elections, proposal regarding, 1331–1332 [Pg. 1331 is part of Doc. 721]

Withdrawal of occupation forces from Germany, proposal regarding supervision of, 1335 [Pg. 1335 is part of Doc. 721]

United Nations Charter, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 37], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70], 935 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 567], 1055 [Pg. 1055 is part of Doc. 615], 1187 [Pg. 1187 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 1192 [Pg. 1192 is part of Doc. 667]

Articles: 33, 953 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 575], 955–956 [Pgs. 955–956 include portions of Doc. 576 and Doc. 577], 1192 [Pg. 1192 is part of Doc. 667]; 51, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 181]; 53, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 70], 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]; 107, 1210 [Pg. 1210 includes portions of Doc. 673 and Doc. 674]

Chapters: II, 986 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 589]; VI, 1059 [Pg. 1059 is part of Doc. 617]; VII, 1059 [Pg. 1059 is part of Doc. 617], 1186 [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666], 1215 [Pg. 1215 is part of Doc. 678]; XIV, 986 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 589]

United Nations Commission on Human Rights, draft declaration and covenant, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 114].

United Nations Declaration, Jan. 5, 1943, 1523 [Pg. 1523 is part of Doc. 857]

United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA), 1342 [Pg. 1342 is part of Doc. 723], 1379 [Pg. 1379 is part of Doc. 748]

United States Army in Europe, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

United States-British Coal and Steel Groups. see under Ruhr.

United States vital interests and national security, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67]

Uruguay, 853–854 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 511]

Valery, François, 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 116n [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 311]

Vandenberg, Arthur, 233n [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 420], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 422], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 425], 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 433], 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 1148 [Pg. 1148 is part of Doc. 652]

Van Voorst tot Voorst, Baron S. G. N., 458n [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

Verduynen, Johnkheer van, 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 100n [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 66], 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 76], 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 94], 144n [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 95], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 125], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 129], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 131], 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 140], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 146], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 154], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 159], 249–251 [Pgs. 249–251 include portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 171], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

Voice of America, 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]

Voorhees, Tracy S., 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]

Vooys, J. G. de, 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]

Vorys, John M., 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486]

Vyshinsky, Andrey Yanuaryevich, 1086 [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 629], 1089 [Pg. 1089 is part of Doc. 630], 1093n [Pg. 1093 is part of Doc. 632], 1219–1220 [Pg. 1219 is part of Doc. 681], 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694], 1250–1251 [Pgs. 1250–1251 include portions of Doc. 696 and Doc. 697]

Waldbrunner, Karl, 1402 [Pg. 1402 is part of Doc. 765]

Wallner, Woodruff, 27–28 [Pgs. 27–28 include portions of Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38]

War Department, 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

Warsaw Conference of Foreign Ministers, June 23–24, 370–371 [Pgs. 370–371 include portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 922n [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 560]

Wedemeyer, Lt. Gen. Albert C., 925–926 [Pgs. 925–926 include portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 1357–1358 [Pgs. 1357–1358 include portions of Doc. 729, Doc. 730, and Doc. 731], 1361 [Pg. 1361 includes portions of Doc. 733 and Doc. 734]

Wehrer, Col. Albert, 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 131n [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 149n [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 99], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 125], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416]

Weimar Constitution, 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 293]

Weimar Republic, 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

Weir, Sir Cecil M., 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2], 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635]

West, Robert R., 674–675 [Pgs. 674–675 include portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]

West Germany (see also Bizonia, French zone of occupation under Germany, International Authority for the Ruhr, Level of Industry, London Conference on Germany, London Conference on the Ruhr, Military Governors Conference at Berlin, Ruhr, Saar, Trizonal fusion): Allied Military Government, role and functions, 101–102 [Pgs. 101–102 include portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 73], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 82], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 224–225 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 145], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 146], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 152], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 154], 245–246 [Pgs. 245–246 include portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 260–262 [Pgs. 260–262 include portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 252], 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 266], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 270], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 416–417 [Pgs. 416–417 include portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, and Doc. 278], 430–431 [Pgs. 430–431 include portions of Doc. 287, Doc. 288, and Doc. 289], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 295], 470–471 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 309], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 316], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 321], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 327], 508–509 [Pgs. 508–509 include portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, and Doc. 331], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 547 [Pg. 547 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 356], 559–560 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 360], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 599–600 [Pgs. 599–600 include portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 629–635 [Pgs. 629–635 include portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 394], 908 [Pg. 908 includes portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547]

Allied troops, question of withdrawal, 231–232 [Pgs. 231–232 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 292–293 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 194], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 210], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 213], 322n [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

Atomic energy, control of, 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 496]

Austria, relations with, 1407 [Pg. 1407 is part of Doc. 766]

Baden, 44–45 [Pgs. 44–45 include portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 429–431 [Pgs. 429–431 include portions of Doc. 287, Doc. 288, and Doc. 289], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 291], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 386]

Bavaria, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 114], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 266], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 287], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 290]

British position, 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 379], 616–617 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 380], 618n [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 380], 625–627 [Pgs. 625–627 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385], 631–636 [Pgs. 631–636 include portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 644–45 [Pgs. 644–645 include portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 651–652 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 394]

Civil aviation, control of, 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 394]

Coal exports, sliding scale agreement, 74n [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 46], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 327], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 370], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442]

Constituent Assembly: Discussions at London Conference on Germany, 151–152 [Pgs. 151–152 include portions of Doc. 100, Doc. 101, and Doc. 102], 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 106], 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 173–176 [Pgs. 173–176 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 179–180 [Pgs. 179–180 include portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, and Doc. 119], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 207–211 [Pgs. 207–211 include portions of Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, and Doc. 137], 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 145], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 154], 240n [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 169], 262–263 [Pgs. 262–263 include portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 294–295 [Pgs. 294–295 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196], 297–298 [Pgs. 297–298 include portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 200], 305–306 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 208], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 210], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 224]; preparations for, 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 252], 378–379 [Pgs. 378–379 include portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 381–384 [Pgs. 381–384 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, and Doc. 258], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 264], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 266], 401–402 [Pgs. 401–402 include portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 406–408 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 269], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 270], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 417–418 [Pgs. 417–418 include portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 379], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 391], 648–649 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 393], 1011 [Pg. 1011 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 602], 1328 [Pg. 1328 is part of Doc. 721]

Constitution: London Conference on Germany, discussions, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 102], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 106], 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 114], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 114], 175–176 [Pgs. 175–176 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 208–210 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 135], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 218–220 [Pgs. 218–220 include portions of Doc. 140, Doc. 141, and Doc. 142], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 145], 238–239 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 154], 261–263 [Pgs. 261–263 include portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 294–295 [Pgs. 294–295 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 305–306 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 208], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 210], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 224], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 337]; Letter of Advice to Military Governors regarding Constitution, 240–241 [Pgs. 240–241 include portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 171], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 334], 648–649 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 393]

Preparation, 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 252], 383–384 [Pgs. 383–384 include portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 259], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 394–395 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 264], 397–403 [Pgs. 397–403 include portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 406–414 [Pgs. 406–414 include portions of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, and Doc. 273], 419–421 [Pgs. 419–421 include portions of Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282], 425n [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 426–427 [Pgs. 426–427 include portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287], 431n [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 435–443 [Pgs. 435–443 include portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 296], 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 328], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 334], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 353], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 365], 598–601 [Pgs. 598–601 include portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, and Doc. 375], 605–606 [Pgs. 605–606 include portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 609–612 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 378], 618–619 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 380], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 385], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 386], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 386], 637–638 [Pgs. 637–638 include portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 642–645 [Pgs. 642–645 include portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 393], 654–656 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 394], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 394], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 799 [Pg. 799 is part of Doc. 472]

Preparatory Constitutional Committee (Committee of Experts), 414–415 [Pgs. 414–415 include portions of Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274], 418–419 [Pgs. 418–419 include portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, and Doc. 281]; report (Chiem see draft), 418–419 [Pgs. 418–419 include portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, and Doc. 281]

Ratification, question of, 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 259], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 264], 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 411–414 [Pgs. 411–414 include portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, and Doc. 273], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 295], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 296], 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 328], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 391], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 648–649 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 393], 1298 [Pg. 1298 is part of Doc. 720]

Council for European Economic Cooperation, question of West German representation in, 169–170 [Pgs. 169–170 include portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114]

Currency reform, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 904–905 [Pgs. 904–905 include portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545], 914 [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 552 and Doc. 553], 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 569 and Doc. 570], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 576], 961–964 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 579], 998–1001 [Pgs. 998–1001 include portions of Doc. 593 and Doc. 594], 1042–1043 [Pgs. 1042–1043 include portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 639], 1182 [Pg. 1182 is part of Doc. 664], 1201–1212 [Pgs. 1201–1212 include portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, and Doc. 676], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 720], 1431 [Pg. 1431 is part of Doc. 787]

Decartelization policy, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 170], 297n [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 198], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 226], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 262], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 374], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 378], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 394]

Deconcentration policy, 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 226], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 356], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 358], 559–561 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 360], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 362], 569–570 [Pgs. 569–570 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 370], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 371]

Denazification policy, 297n [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 198], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 226], 545–546 [Pgs. 545–546 include portions of Doc. 349, Doc. 350, and Doc. 351], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 356], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 357], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 358], 559–561 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 360], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 362], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 370], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 371], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 371]

Disarmament and demilitarization, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 152], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 167], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 170], 274–275 [Pgs. 274–275 include portions of Doc. 178, Doc. 179, and Doc. 180], 279–281 [Pgs. 279–281 include portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, and Doc. 185], 292–294 [Pgs. 292–294 include portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 210], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 390–391 [Pgs. 390–391 include portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 300], 490–491 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 317], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 318], 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 502–503 [Pgs. 502–503 include portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 337], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 578–587 [Pgs. 578–587 include portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 371], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 374], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 375], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 378], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380], 654–655 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 394], 665–667 [Pgs. 665–667 include portions of Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 428], 806 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 477], 838–841 [Pgs. 838–841 include portions of Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc. 501], 844 [Pg. 844 is part of Doc. 502]

Displaced persons, responsibility for, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 374], 603–604 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 375], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 378], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 380], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 380], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 635–636 [Pgs. 635–636 include portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 394], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 394], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 394], 1303 [Pg. 1303 is part of Doc. 720]

Economic institutions, 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 720]

Economic recovery, 88–89 [Pgs. 88–89 include portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

Elections, proposals regarding, 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 179–180 [Pgs. 179–180 include portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, and Doc. 119], 209–210 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 135], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 154], 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 189], 297–298 [Pgs. 297–298 include portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 200], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 205], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 208], 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 259], 388–389 [Pgs. 388–389 include portions of Doc. 259, Doc. 260, and Doc. 261], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 264], 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 269], 411–414 [Pgs. 411–414 include portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, and Doc. 273], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 295], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 296]

European Recovery Program, West German relationship to. see under European Recovery Program.

Expellees, control over, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 378], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 380], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 380]

Federal government, 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 210], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 394]

Federal system, 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 259], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 269], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 294], 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 334], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 334], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 374]

Federation, 208–211 [Pgs. 208–211 include portions of Doc. 135, Doc. 136, and Doc. 137], 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 240–241 [Pgs. 240–241 include portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156], 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 269]

Financial and economic controls, 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 648–649 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 393], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 720]

Foreign exchange, control over, 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 378], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 394]

Foreign investment: Policy regarding, 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 386]; Six Power Conference at Paris, 456n [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 698–702 [Pgs. 698–702 include portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416]

Foreign relations, control over, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 170], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 256], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 374], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 375], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 378], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 638–639 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 388], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 394]

Foreign trade, control over, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 170], 382–383 [Pgs. 382–383 include portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 259], 390–391 [Pgs. 390–391 include portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 374], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 375], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 378], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 386], 654–655 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 394]

French attitude toward, 70n [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 230–232 [Pgs. 230–232 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 262–263 [Pgs. 262–263 include portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 492–493 [Pgs. 492–493 include portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 525–528 [Pgs. 525–528 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 362], 1339 [Pg. 1339 is part of Doc. 722]

Gendarmerie, proposal for establishment of, 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

Hohenzollern, 430–431 [Pgs. 430–431 include portions of Doc. 287, Doc. 288, and Doc. 289]

Industrial ownership, control of, 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 394]

Industries, prohibited and restricted, control over, 104–105 [Pgs. 104–105 include portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 148], 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 256–257 [Pgs. 256–257 include portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 274–275 [Pgs. 274–275 include portions of Doc. 178, Doc. 179, and Doc. 180], 279–280 [Pgs. 279–280 include portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 292–293 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 194], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 210], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 254], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 291], 439–440 [Pgs. 439–440 include portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 300], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 300], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 300], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 317], 518–519 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 334], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 334], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 337], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 339], 549–550 [Pgs. 549–550 include portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 358], 559–560 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 360], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 566–567 [Pgs. 566–567 include portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 370], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 371], 631n [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 386], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 386], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 668–669 [Pgs. 668–669 include portions of Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, and Doc. 404], 782–785 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 466], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 477], 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 832–833 [Pgs. 832–833 include portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 837–841 [Pgs. 837–841 include portions of Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc. 501], 843–845 [Pgs. 843–845 include portions of Doc. 501, Doc. 502, and Doc. 503], 848–850 [Pgs. 848–850 include portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, and Doc. 508], 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 1329 [Pg. 1329 is part of Doc. 721], 1340 [Pg. 1340 is part of Doc. 722]

Laender: Agreed Document of London Conference on Germany regarding reorganization of the Laender, 306–307 [Pgs. 306–307 include portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 208]; boundaries, 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 252], 378–379 [Pgs. 378–379 include portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 257], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 259], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 264], 397–399 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 266], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 267], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 269], 411–415 [Pgs. 411–415 include portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274], 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 427–431 [Pgs. 427–431 include portions of Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, and Doc. 289], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 290], 437–439 [Pgs. 437–439 include portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 295]; Committee on Territorial Reorganization (Boundary Commission), 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]; role and functions, 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 174–175 [Pgs. 174–175 include portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 135], 219–221 [Pgs. 219–221 include portions of Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 145], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 154], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 383–385 [Pgs. 383–385 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 393], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 394], 654–657 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 394], 659–662 [Pgs. 659–662 include portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]

Landtage, role of, 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Lindau question, 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 287]

Lippe-Detmold, abolition of state of, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 290]

Machine tool situation, 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 120], 187–188 [Pgs. 187–188 include portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Military Governors (U.S.–British–French): Berlin situation (see also under Berlin blockade), 937 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 568], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 569], 942 [Pg. 942 is part of Doc. 571], 945–946 [Pgs. 945–946 include portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573], 953 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 575]

Constituent Assembly and Constitution, role in development of, 375–376 [Pgs. 375–376 include portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 254], 386–393 [Pgs. 386–393 include portions of Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, and Doc. 264], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 264], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 266], 400–402 [Pgs. 400–402 include portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, and Doc. 278], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 425–426 [Pgs. 425–426 include portions of Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 427n [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 432–444 [Pgs. 432–444 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 296], 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 832n [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496]

Currency in Berlin, 914 [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 552 and Doc. 553]

Currency reform, 905n [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 907–910 [Pgs. 907–910 include portions of Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549], 940 [Pg. 940 is part of Doc. 569]

Industries, prohibited and restricted, control over, 668–669 [Pgs. 668–669 include portions of Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, and Doc. 404], 832–833 [Pgs. 832–833 include portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 499], 848–849 [Pgs. 848–849 include portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507], 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510]

Military Security Board, 665–668 [Pgs. 665–668 include portions of Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403]

Occupation statute: Draft text, 653–662 [Pgs. 653–662 include portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]; meetings with Parliamentary Council regarding, 641–650 [Pgs. 641–650 include portions of Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, and Doc. 394], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 409]; report, 650–662 [Pgs. 650–662 include portions of Doc. 393, Doc. 394, and Doc. 395], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 397]; role in preparation of, 598n [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 599–606 [Pgs. 599–606 include portions of Doc. 374, Doc. 375, and Doc. 376], 608–613 [Pgs. 608–613 include portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 617–619 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 380], 622–623 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 380], 624n [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 625–637 [Pgs. 625–637 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, and Doc. 388], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 397], 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 832n [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496]

Protection of foreign interests, 699–702 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 416]

Provisional Government, role in development of: Committee of Experts, 399–400 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 266]; Committee on Allied Controls, 440n [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]; liaison officers, 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 441n [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 293], 442n [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 294], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 295], 649–650 [Pgs. 649–650 include portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]; meetings with Ministers President, 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 378–381 [Pgs. 378–381 include portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, and Doc. 256], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 259], 395–397 [Pgs. 395–397 include portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 266], 402–413 [Pgs. 402–413 include portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, and Doc. 271], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 296], 924–925 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 560]

Reparations question, 831–832 [Pgs. 831–832 include portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496]

Role and functions, discussions at London Conference on Germany concerning, 223–225 [Pgs. 223–225 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 238–241 [Pgs. 238–241 include portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156], 245–246 [Pgs. 245–246 include portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 260–263 [Pgs. 260–263 include portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171], 279–280 [Pgs. 279–280 include portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 190], 292–293 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 194], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 304–308 [Pgs. 304–308 include portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 310–311 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 208], 313n [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 315–316 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 210], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 226], 334–335 [Pgs. 334–335 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307]

Ruhr question, 451–454 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 300], 457–460 [Pgs. 457–460 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 480–481 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 315], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 319], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 327], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 332], 518–519 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 334], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 334], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 338], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 553–554 [Pgs. 553–554 include portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 559–560 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 360], 564–567 [Pgs. 564–567 include portions of Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 367], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 370]

Tripartite Board for disarmament and demilitarization, 666–667 [Pgs. 666–667 include portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401]

Trizonal fusion proposals, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 406], 676–677 [Pgs. 676–677 include portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 680–681 [Pgs. 680–681 include portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, and Doc. 412]

Military Governors Conference at Berlin, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 99], 156–157 [Pgs. 156–157 include portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 163–164 [Pgs. 163–164 include portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 170–176 [Pgs. 170–176 include portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 120]

Ministers President, activities of, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 10–19 [Pgs. 10–19 include portions of Doc. 3, Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7], 51–52 [Pgs. 51–52 include portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 375–381 [Pgs. 375–381 include portions of Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, and Doc. 256], 383–397 [Pgs. 383–397 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 266], 402–415 [Pgs. 402–415 include portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274], 418–419 [Pgs. 418–419 include portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, and Doc. 281], 427–430 [Pgs. 427–430 include portions of Doc. 286, Doc. 287, and Doc. 288], 431n [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 442n [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 294], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 296], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 375], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 379], 634n [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 386], 645n [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 392], 808n [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 831–832 [Pgs. 831–832 include portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 560]

North Rhineland, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 154], 306–307 [Pgs. 306–307 include portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 254]

North Rhineland-Westphalia, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 154], 306–307 [Pgs. 306–307 include portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 210], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 254], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 290], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 317], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 371]

Occupation: Basis for, 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]; discussions regarding, 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 291–292 [Pgs. 291–292 include portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 259]; President Truman’s Mar. 17 statement concerning continued U.S. occupation, 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 152], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 181]

Occupation authorities, 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 190], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 259], 390–391 [Pgs. 390–391 include portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 485–486 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 317], 488–490 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 317], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 328], 510–511 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 331], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 331], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 341], 569–571 [Pgs. 569–571 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 573–576 [Pgs. 573–576 include portions of Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, and Doc. 369], 579–580 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 370], 582–583 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 371], 585–589 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 371], 591–593 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 371], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 375], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 609–613 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 378], 616–623 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 380], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 385], 635–636 [Pgs. 635–636 include portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 651–652 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 394], 654–663 [Pgs. 654–663 include portions of Doc. 394, Doc. 395, and Doc. 396], 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514]

Occupation costs, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 70], 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 378], 616–617 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 380], 622–623 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 380], 625–626 [Pgs. 625–626 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, and Doc. 383], 635–637 [Pgs. 635–637 include portions of Doc. 386, Doc. 387, and Doc. 388], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 394], 659–660 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 394], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 674n [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 408]

Occupation forces, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 170], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 198], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 262], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 374], 601–602 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 375], 604–606 [Pgs. 604–606 include portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 378], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 378], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380], 621–623 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 380], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 385], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 386], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 394], 657–658 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 394], 660–662 [Pgs. 660–662 include portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

Occupation statute (see also under Military Governors, supra): Belgian interest, 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

Benelux interest, 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 394], 662–663 [Pgs. 662–663 include portions of Doc. 394, Doc. 395, and Doc. 396]

British position, 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 379], 616–617 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 380], 618n [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 380], 625–627 [Pgs. 625–627 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385], 631–636 [Pgs. 631–636 include portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 644–645 [Pgs. 644–645 include portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 651–652 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 394]

Committee on Allied Controls, report, 627–630 [Pgs. 627–630 include portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, and Doc. 386], 631n [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 386], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 386]

Draft joint text, Dec. 17, 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 653–662 [Pgs. 653–662 include portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 397]

French position, 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 614–617 [Pgs. 614–617 include portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 380], 625–626 [Pgs. 625–626 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, and Doc. 383], 631–635 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 386], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 394], 1339 [Pg. 1339 is part of Doc. 722]

Luxembourg interest, 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

Parliamentary Council: Liaison with Military Governors, 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 386]; meetings with Military Governors, 640–650 [Pgs. 640–650 include portions of Doc. 389, Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, and Doc. 394], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 409]; resolution, 637–639 [Pgs. 637–639 include portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 644–646 [Pgs. 644–646 include portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, and Doc. 393]

Preparation of draft, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 152], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 261–262 [Pgs. 261–262 include portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 279–280 [Pgs. 279–280 include portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 383–384 [Pgs. 383–384 include portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 386–387 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 259], 390–394 [Pgs. 390–394 include portions of Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, and Doc. 264], 397–401 [Pgs. 397–401 include portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 407–408 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 269], 432n [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 291], 439–440 [Pgs. 439–440 include portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 331], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 356], 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 365], 572n [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366], 597–664 [Pgs. 597–664 include portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, and Doc. 397], 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 667n [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 414], 701–702 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 416]

Soviet Union, provision for modification phrased to permit inclusion of, 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 375], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

Swiss interests, 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

Tripartite Working Party, 440n [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 608n [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 615–617 [Pgs. 615–617 include portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 637n [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 650n [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 832n [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496]; draft joint text, 617–624 [Pgs. 617–624 include portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 386], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

U.S. position, 598–608 [Pgs. 598–608 include portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378], 614–617 [Pgs. 614–617 include portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 380], 623–627 [Pgs. 623–627 include portions of Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385], 630–637 [Pgs. 630–637 include portions of Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, and Doc. 388], 640–641 [Pgs. 640–641 include portions of Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391], 651–652 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 394]; OMGUS draft, 608–613 [Pgs. 608–613 include portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]

Occupying Powers, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 154], 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 260–261 [Pgs. 260–261 include portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 190], 292–294 [Pgs. 292–294 include portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 303–304 [Pgs. 303–304 include portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 310–312 [Pgs. 310–312 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 210], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 210], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 385–387 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 259], 390–391 [Pgs. 390–391 include portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 270], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 291], 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 450–454 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 300], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 305], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 309], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 315], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 317], 487–491 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 317], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 328], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 341], 552–553 [Pgs. 552–553 include portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 357], 568–570 [Pgs. 568–570 include portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365], 574–576 [Pgs. 574–576 include portions of Doc. 367, Doc. 368, and Doc. 369], 583–590 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 371], 592–594 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 371], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 602–604 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 375], 606–608 [Pgs. 606–608 include portions of Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 378], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 378], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 380], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 380], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 380], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 628–629 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 385], 636–639 [Pgs. 636–639 include portions of Doc. 386, Doc. 387, and Doc. 388], 654–655 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 394], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 394], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 394], 674n [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 451], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 464], 807–808 [Pgs. 807–808 include portions of Doc. 477, Doc. 478, and Doc. 479], 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490]

Oldenburg, abolition of state of, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 290]

Organization for European Economic Cooperation (OEEC), relationship to, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 210], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 370], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 393]

Palatinate, 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 254]

Parliamentary Council: Berlin representation, question of, 415–418 [Pgs. 415–418 include portions of Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280], 420–423 [Pgs. 420–423 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, and Doc. 283], 434–436 [Pgs. 434–436 include portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 438–439 [Pgs. 438–439 include portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 293], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 297], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 337]; occupation statute, consideration of, 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 386], 637–639 [Pgs. 637–639 include portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 640–650 [Pgs. 640–650 include portions of Doc. 389, Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, and Doc. 394]; proposals regarding, 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 257], 388–389 [Pgs. 388–389 include portions of Doc. 259, Doc. 260, and Doc. 261], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 264], 397–398 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 266], 414–419 [Pgs. 414–419 include portions of Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, and Doc. 281], 1001 [Pg. 1001 is part of Doc. 594], 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 594], 1018 [Pg. 1018 is part of Doc. 602]; sessions at Bonn, 419–425 [Pgs. 419–425 include portions of Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, and Doc. 285], 432–433 [Pgs. 432–433 include portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 435–436 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 291], 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 440–442 [Pgs. 440–442 include portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294], 444–448 [Pgs. 444–448 include portions of Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 519n [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 334], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366], 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 414]

Police, control over, 220–221 [Pgs. 220–221 include portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143], 239–240 [Pgs. 239–240 include portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 433–434 [Pgs. 433–434 include portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 294], 631–632 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 386], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 393]

Political and economic organization: Agreed document, May 31, 305–306 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205]; discussions at London Conference on Germany, 79–80 [Pgs. 79–80 include portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 107–111 [Pgs. 107–111 include portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 76], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 131–134 [Pgs. 131–134 include portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, and Doc. 89], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 94], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 207–211 [Pgs. 207–211 include portions of Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, and Doc. 137], 213–214 [Pgs. 213–214 include portions of Doc. 137, Doc. 138, and Doc. 139], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 219–221 [Pgs. 219–221 include portions of Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143], 223–226 [Pgs. 223–226 include portions of Doc. 144, Doc. 145, and Doc. 146], 230–231 [Pgs. 230–231 include portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 238–241 [Pgs. 238–241 include portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156], 244–246 [Pgs. 244–246 include portions of Doc. 157, Doc. 158, and Doc. 159], 260–264 [Pgs. 260–264 include portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 294–295 [Pgs. 294–295 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196], 298–299 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 199], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 208], 314–515 [Pgs. 314–515 include portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 226], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 226], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 229]

Political Parties: Christian Democratic Union (CDU): Activities of, 381–382 [Pgs. 381–382 include portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 264], 443n [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 444–445 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 295], 1131 [Pg. 1131 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646], 1222 [Pg. 1222 is part of Doc. 682], 1261 [Pg. 1261 is part of Doc. 703], 1269 [Pg. 1269 is part of Doc. 706], 1271 [Pg. 1271 is part of Doc. 707]; attitude toward establishment of provisional government, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 256], 414–415 [Pgs. 414–415 include portions of Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274], 420–421 [Pgs. 420–421 include portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 425n [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 297]; splinter group, 1131 [Pg. 1131 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646]

Christian Social Union (CSU), 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4], 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 295]

Communist Party (KPD), 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 270], 420–421 [Pgs. 420–421 include portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 422n [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 282], 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 431n [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 297], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 331], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 1198 [Pg. 1198 includes portions of Doc. 670 and Doc. 671], 1313 [Pg. 1313 is part of Doc. 720]

Democrats, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 281]

Deutsche Party, (DP), 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 281], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 297]

Free Democratic Party (FDP), 420n [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 281], 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 297]

Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), 420n [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 281], 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 1039 [Pg. 1039 is part of Doc. 610], 1131 [Pg. 1131 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646], 1261 [Pg. 1261 is part of Doc. 703], 1269 [Pg. 1269 is part of Doc. 706], 1271 [Pg. 1271 is part of Doc. 707]

National Democratic Party (NDP), 1306 [Pg. 1306 is part of Doc. 720]

Social Democratic Party (SPD): Activities of, 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 47], 381–384 [Pgs. 381–384 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, and Doc. 258], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 295], 1131 [Pg. 1131 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646], 1222 [Pg. 1222 is part of Doc. 682], 1261 [Pg. 1261 is part of Doc. 703], 1269 [Pg. 1269 is part of Doc. 706], 1271–1272 [Pgs. 1271–1272 include portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708]; attitude toward establishment of provisional government, 382–384 [Pgs. 382–384 include portions of Doc. 256, Doc. 257, and Doc. 258], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 264], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 281], 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 425n [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 297]

Zentrum (Z), 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 297]

Political power, decentralization of, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 70]

Proportional representation, question of, 426–427 [Pgs. 426–427 include portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287], 431–432 [Pgs. 431–432 include portions of Doc. 288, Doc. 289, and Doc. 290]

Protection of foreign interests: Agreed document, May 31, 307–308 [Pgs. 307–308 include portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 210], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]; Intergovernmental Working Party, Paris, Oct. 25–Nov. 11, 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 316], 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 394], 698–702 [Pgs. 698–702 include portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416]; London Conference discussions, 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 132], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 146], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 159], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 267], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 291], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 375]

Provisional Government (see also under Office of Military Government in Germany (U.S.) (OMGUS)): Allied Control Council for Germany, possible effect on, 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]; discussions at London Conference on Germany, 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 48], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 90], 140–141 [Pgs. 140–141 include portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 140], 237–241 [Pgs. 237–241 include portions of Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 157], 240–250 [Pgs. 240–250 include portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, and Doc. 162], 255–256 [Pgs. 255–256 include portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167], 258–260 [Pgs. 258–260 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170], 266–272 [Pgs. 266–272 include portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, and Doc. 176], 275–283 [Pgs. 275–283 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, and Doc. 189], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 190], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 208], 1305 [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 720]; discussions at Military Governors Conference at Berlin, 150n [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 151–159 [Pgs. 151–159 include portions of Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, Doc. 104, Doc. 105, and Doc. 106], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 107], 165–166 [Pgs. 165–166 include portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, Doc. 110, and Doc. 111], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 174–177 [Pgs. 174–177 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 179–180 [Pgs. 179–180 include portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, and Doc. 119], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]; plans and preparations, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 305], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 309], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 317], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 328], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 331], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 331], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 339], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 339], 546–547 [Pgs. 546–547 include portions of Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 356], 567–568 [Pgs. 567–568 include portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 367], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 370], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 371], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 371], 593–594 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 371], 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 378], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 386], 654–657 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 394], 659–662 [Pgs. 659–662 include portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 477], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535], 962 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 579], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 598], 1019–1020 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 602], 1174 [Pg. 1174 is part of Doc. 661], 1298 [Pg. 1298 is part of Doc. 720], 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 720], 1313–1314 [Pg. 1313 is part of Doc. 720], 1328 [Pg. 1328 is part of Doc. 721], 1339–1341 [Pgs. 1339–1341 include portions of Doc. 722 and Doc. 723], 1431 [Pg. 1431 is part of Doc. 787]; Soviet attitude, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 154], 266n [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 267–268 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 173], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 189], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 317–319 [Pgs. 317–319 include portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 224], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 236], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 985 [Pg. 985 is part of Doc. 588], 1001 [Pg. 1001 is part of Doc. 594], 1003–1004 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 594], 1007 [Pg. 1007 is part of Doc. 595], 1009–1013 [Pgs. 1009–1013 include portions of Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599], 1015 [Pg. 1015 is part of Doc. 600], 1018 [Pg. 1018 is part of Doc. 602], 1053 [Pg. 1053 includes portions of Doc. 614 and Doc. 615], 1073 [Pg. 1073 is part of Doc. 622], 1077 [Pg. 1077 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624], 1202–1203 [Pg. 1202 is part of Doc. 673], 1207 [Pg. 1207 is part of Doc. 673], 1210 [Pg. 1210 includes portions of Doc. 673 and Doc. 674], 1313–1314 [Pg. 1313 is part of Doc. 720], 1431 [Pg. 1431 is part of Doc. 787]; West German activities regarding, 381–397 [Pgs. 381–397 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 266], 402–403 [Pgs. 402–403 include portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 408–413 [Pgs. 408–413 include portions of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, and Doc. 271], 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 300], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 371], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 375], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 375], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 391], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Refugees, control over, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 378], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 380], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 380], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 394], 1303 [Pg. 1303 is part of Doc. 720]

Reparations obligations, 391–392 [Pgs. 391–392 include portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 282]

Repatriation policy (U.S.), 1303–1304 [Pg. 1303 is part of Doc. 720]

Rhineland, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 114]

Saxony, Lower, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 290]

Schaumburg-Lippe, abolition of the state of, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 290]

Scientific research, control over, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 170], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 194], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 210], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 262], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 374], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 378], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 380], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 394]

Ship construction, 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 496]

South Rhineland, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 154], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

Soviet penetration, danger of, 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Suedschleswig, 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 287]

Termination of hostilities, question regarding, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 290]

Territorial arrangements, 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 168–169 [Pgs. 168–169 include portions of Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 208–210 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 135], 218–219 [Pgs. 218–219 include portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 238–239 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 154], 245–247 [Pgs. 245–247 include portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 249–251 [Pgs. 249–251 include portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 169], 261–262 [Pgs. 261–262 include portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 171], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 288–289 [Pgs. 288–289 include portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 305–306 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 205], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 208], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 210], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 236], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 254], 392–393 [Pgs. 392–393 include portions of Doc. 262, Doc. 263, and Doc. 264], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 267], 681–697 [Pgs. 681–697 include portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]; London Conference on Germany, agreement of, 288–289 [Pgs. 288–289 include portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 681–682 [Pgs. 681–682 include portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, and Doc. 413]; U.S. position, 681–682 [Pgs. 681–682 include portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, and Doc. 413], 690–694 [Pgs. 690–694 include portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 697–698 [Pgs. 697–698 include portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416]

Trade agreement with France, 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

Trade policies, 1309–1312 [Pg. 1309 is part of Doc. 720]

U.S. economic cooperation agreements, 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 317]

Western boundaries, delimitation commission, proposal for, 682n [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 413], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 413], 687–689 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 413], 695–698 [Pgs. 695–698 include portions of Doc. 414, Doc. 415, and Doc. 416]

Western Europe, integration of West German economy with, 71–73 [Pgs. 71–73 include portions of Doc. 44, Doc. 45, and Doc. 46], 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 66], 109–110 [Pgs. 109–110 include portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 113–114 [Pgs. 113–114 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, and Doc. 76], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 162], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 189], 313–314 [Pgs. 313–314 include portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 236], 532–533 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 339], 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 394], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 782–783 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 466], 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514]

Western European Union, question of West German relationship to, 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 72–73 [Pgs. 72–73 include portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 236], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 375], 1293–1294 [Pg. 1293 is part of Doc. 719]

Westphalia, 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 114], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 135], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 154], 306–307 [Pgs. 306–307 include portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

Wuerttemberg, 44–45 [Pgs. 44–45 include portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 291]

Wuerttemberg-Baden, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 25], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 114], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 145], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 429–431 [Pgs. 429–431 include portions of Doc. 287, Doc. 288, and Doc. 289], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 290], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 291]

Wuerttemberg-Hohenzollern, 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 429–431 [Pgs. 429–431 include portions of Doc. 287, Doc. 288, and Doc. 289]

Western European Security, problem of, 233–234 [Pgs. 233–234 include portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 167], 271–272 [Pgs. 271–272 include portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 276–277 [Pgs. 276–277 include portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 291n [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 331], 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 339], 535 [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]; French concern, 266n [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 173], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 182]; question of inclusion of Austria, 1501 [Pg. 1501 includes portions of Doc. 844 and Doc. 845]; Vandenberg resolution, 233–234 [Pgs. 233–234 include portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 257–258 [Pgs. 257–258 include portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 270–271 [Pgs. 270–271 include portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 277–278 [Pgs. 277–278 include portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

Western European Union: Austrian role, 1389n [Pg. 1389 includes portions of Doc. 756 and Doc. 757], 1415 [Pg. 1415 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1497 [Pg. 1497 includes portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842], 1499 [Pg. 1499 is part of Doc. 843]; Benelux role, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 236]; Bevin proposals, 61–64 [Pgs. 61–64 include portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 45], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 236], 1383 [Pg. 1383 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752]; development, 1290 [Pg. 1290 is part of Doc. 719], 1293–1294 [Pg. 1293 is part of Doc. 719]; French position, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 48], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 236]; rearmament, 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]; Soviet attitude toward, 352–353 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 236]; U.S. arms for, question of, 1375 [Pg. 1375 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745]; U.S. attitude toward, 66n [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 71–73 [Pgs. 71–73 include portions of Doc. 44, Doc. 45, and Doc. 46], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 67], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 233n [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 280n [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 1294 [Pg. 1294 is part of Doc. 719]; West German participation, question of, 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 72–73 [Pgs. 72–73 include portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 236], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 375], 1293–1294 [Pg. 1293 is part of Doc. 719]

Westropp, Maj. Gen. V. J. E., 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]

Whithan, Gelbert S., 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 502 and Doc. 503], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 504]

Wierblowski, Stefan, 360–361 [Pgs. 360–361 include portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

Wilds, Walter, 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 365]

Wilkinson, Lawrence, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 120], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125], 458n [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 315], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 320], 551 [Pg. 551 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 445], 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635]

Williamson, Francis T., 1453–1454 [Pgs. 1453–1454 include portions of Doc. 804, Doc. 805, and Doc. 806], 1463n [Pg. 1463 includes portions of Doc. 813 and Doc. 814]

Wilson, Charles E., 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 471], 841n [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504], 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508]

Winant, John G., 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 386], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 486], 919 [Pg. 919 includes portions of Doc. 558 and Doc. 559]

Winiewicz, Josef, 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239], 368–371 [Pgs. 368–371 include portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]

Winterton, Maj. Gen. T. S. W., 1411 [Pg. 1411 includes portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770]

Wisner, Frank G., 32n [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 16], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 74], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 125], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 132], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 597–598 [Pgs. 597–598 include portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374], 727n [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 728n [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431], 729–731 [Pgs. 729–731 include portions of Doc. 431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433], 732n [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 434], 738–743 [Pgs. 738–743 include portions of Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, and Doc. 442], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 455 and Doc. 456], 768–769 [Pgs. 768–769 include portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, and Doc. 463], 794n [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 470], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 471], 879–880 [Pgs. 879–880 include portions of Doc. 523 and Doc. 524], 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561]

Wohleb, Leo, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 287]

Wolf, George W., 802–803 [Pgs. 802–803 include portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 486], 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488], 842n [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 501], 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509]

Works Progress Administration (WPA) 822 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 487]

Yalta Conference, 1945, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 236], 349–350 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 236], 819–820 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 486], 961 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 579]

Yelisarov, Col. A. I., 900n [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541], 908–909 [Pgs. 908–909 include portions of Doc. 546, Doc. 547, and Doc. 548]

Yerofeyev, Vladimir Yakoylevich, 1024n [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 604], 1035n [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 609], 1042n [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 1065n [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1086n [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 629], 1093n [Pg. 1093 is part of Doc. 632], 1157n [Pg. 1157 is part of Doc. 657]

Yost, Charles W., 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 1374–1375 [Pgs. 1374–1375 include portions of Doc. 743, Doc. 744, and Doc. 745], 1388–1390 [Pgs. 1388–1390 include portions of Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, and Doc. 758], 1417–1418 [Pgs. 1417–1418 include portions of Doc. 774, Doc. 775, and Doc. 776], 1435–1436 [Pgs. 1435–1436 include portions of Doc. 789, Doc. 790, Doc. 791, and Doc. 792], 1491–1492 [Pgs. 1491–1492 include portions of Doc. 837 and Doc. 838]

Yugoslavia (see also under London Conference on Germany, Austria, and Austrian Peace Treaty): COMINFORM denunciation of, 1348–1349 [Pg. 1348 is part of Doc. 723]; Inter Allied Reparations Agency, reparations allocations, 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 428], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 455]; Praha Foreign Ministers Conference, 339–340 [Pgs. 339–340 include portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231]; reparations from Germany, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 78], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 144], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 746n [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 751–752 [Pgs. 751–752 include portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, and Doc. 450], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 758–759 [Pgs. 758–759 include portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, and Doc. 455]; restitutions from Germany, 759n [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]; Soviet pressure, 1456 [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 807]; Warsaw Conference of Foreign Ministers, 916n [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 922n [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 560]

Zarubin, Georgiy Nikolayevich, 313n [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 366–367 [Pgs. 366–367 include portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246]

Zheltov, Col. Gen. Alexey Sergeyevich, 1421 [Pg. 1421 includes portions of Doc. 778 and Doc. 779], 1434 [Pg. 1434 is part of Doc. 789], 1443 [Pg. 1443 includes portions of Doc. 796 and Doc. 797]

Zhukov, Marshal Georgiy Konstantine vich, 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 559]

Zinn, Georg August, 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 257]

Zorin, Valerian Aleksandrovich, 991n [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 590], 995–997 [Pgs. 995–997 include portions of Doc. 591, Doc. 592, and Doc. 593]
