Foreign Relations of the United States, Diplomatic Papers, 1944, General, Volume I (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1966)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1944v01).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

General (Foreign Relations of the United States: Diplomatic Papers, 1944, Volume I)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States: Diplomatic Papers, 1944

Volume I

General

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 28, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

General (Foreign Relations of the United States: Diplomatic Papers, 1944, Volume I)Contents

Preface

Participation by the United States in the work of the European Advisory Commission:I. Organization and scope of activity of the European Advisory Commission; question of civil affairs arrangements for liberated areas (Documents 1-28)

II. The preparation of surrender terms for Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria, and Finland

III. Consultation by the Commission with European Allied countries (Documents 29-54)

IV. Admission of France to full membership in the Commission (Documents 55-74)

V. Questions of terms of surrender, zones of occupation, and control machinery for Germany (Documents 75-227)

VI. Questions of zones of occupation and control machinery for Austria (Documents 228-256)

Consideration of the application of “unconditional surrender” terms to Germany; unofficial peace feelers from Germany (Documents 257-339)

Application of the principle of unconditional surrender to Bulgaria, Hungary, and Rumania (Documents 340-375)

Preliminaries to the establishment of an international organization for the maintenance of international peace and security:I. Arrangements for exploratory discussions on world security organization (Documents 376-418)

II. Dumbarton Oaks Conversations:A. Anglo-American-Soviet phase: August 21–September 28, 1944 (Documents 419-488)

B. Anglo-American-Chinese phase: September 29–October 7, 1944 (Documents 489-506)

III. Continuing preparations for a Conference of United Nations (Documents 507-510)

Interest of the United States in the reaction of non-participating Governments to the Dumbarton Oaks Proposals (Documents 511-526)

Attitude of the United States regarding the eligibility of the Vatican for membership in the proposed international organization (Documents 527-532)

Participation of United States in the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education, London, April 5–29, 1944, and the proposed establishment of a United Nations organization for educational and cultural reconstruction (Documents 533-548)

Governmental assistance to persons forced to emigrate for political or racial reasons (Documents 549-724)

Emergency measure for the welfare and repatriation of American citizens in enemy, former enemy, and enemy-occupied countries (Documents 725-765)

Allied declarations and warnings regarding Nazi atrocities (Documents 766-815)

Discussions regarding procedures and scope of the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes (Documents 816-914)

Representations to neutral governments against the granting of asylum to persons guilty of war crimes (Documents 915-973)

Successful Anglo-American effort to effect Soviet participation in the work of the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee (Documents 974-987)

Establishment of the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee (Documents 988-990)

Policy of the United States with respect to diplomatic and consular property of enemy governments and the property of enemy diplomatic and consular personnel in liberated areas (Documents 991-1013)

Policy and attitude of the Department of State with regard to censorship (Documents 1014-1028)

Appendix: Reorganization of the Department of State

Index

Preface Preface

This volume was prepared under the direct supervision of E. Ralph Perkins, formerly Chief of the Foreign Relations Division now headed by S. Everett Gleason. The compilers of the volume were the late Gustave A. Nuermberger, Velma Hastings Cassidy, John G. Reid, William Slany, John P. Glennon, and former staff members John Rison Jones, Jr., Shirley L. Phillips, and Matilda F. Axton. Further review of the volume was made by Fredrick Aandahl.

The Publishing and Reproduction Services Division (Jerome H. Perlmutter, Chief) was responsible for the technical editing of the volume. This function was performed in the Historical Editing Section under the direct supervision of Elizabeth A. Vary, Chief, and Ouida J. Ward, Assistant Chief.

William M. Franklin
Director, Historical Office,
Bureau of Public Affairs
May 26, 1966

Principles for the Compilation and Editing of “Foreign Relations”

The principles which guide the compilation and editing of Foreign Relations are stated in Department of State Regulation 1350 of June 15, 1961, a revision of the order approved on March 26, 1925, by Mr. Frank B. Kellogg, then Secretary of State. The text of the current regulation is printed below:

1350 Documentary Record of American Diplomacy

1351 Scope of Documentation

The publication Foreign Relations of the United States, Diplomatic Papers, constitutes the official record of the foreign policy of the United States. These volumes include, subject to necessary security considerations, all documents needed to give a comprehensive record of the major foreign policy decisions within the range of the Department of State’s responsibilities, together with appropriate materials concerning the facts which contributed to the formulation of policies. When further material is needed to supplement the documentation in the Department’s files for a proper understanding of the relevant policies of the United States, such papers should be obtained from other Government agencies.

1352 Editorial Preparation

The basic documentary diplomatic record to be printed in Foreign Relations of the United States, Diplomatic Papers, shall be edited by the Historical Office, Bureau of Public Affairs of the Department of State. The editing of the record shall be guided by the principles of historical objectivity. There shall be no alteration of the text, no deletions without indicating where in the text the deletion is made, and no omission of facts which were of major importance in reaching a decision. Nothing shall be omitted for the purpose of concealing or glossing over what might be regarded by some as a defect of policy. However, certain omissions of documents are permissible for the following reasons: a. To avoid publication of matters which would tend to impede current diplomatic negotiations or other business.

b. To condense the record and avoid repetition of needless details.

c. To preserve the confidence reposed in the Department by individuals and by foreign governments.

d. To avoid giving needless offense to other nationalities or individuals.

e. To eliminate personal opinions presented in despatches and not acted upon by the Department. To this consideration there is one qualification—in connection with major decisions it is desirable, where possible, to show the alternatives presented to the Department before the decision was made.

1353 Clearance

To obtain appropriate clearances of material to be published in Foreign Relations of the United States, Diplomatic Papers, the Historical Office shall: a. Refer to the appropriate policy offices of the Department and of other agencies of the Government such papers as appear to require policy clearance.

b. Refer to the appropriate foreign governments requests for permission to print as part of the diplomatic correspondence of the United States those previously unpublished documents which were originated by the foreign governments.

Participation by the United States in the work of the European Advisory Commission:Participation by the United States in the work of the European Advisory Commission:1

1 The European Advisory Commission was established by the Tripartite Conference of Foreign Ministers at Moscow, October 18–November 1, 1943. The project was discussed at the sessions held on October 22, 23, 27, and 29. For reports of these meetings and texts of other Moscow Conference documents relating to the European Advisory Commission (telegram 1135, Amdel 60, Washington, October 30, 1943; Conference Documents Nos. 8 and 18; and Annex 2 to the Secret Protocol of the Conference), see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 604, 617, 650, 662, 683, 710, 720, and 756, respectively. For previous correspondence regarding the establishment of the European Advisory Commission, see ibid., pp. 801 ff.

Contents

I. Organization and scope of activity of the European Advisory Commission; question of civil affairs arrangements for liberated areasI. Organization and scope of activity of the European Advisory Commission; question of civil affairs arrangements for liberated areas

[1] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 4, 1944—10 p.m. [Received 10:47 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/29: Telegram

[2] Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Dunn)

[Washington,] January 4, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/1–444

[3] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 6, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 6:50 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/31: Telegram

[4] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 6, 1944—10 p.m. [Received January 6—9:29 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/32: Telegram

[5] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 6, 1944—10 p.m. [Recieved January 7—11:08 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/33: Telegram

[6] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 9, 1944, 3 p.m.

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/29: Telegram

[7] The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Hayter) to the Chief of the Division of European Affairs (Matthews)

Washington, January 10, 1944.

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/62

[8] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 12, 1944—midnight.

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/37: Telegram

[9] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 14, 1944—11 p.m. [Received January 14—8:52 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/47: Telegram

[10] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 15, 1944—6 p.m. [Received January 15—2:33 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/49: Telegram

[11] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Counselor of the American Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Kennan)

[London,] January 15, 1944.

EAC Files, Lot 52M 64, File “215—France”

[12] The Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs (Matthews) to the First Secretary of the British Embassy (Hayter)

Washington, January 19, 1944.

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/62

[13] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 20, 1944—5 p.m. [Received January 20—3:15 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/55: Telegram

[14] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 21, 1944—1 p.m.

851.01 American Military Government/9a: Telegram

[15] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 24, 1944—4 p.m. [Received 6:06 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/60: Telegram

[16] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 28, 1944—8 p.m.

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/60: Telegram

[17] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, March 14, 1944—8 a.m. [Received March 15—2:10 p.m.]

857.01/122: Telegram

[18] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, March 15, 1944—midnight.

857.01/124a: Telegram

[19] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, April 14, 1944—midnight.

740.00119 EAC/160: Telegram

[20] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, April 14, 1944—midnight. [Received April 14—11:59 p.m.]

740.0011 Stettinius Mission/24: Telegram

[21] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, April 14, 1944—midnight. [Received April 14—11:59 p.m.]

740.0011 Stettinius Mission/28: Telegram

[22] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, April 18, 1944—midnight.

740.0011 Stettinius Mission/41c: Telegram

[23] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, April 25, 1944—6 p.m. [Received 9:09 p.m.]

740.0011 Stettinius Mission/59: Telegram

[24] The Chargé to the Norwegian Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State

London, April 28, 1944—6 p.m. [Received April 28—4:30 p.m.]

857.01/132: Telegram

[25] The Chargé to the Norwegian Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State

London, May 5, 1944—7 p.m. [Received May 5—6:55 p.m.]

857.01/134: Telegram

[26] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, May 13, 1944—11 a.m. [Received 6:30 p.m.]

855.01/82: Telegram

[27] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Bucknell)

Washington, May 13, 1944—midnight.

855.01/82a: Telegram

[28] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Bucknell) to the Secretary of State

London, May 15, 1944—11 p.m. [Received May 15—6:09 p.m.]

857.01/138: Telegram

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/29: Telegram

[Document 1]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)2 to the Secretary of State

London, January 4, 1944—10 p.m.
[Received 10:47 p.m.]

82. Personal for the Secretary. Department’s 8108 of December 23, 8 p.m.3 I note that your view of the scope of activity of the European Advisory Commission represents the absolute minimum of what was set forth in its terms of reference.4 This view practically excludes, after disposal of the French civil affairs document5 and the liberated areas question specifically referred to the Commission by the Moscow Conference,6 the consideration of any subjects other than terms of surrender and machinery for control in enemy countries.7

The British have an entirely different view of the Commission’s role, and are making plans for submitting to it numbers of matters on which they will be anxious to obtain agreement, currently and with a minimum of delay, between the three Governments.

They expect the Commission to consider not only the treatment of Germany and other enemy countries with respect to frontiers, military occupation, disarmament, reparation, decentralization, as well as armistice terms and controls, but also numerous questions connected with the liberated territories. It was their understanding that while the Commission would not concern itself with the detail planning of affairs in liberated territories, it would make recommendations covering the broad lines of policy in this respect.

There thus remains between the two Governments a divergence of view so serious that I think it dangerous to allow it to manifest itself initially in the actual sessions of the Commission, where it could hardly fail to be conspicuous to the Russians; and I feel we should do everything possible to reach a closer approximation to the British position before the Commission convenes. I am pressed, however, to call a meeting of the Commission this week by both the British and the Russians.

I understand and share your concern that the Commission should not in any way anticipate the political decisions of a future general organization for the maintenance of peace and security on a worldwide basis, or the military decisions which must necessarily be taken on various future occasions by Allied military commanders.

I do not think, however, that the strict observance of these considerations should prevent us from exchanging views in the Commission on a number of current questions affecting the termination of hostilities in Europe, which may be referred to us.

In this view, I am guided by the following thoughts: (1) The Commission is advisory only; its deliberations and agenda will presumably not be made public; and there is no reason why our Government should accept any undesirable proposals.

(2) You may be sure that I shall keep the above considerations carefully in mind in my work on the Commission.

(3) I expect to be in touch with the Department currently, and the latter, together with the other Departments represented on the working security committee, will have ample opportunity to make known its views even in the course of the preliminary consideration of matters before the Commission.

(4) Our delegation will have closest touch with our military authorities through (a) inclusion of military experts in its membership; (b) regular liaison with Combined Chiefs of Staff and their Combined Civil Affairs Committee;8 (c) direct day by day contact with Supreme Allied Commander; and (d) army representation on Working Security Committee in Washington. In these circumstances, I fail to see how anything prejudicial to the interests of our military authorities could pass unnoticed.

(5) We cannot dispute the necessity of having some central machinery through which the views of the three Governments may be obtained and joint action solicited on questions which may arise suddenly and urgently at any time as the military situation develops and which affect the immediate interest and competencies of the three powers in connection with the termination of hostilities in the European sphere. If we take at the outset a negative attitude to the Commission, without having any alternative facilities to propose, I fear that we may cause deep and deplorable discouragement on the British side and indifference on the part of the Russians and thereby jeopardize the chances of obtaining effective Anglo-Russian-American cooperation for the immediate post-hostilities period.

(6) As you know, Sir Frederick Bovenschen9 is visiting Washington where he will presumably discuss British participation on the Combined Civil Affairs Committee. Even if agreement is reached in these discussions in Washington, the future successful operation of the Combined Civil Affairs Committee will be assured only if the British are satisfied that we are willing to cooperate wholeheartedly in the application of such agreement. I doubt very much if the British will consider that we are doing so if we refuse to join them in exploiting to the full the possibilities of the Advisory Commission to the establishment of which we have consented.

This message will be followed by separate messages reviewing the present situation with respect to each of matters which have been proposed for consideration by the Commission. In connection with these messages, I hope that the Department will bear in mind the considerations set forth above.

Winant

2 Ambassador John G. Winant was United States Representative on the European Advisory Commission.

3  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 812.

4 The Terms of Reference of the European Advisory Commission are contained in Annex 2 of the Secret Protocol of the Moscow Conference of Foreign Ministers, signed November 1, 1943, ibid., p. 756.

5 Under item 6 of the Secret Protocol of the Moscow Conference of Foreign Ministers, it was stated that an exchange of views had taken place upon the document presented to the Conference by the United States and the United Kingdom (American title: “Civil Affairs for France”, British title: “Basic Scheme for Administration of Liberated France”) and the document was referred for examination to the European Advisory Commission. For text of the Secret Protocol, see ibid., p. 749. For text of the document, see Annex 5 to the Secret Protocol, ibid., p. 760. For the record of the discussions of this subject at the ninth session of the Moscow Conference of Foreign Ministers on October 27, 1943, see ibid., p. 650.

6 Under item 14 of the Secret Protocol of the Moscow Conference of Foreign Ministers, it was stated that an exchange of views had taken place on a proposal put forward by the United Kingdom on “policy regarding Allied territory liberated through the advance of the Allied forces” and that this question was referred to the European Advisory Commission. For text of the British draft proposal, see Moscow Conference Document No. 35, ibid., p. 738. For the record of the discussions of this subject at the ninth session of the Moscow Conference of Foreign Ministers on October 27, 1943, see ibid., p. 650.

7 For correspondence regarding the discussions in the European Advisory Commission regarding the terms of surrender and control machinery for Germany, see pp. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75] ff. Regarding the consideration by the European Advisory Commission of surrender terms for Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria, and Finland, see bracketed note, p. 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 28].

8 This United States-British committee, which was located in Washington, was established by the Combined Chiefs of Staff in July 1943 to recommend civil affairs policies for enemy and enemy-held areas that were occupied by combined operations and to coordinate military and civilian agency interests in such matters. For previous documentation on the relationship of the Combined Civil Affairs Committee to the European Advisory Commission, see pertinent entries in the index of Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehran.

9 British Joint Permanent Under-Secretary of State for War and head of the Administration of Territories (Europe) Committee, a British body to coordinate planning for military government. Bovenschen was in Washington to advance a British proposal that a branch of the Combined Civil Affairs Committee be established in London. At the end of January 1944 the London Sub-Committee of the Combined Civil Affairs Committee was set up. For a discussion of the events leading up to the establishment of this sub-committee, see Forrest C. Pogue, The Supreme Command, in the official Army history, United States Army in World War II: The European Theater of Operations (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1954), pp. 76–78.

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Dunn) 740.00119 EAC/1–444

[Document 2]

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Dunn)11

[Washington,] January 4, 1944.

Jurisdiction of European Advisory Commission

1. There has arisen some confusion in the minds of the British, particularly, as to the jurisdiction of the European Advisory Commission. It is quite clear to this Government, and it would seem, also to the Soviet Government, that with certain exceptions the task of the European Advisory Commission is to draw up and recommend to the three Governments the terms and conditions to be imposed upon Germany and the enemy countries in Europe at the time of their surrender, and to recommend the form of control machinery which should be put into effect for the purpose of executing such terms and conditions. In carrying on this work, the American Commissioner, Ambassador Winant, will have military and naval advisers, and the State Department has assigned to him two political assistants. We expect that Ambassador Winant will be cabling the Department of State from time to time, as the discussions develop in the Commission, for our information and for instructions as to the policies to be followed in drawing up these terms. The State Department will undertake to clear all the correspondence with Ambassador Winant with the War and Navy Departments and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

2. As specific exceptions to this field of jurisdiction, the European Advisory Commission has had referred to it by the Conference at Moscow two papers— (a) “Civil Affairs for France” which was agreed to between the British and American Governments under date of October 6;12 and

(b) A statement proposed by the British Government on the part to be played by the refugee governments in the liberated areas when the military operations take place in those countries.13

With regard to (a), there would appear to be no necessity of more than clearing this document with the Soviet Government, and this should be done as quickly as possible in order that the document may be submitted to the Combined Chiefs of Staff for transmission in the form of a directive to the Supreme Allied Commander in connection with his planning for the operations in France. As to (b), the Secretary has already given Mr. Winant instructions on the subject to the effect that the American Government has never approved the British proposed statement in the form in which it was presented at Moscow and referred to the European Advisory Commission.

3. It is the general conception on the part of the United States Government that the European Advisory Commission should deal with problems beginning with the surrender of the enemy in Europe and the post-hostilities period, and should not discuss matters relating to the military period up to the time of the surrender of Germany and her satellites.

James Clement Dunn

11 Copy obtained from the files of the American Delegation to the European Advisory Commission, Lot 52 M 64, “305—Terms of Reference”.

12 See footnote 5, p. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1].

13 See footnote 6, p. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/31: Telegram

[Document 3]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 6, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 6:50 p.m.]

111. Personal for the Secretary. Since my cable to you (my 82, January 4, 10 p.m.) I have planned to call the first meeting of the Advisory Commission the middle of next week.

It is my present thought that if by that time we have not reached closer understanding with the British with relation to the general scope of the Commission’s intentions and in particular the questions connected with civil affairs in occupied areas, I shall inaugurate the work of the Commission by taking up initially, as indicated in the terms of reference, the matter of terms of surrender and pertinent controls for Germany and shall ask that the various representatives be prepared to place before the Commission at the following (i. e. the second) session any papers or suggestions they may already have to submit on this subject. This would be, of course, without prejudice to the future submission of further material, by any representative, as it might become available.

The next step, at the second session, would then probably be to start the immediate studying and sifting of available material by a working subcommittee, with a view to giving the representatives a clear picture of the extent to which, and points at which, the initial approaches by the three powers converge or differ.

I hope that this program will enable the Commission to get down to hard work at once on a matter with regard to which, in connection with the Commission’s competency, there can be no difference of opinion; and that this will smooth the ways for a clarification of views with respect to other matters proposed for its examination.

Winant

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/32: Telegram

[Document 4]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 6, 1944—10 p.m.
[Received January 6—9:29 p.m.]

130. Personal for the Secretary. I strongly doubt that we will succeed in clearing through the Advisory Commission without further discussion and amplification the draft basic scheme for administration of liberated France. See Department’s 8108 December 23, 8 p.m.14 and my 82 January 4, 10 p.m.

Despite the fact that they have formally agreed to this document, the British appear to feel that it is inadequate in its present form as a basis of military planning and that certain modifications and amplifications are in order which cannot—in view of the political connotations—properly proceed from the military planners. They expect the Russians to come forward in the Commission with questions and comments, if not objections, with respect to the existing text, and I suspect that they propose to seize this opportunity to achieve reconsideration of a document which they cannot gracefully themselves propose for revision.

Their objections and possibly those of the Russians are believed to run along two lines.

(a) They feel that the tendency to distinguish between the French military authorities and the French National Committee is no longer realistic and that if we attempt to sidetrack the latter entirely in the appointment of a civil affairs director we will be faced with a campaign of sabotage which will vitiate many of the director’s efforts and render him largely useless to the Supreme Commander.

They would probably wish to see paragraphs (2) and (3) of the existing document altered so as to correspond to this view.

(b) They seem to feel that France cannot be treated in civil affairs as enemy occupied territory, that the rights accorded by international law to a military force occupying territory of another state are not suitable or politically expedient as a source of authority for the Supreme Allied Commander in this instance, and that account must be taken of French law. They evidently hope to establish this thought (which of course runs counter to the general tenor of the document they have already signed) by incorporating it in, and achieving acceptance of, some sort of supplementary document (examining the practical application of the broad principles laid down in the draft basic scheme). As you probably know, a supplementary document thus described was drafted by the British Delegation at Moscow;15 and I think it likely that it will appear at some stage before the Commission.

My own view, based not only on the general picture as it presents itself to us here but also on informal contacts which we have had with COSSAC,16 is that on the first of these points the British position is not without logic and that we will have to make some effort to meet their views if we are to achieve the prompt submission of the document to the military planning authorities. Fortunately, I believe that we can accomplish this without incurring prejudice to the basic position incorporated in the paper dated October 6.

I think that justice could be done to the British view as well as to our own if paragraphs (2) and (3) of that paper were to be modified in such a way as to indicate: (a) that the French Committee of National Liberation would be invited to appoint a French military liaison mission composed of professional French officers to the headquarters of the Supreme Allied Commander;

(b) that the civil affairs director would be a French officer appointed by the Supreme Allied Commander from the French military liaison mission;

(c) that the civil affairs director would be directly responsible to the Supreme Allied Commander.

You will note that this suggestion, while it permits the French National Committee to appoint the French military liaison mission (a feature which I am afraid is now practically unavoidable), ensures that the civil affairs director shall be a professional officer (thus excluding politicians placed in uniform for this purpose) and adds the specific provision—only implied in the existing agreement—that the civil affairs director should be directly responsible to the Supreme Commander. It thus provides us with some protection—as much, I think, as we can hope to get—against the French National Committee’s being confronted with too strong a temptation either to load the dice for future political developments in France or sabotage civil affairs work during the period of military occupation.

Unless you have strong objections I propose, if pressed, to discuss a compromise along the above lines, bearing in mind of course that nothing more binding than advisory recommendation to our Government could ensue from these discussions. With respect to the second of the British objections, I feel that they are definitely wrong and that their attempt to twist the spirit of the existing document should be flatly resisted. I fail to see how the Supreme Commander can undertake to observe and respect French law without taking in the French National Committee as a partner in the governing of France, with all the resultant division and obscurity of authority; and I think we should adhere strictly in this respect to the existing document which leaves these questions entirely in the Commander’s discretion.

If the matter is settled as indicated above, the overall approach to the treatment of French civil affairs would roughly be as follows: initially there would be only straight Allied military government. As various zones were freed from actual combat operations, the Supreme Commander might turn over the direction of civil affairs in them, at his own discretion, to the French director who would act under his authority.

Finally, the Supreme Commander, after the termination of hostilities, would determine the time at which civil affairs could be turned over entirely to the French and the various schemes now being worked on in North Africa (see Wilson’s 5 December 18, 7 p.m. to me, repeated to Department)17 for reestablishment of constitutional French authority could then be implemented.

Winant

14  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 812.

15 Document entitled “Civil Administration of Liberated France”, dated October 19, 1943, not printed; circulated by the Chief of Staff to the Supreme Allied Commander as document COSSAC/3151/Sec., dated 26 November 1943.

16 Chief of Staff to the Supreme Allied Commander; this office was held by Lt. Gen. Sir Frederick E. Morgan.

17 This telegram from Edwin C. Wilson, American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers, not printed. For correspondence regarding the recognition by the United States of the administrative authority of the French Committee of National Liberation, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. ii, pp. 23 ff. For additional correspondence regarding the concern of the United States over the civil administration of France immediately following liberation from the Germans, see ibid., 1944, vol. iii, pp. 634 ff.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/33: Telegram

[Document 5]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 6, 1944—10 p.m.
[Recieved January 7—11:08 p.m.]

131. I appreciate the guidance given me in the Department’s 8108 December 23, 8 p.m.,18 concerning the paper presented by Mr. Eden19 in Moscow on policy regarding Allied territory liberated through the advance of the Allied forces and will bear it in mind if the paper is presented by the British to the Commission.

However, I am not sure that the British intend to present this paper at all, and in any case they do not intend that consideration by the Commission of questions dealing with policy in liberated territories shall be confined to the examination of this particular document.

Strang20 has been kind enough to give me a written statement of the matters which the British consider to have been already referred to the Advisory Commission. In this statement, the following passage, dealing with the question under reference appears: “While Mr. Eden originally raised the question at Moscow as a general issue, expressed in the form of a draft declaration covering all liberated territories he suggested at the outset of the conference that the various problems which would arise as Allied countries were liberated should be referred to the Commission. According to the record of the discussion taken by the UK delegation,21 Mr. Hull then enlarged on the different treatment which would be required in the various countries concerned and seemed to imply that Allied policy would vary in regard to the various Allied governments-in-exile. He suggested that it would be for the members of the London Commission to review the facts and conditions in each country. It was Mr. Hull who proposed that the question should be turned over to the European Advisory Commission, and the UK delegation did not get the impression from his previous remarks that he contemplated restricting the European Advisory Commission merely to the consideration of the British draft declaration. M. Molotov22 then summed up the discussion by stating that the question should be considered in the light of the circumstances obtaining in each individual country. It was the impression of the UK delegation that the question would be considered by the European Advisory Commission on this basis, namely that the Commission would examine the situation in each country in turn. The countries concerned would be Norway, the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxemburg, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and Greece. The functions of the European Advisory Commission would be to make recommendations covering bread [broad] lines of policy. It would not concern itself with the detailed planning of civil affairs.”

There was enclosed with the statement an extract from the UK record of the conference. In summing up your remarks on this question, the extract said that he (i.e. Mr. Hull) “thought that the three Governments would think pretty much alike, but would need time to work out suitable plans. He thought Mr. Eden agreed that until the machinery of the London Commission had been set up there was no organization competent to deal with this question and with many other major and minor questions which called for discussion. This conference had not got time to work it out, and it should therefore be turned over to the London Commission.”

In summarizing Mr. Molotov’s remarks, the extract states that: “He agreed with Mr. Hull’s proposal that the matter should be referred to the London Commission, and thought this should be one of the first questions to be taken up by it. The Committee would have a big job to do.”

In view of the above, I think that we may find the British bringing into the Commission various questions dealing with liberated areas on which broad general agreement of the three Governments is required. And if this occurs, I do not think that we should evidence at the outset a flatly negative a priori attitude toward all such discussion. Each question can be treated on its merits; and if in any individual instance we have reason to believe that discussion in the Commission would be undesirable or inappropriate, there is nothing to prevent our saying so frankly.

As far as the Norwegian agreement23 is concerned, the difficulty in bringing about a speedy acceptance of this and other similar agreements on our part appears to lie not in the proposed content of the agreements themselves but in differences between the British and ourselves over the proper channel for their submission to our authorities. I understand fully the Department’s views on this subject and strongly hope that the talks with Bovenschen will contribute to a removal of the difficulties.

I do not understand, however, why this situation should preclude the Advisory Commission from at least taking note of the general tenor of the proposed agreements. Such a formality, as I am sure you understand, would not make them binding on our Government, but would merely mean that they would come to us, for executive action, after being favorably noted by a body on which the Russians are represented. It has been indicated to us here that the British desire to bring the agreements before the Commission is not connected with, and need not influence, the question of the place and manner through which they are eventually considered for approval or rejection by our authorities, but arises out of regard for relations with the Russians. The British wish to see these agreements made known in this manner in a preliminary stage to the Soviet Government in order that there may be justification for demanding that the Russians similarly take us into confidence with respect to their plans for treatment of civilian populations and collaborations with local authorities in territories they may occupy in Eastern Europe. The British feel that if we present the Russians only with faits accomplis on these subjects, as we were obliged to do in the case of Italy,24 we can only expect to learn of their actions and policies in Eastern Europe in a similar manner. This is plainly a political consideration of the most weighty significance, and one which—if we are not in agreement with it—should at least be treated on its merits and not subordinated to the questions of technical procedure which the proposed submission of the Norwegian agreement to our Government has raised.

In these circumstances, I see no objection to the clearance of this, document through the Commission, provided that my assent to its notation or approval there is qualified by the reservation that such action does not influence the question of the manner and channel of its presentation for executive action by our authorities.

Since this is one of the first questions which the British wish to bring before the Commission, I should appreciate an early clarification of your views in the light of the above.

Winant

18  Ibid., 1943, vol. i, p. 812.

19 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

20 Sir William Strang, Assistant Under Secretary of State in the British Foreign Office and British Representative on the European Advisory Commission.

21 For the American delegation’s record of this discussion, see the Summary of the Ninth Session of the Tripartite Conference of Foreign Ministers at Moscow, October 27, 1943, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 650.

22 Vyacheslav Mikhailovieh Molotov, Soviet People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs.

23 Draft Memorandum of Agreement Respecting the Arrangements for Civil Administration and Jurisdiction in Norwegian Territory Liberated by an Allied Expeditionary Force, not printed. For the final version of this agreement as signed on May 16, 1944, by representatives of the United States and Norway, see Department of State Treaties and Other International Acts Series No. 1514, or 60 Stat. (pt. 2) 1581. An agreement in identical terms was concluded on the same day between the United Kingdom and Norway. For a discussion of the negotiation of these agreements, see Pogue, The Supreme Command, pp. 79–80, 139–140.

24 For correspondence regarding the overthrow of the Fascist regime in Italy and the Italian armistice, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. ii, pp. 314 ff.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/29: Telegram

[Document 6]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 9, 1944, 3 p.m.

226. I am somewhat disturbed to learn from your telegram no. 82, January 4, 10 p.m. that I apparently was unsuccessful in conveying to you through my telegram no. 8108, December 23, 8 p.m.,25 the American viewpoint regarding the scope and functions of the European Advisory Commission. You are quite right when you state that the British have an entirely different view of the Commission’s role. From the very beginning as I endeavored to make clear in the second paragraph of my no. 8108 the British Government has apparently conceived of the European Advisory Commission as in fact the instrument through which the post-war world organizations would be molded. This view was definitely not shared by the Russians or ourselves and I fail to understand why you believe that our endeavors to keep the Commission within the bounds specifically agreed upon should cause “indifference on the part of the Russians and thereby jeopardize the chances of obtaining effective Anglo-Russian-American cooperation for the immediate post-hostilities period”. I think if you will carefully read Annex 2 to the Secret Moscow Protocol you will see that it clearly and specifically defines the terms of reference of the European Advisory Commission. You will find nothing therein which would justify any British complaint if, to quote numbered paragraph 6 of your telegram “we refuse to join them in exploiting to the full the possibilities of the Advisory Commission to the establishment of which we have consented”. Paragraph 2 of that document states: “The Commission will study and make joint recommendations to the three Governments upon European questions connected with the termination of hostilities which the three Governments may consider appropriate to refer to it.” Paragraph 5 thereof stipulates: “The foregoing terms of reference will be subject to review by the three Governments if circumstances should arise which call for an extension of the membership and competence of the Commission.” There has been no suggestion on the part of any of the three Governments that even prior to beginning its labors the Commission’s terms of reference should be reviewed.

It has been apparent from the tone of the British press, presumably with official guidance, and from official statements by British authorities that Mr. Eden and his Government regard the jurisdiction of the Commission to be very much wider than that stated in the terms of reference. For example we learn from the Hansard reports that on December 17 Mr. George Hall, Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, in a debate on peace aims stated: “As far as the European situation is concerned I think it is generally admitted that it is impossible to bring about economic restoration in Europe if you leave out that great mass of population in the center. But is not that one of the questions which the European Commission which is now sitting in London is considering?”26 He further stated in reply to a question: “My understanding of the functions of the European Commission is that they are charged to consider almost any question with regard to peace problems which might arise when the war is over. I have no doubt that when it is required the position of Japan will also be considered in exactly the same way.”27 Statements such as the above are frankly disturbing in their implications and give to the Commission a latitude and field of endeavor far beyond anything agreed upon at Moscow. (You will note for instance from item 2 on the Secret Protocol agreement that representatives of the three Governments “should conduct, in a preliminary fashion, an exchange of views on questions connected with the establishment of an international organization for the maintenance of international peace and security, the intention being that this work should be carried out in the first instance in Washington, and also in London and Moscow.”) In fact upon my return the President expressed to me his own anxiety lest the European Advisory Commission might tend to arrogate to itself the general field of post-war organization. I assured him that no such scope was intended. I believe that you will appreciate the possible long-term repercussions on American public opinion should the impression be gained that this Commission sitting in London is secretly building the new world. The implications with regard to American participation in and cooperation with such an organization are obvious. I am very glad to learn that you do fully share, as you indicate in your telegram, our concern in this regard: it is a fundamental and delicate aspect of our relationship to the Committee.

On the other hand I cannot feel as you apparently do that the scope left to the Advisory Commission is either unimportant or too narrow. It is specifically intended that the Commission shall draft provisions for imposition upon Germany and her satellites at the time of surrender and the complexity and importance of this subject in its political, military, and economic aspects, is, I think, obvious. (We hope to forward to you in the immediate future our own views on this specific subject for Germany).

The United States Joint Chiefs of Staff when they learned of the proposed establishment of the Commission were immediately apprehensive and have made an exhaustive study of its relationship during the period of military operations. I have now received from them the following communication:28 “The Joint Chiefs of Staff have carefully considered the question of military and naval advisors for the European Advisory Commission and have directed that adequate military and naval personnel be provided in London and Washington for liaison with the Commission.

“Based on military considerations, it is the opinion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the following should be incorporated in the instructions to Mr. Winant and should provide the accepted procedure for handling matters of direct or indirect military concern which may arise in connection with the work of the Commission: “a. That the European Advisory Commission, from the U. S. point of view, is an important body, whose functioning and development should be guided and maintained in accordance with the U. S. concept as to the scope of its activities and the manner of its operation.

“b. That the Commission should keep strictly within the letter and spirit of its directive and in so doing be particular to avoid problems relating to the conduct of military operations, and concerning civil affairs of liberated or enemy territories incident to such operations prior to the end of hostilities.

“c. That the U. S. member of the Commission should be directed to present the studies and proposed recommendations of the Commission to the U. S. Government for approval by appropriate authorities before committing the United States in regard thereto.

“d. That all matters referred by this Government to the U. S. member of the Commission either for study or for information, should be previously approved by appropriate U. S. authorities.

“e. That the necessary organization and personnel should be provided to accomplish c and d above effectively.

“f. That all questions involving military matters, directly or indirectly, be referred to and passed upon by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the theater commander, or the War or Navy Department, as appropriate.”

The Joint Chiefs of Staff are consequently sending instructions to the military and naval advisors on the Commission in accord with their views expressed in the above letter. I believe that it is necessary to clarify immediately this question of the basic jurisdiction of the Commission, and am confident that you will be able to do so with your British and Russian associates.

Hull

25  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 812.

26  Parliamentary Debates, House of Commons, 5th series, vol. 395, col. 1900.

27  Ibid., col. 1901.

28 Transmitted by letter dated January 5, 1944, from Admiral Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, to the Secretary of State; not printed.

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Hayter) to the Chief of the Division of European Affairs (Matthews) 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/62

[Document 7]

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Hayter) to the Chief of the Division of European Affairs (Matthews)

Washington, January 10, 1944.

Dear Mr. Matthews: As I promised during our conversation today, I enclose a copy of an extract from the British Delegation’s record of the discussion at the Moscow Conference on the subject of policy in liberated territory.29

The Foreign Office’s understanding of what passed during this discussion was that while Mr. Eden originally raised the question as a general issue expressed in the form of a draft declaration, he suggested at the outset that the various particular problems which would arise as the Allied countries were liberated should be referred to the European Advisory Commission. Mr. Hull’s subsequent remarks seemed to imply that Allied policy would vary widely in regard to the various Allied Governments in exile. It was the Secretary who first proposed that the broad question should be turned over at once to the European Advisory Commission, and the British Delegation did not get the impression from his remarks that he contemplated restricting the European Advisory Commission to consideration of the British draft declaration, which was known to be unacceptable in its present form to Mr. Hull. Mr. Molotov summed up the discussion by stating that the question should be considered in the light of the circumstances obtaining in each individual country, and it was the British Delegation’s impression that the question would be considered by the European Advisory Commission on this basis.

However this may be, it is clear that in view of developments in Yugoslavia and Greece and of the Polish-Russian situation it would now be hopeless to try to agree upon any Three-Power declaration of general application. On the other hand, Mr. Eden thinks it very desirable to try to reach agreement upon the policy to be followed in the individual Allied countries. The action taken at Moscow which resulted in concerting Anglo-American policy in Italy with the Soviet Government30 was most useful in removing misunderstanding and friction, and has convinced His Majesty’s Government that it would be very wise to try to clear in advance with the Soviet Government Anglo-American policy in regard to Allied countries within the Anglo-American operational sphere. Moreover, the best chance of reaching agreement with the Soviet Government about policy in Poland and Yugoslavia seems to be frank consultation with them about Anglo-American policy in territories liberated by Anglo-American operations. Mr. Eden attaches great importance to this point, with which I understand you are in agreement. It was with this thought in mind that the Foreign Office suggested that the civil affairs agreements with Norway, Belgium and the Netherlands should be cleared with the Russians in the European Advisory Commission; this seemed the appropriate way to secure the agreement of the Soviet Government to our policy in those countries.

Mr. Eden feels that it is important to keep these agreements as drafts until we have given the Soviet Government an opportunity to express their views on policy in the three countries concerned, and that if we were to conclude them before policy in liberated territories has been discussed in the European Advisory Commission our action would not be in harmony with the spirit of the decisions at Moscow and might give the Soviet Government the impression that we were returning to the idea of separate spheres of interest in Europe.

The Foreign Office do not feel that the agreements are operational in character and therefore unsuitable for discussion in the European Advisory Commission. The agreements lay down certain general principles to govern the administrative and legal relationships between the Allied forces and the local authorities and population, which together make up the broad policy to be applied.

In the light of the Department’s views which you explained to me at our earlier conversation, the Foreign Office suggest as an alternative procedure the delivery to the European Advisory Commission not of the text of the Norwegian Agreement but of a note in the terms of the draft which I left with you today.31 Meanwhile they have communicated the text of the Agreement to the Soviet Government for their information; and they feel that if the Soviet Representative on the Commission should ask for the actual text to be considered there, we should be well advised to agree to this.

To sum up: the British Government attach great importance to an early discussion of policy in liberated territories in the Advisory Commission in accordance with Item 14 of the Moscow protocol.32 They very much hope that you will agree to proceed as suggested above. If not, I think that they would like to know the State Department’s suggestions for implementing Item 14 of the Moscow protocol, and their views on the general question of the extent to which the Advisory Commission should concern itself with policy in liberated territories in Europe.

Yours sincerely,

W. G. Hayter

29 Not printed; for the American delegation’s record of this discussion, see the Summary of the Ninth Session of the Tripartite Conference of Foreign Ministers at Moscow, October 27, 1943, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 650.

30 See Annex 3, “Advisory Council for Italy,” and Annex 4, “Declaration Regarding Italy,” to the Moscow Conference Protocol, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 758 and 759, respectively.

31 Not printed.

32 Item 14 of the Secret Protocol of the Moscow Conference, entitled “Policy regarding Allied territory liberated through the advance of the Allied forces”, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 754.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/37: Telegram

[Document 8]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 12, 1944—midnight.

303. The British Embassy has likewise again raised with the Department the matter of submitting the Anglo-Norwegian agreement to the European Advisory Commission (your telegram no. 131, January 6, 10 p.m.).

In addition to the other factors involved, you will note from paragraph B of the letter received from the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff (Department’s telegram no. 226, January 8 [9], 3 p.m.) that they are of the opinion that the Commission should keep strictly within the letter and spirit of its directive (terms of reference) and, in particular, avoid discussion of problems “relating to the conduct of military operations, and concerning civil affairs of liberated or enemy territories incident to such operations prior to the end of hostilities.” The substance of the Anglo-Norwegian agreement deals primarily with questions of administration and jurisdiction in Norwegian territory during the phase of active military operations there. Its discussion by the European Advisory Commission would consequently seem to be ipso facto contrary to the wishes of the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff. You should be guided by their wishes and by the Department’s telegram no. 8210, December 29, 7 p.m.33 should the British continue to insist on bringing this question before the Commission.

You may wish to make it clear that our Government has no desire to keep the agreement from the Russians; on the contrary, the Department informally indicated to the British Embassy that it would be happy to see the Anglo-Norwegian agreement communicated to the Soviet Government. We have now been informed that the British have, in fact, communicated the text of the agreement to the Soviet Government for their information. Since the agreement was negotiated some months ago directly by the British with the Norwegian authorities during which time it was communicated neither to the Russians nor to us officially the Department fails entirely to understand your reference to the desire of the British to see the agreement made known “in a preliminary stage to the Soviet Government in order that there may be justification for demanding that the Russians similarly take us into confidence with respect to their plans for treatment of civilian populations and collaboration with local authorities in territories they may occupy in Eastern Europe”. The Anglo-Norwegian agreement is, in our view, (though the British hold otherwise) of an operational nature. It can hardly be described as in a “preliminary stage” and it seems doubtful that the Russians would so consider it.

For your information, in this general connection, the British Embassy has indicated that in view of developments in Yugoslavia and Greece and of the Polish-Russian situation “it would now be hopeless to try to agree upon any three power declaration of general application” and for this reason the British do not wish to submit to the Commission their proposed declaration on liberated areas which was, in the Department’s view, the principal basis for discussion of item 14 of the Moscow secret protocol. The Embassy has asked what would consequently be the Department’s suggestions for implementing item 14. Our feeling is that if the British Government, which originally placed that item on the agenda, now desires to withdraw its proposed declaration there is no need for “implementing item 14” at all. At any rate we must reiterate that the Anglo-Norwegian agreement, concerned as it is largely with military arrangements for the period of active operations during the military phase of the liberation of Norway, is not, in our view, a proper document for discussion in the European Advisory Commission and does not fall within the terms of reference under which that Commission was set up.

Hull

33  Ibid., p. 817.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/47: Telegram

[Document 9]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 14, 1944—11 p.m.
[Received January 14—8:52 p.m.]

378. Comea34 4. The first formal meeting of the European Advisory Commission was held this afternoon under my chairmanship.

The Commission first approved the record of the conclusions of the preliminary meeting, with one or two slight changes relating to Secretariat procedure.

In accordance with the agenda previously informally agreed upon with the other representatives, the subject of discussion was restricted to the matter of surrender terms for Germany and pertinent controls. I invited the various delegations to file with the Secretariat for the next meeting any documents which they might have to present and to be prepared to put forward at the second meeting any oral comments or proposals which they might have to make, on this subject.

The Commission then agreed on a brief statement35 to be released to the press, the wording of which, as far as concerns the competency of the Commission, followed closely the language of the statements released to the press in this respect after the Moscow Conference.36

It was agreed that the Commission should reconvene the end of next week. I hope that I shall receive your views on German surrender terms, as mentioned in your 226, January 9, 3 p.m. in time for presentation at this next meeting.

Copies of the minutes of the preliminary meeting and the first formal meeting will go forward shortly by despatch.

Winant

34 Series designation for telegrams from London dealing with the work of the European Advisory Commission.

35  The statement issued to the press after the meeting held on Friday, January 14, 1944, read as follows: “The European Advisory Commission held its first formal meeting today at its London headquarters, Lancaster House, St. James’s, under the Chairmanship of the United States representative.

“In accordance with the decision reached at the Moscow Conference (October 1943), the Commission was set up to study European questions arising as the war develops and to make joint recommendations to the three Governments.

“The members of the Commission are— United States: Mr. J. G. Winant (United States Ambassador).

Soviet Union: Mr. F. T. Gousev (Soviet Ambassador).

United Kingdom: Sir William Strang.

“A combined Secretariat has been organised to work permanently at Lancaster House, composed of members drawn from each of the three Governments. A Secretary-General (Mr. E. P. Donaldson) has been appointed by the Commission.” (740.00119 EAC/101)

36  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 741.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/49: Telegram

[Document 10]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 15, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received January 15—2:33 p.m.]

392. Comea 6. On January 13 Strang sent a personal communication enclosing text of a “note about Norway which we propose to circulate to the European Advisory Commission.”37

I understand that this document has been communicated in its entirety to the British Embassy in Washington, and through them to you. We were told yesterday that the following sentence should be inserted between the first and second sentences of paragraph 1: “This question was placed on the agenda of the Moscow Conference by the UK delegation, who submitted a draft resolution to the Conference, a copy of which is annexed.” We have therefore revised our copy to include this correction.

In his communication, Strang further stated the following: “You will see that what we should ask the Commission to do would not be to approve the actual text of the agreement, but merely to take note of the circumstances attending its negotiation and the principles upon which it is based.

We should hope that the US delegation would be in a position to agree to this proposal.

Our present idea is to circulate this paper some time between the first and second meetings of the Commission.”

I am replying in writing to Strang and stating that this delegation is not in a position to agree to this proposal or to any discussion in the Commission of the Norwegian Civil Affairs Agreement. I have so informed Eden.

Winant

37 Neither the letter nor the enclosed note is printed.

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Counselor of the American Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Kennan) EAC Files, Lot 52M 64, File “215—France”

[Document 11]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Counselor of the American Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Kennan)

[London,] January 15, 1944.

Sir William Strang’ phoned me about one o’clock today.

He said that they had had news from Washington to the effect that Bovenschen had been getting on very nicely in his conversations, and that there had been some talk there about the French agreement. It had been suggested—he thought by Mr. McCloy38 —that they should first make sure that Monnet39 was qualified to discuss the French agreement on behalf of the National Committee, and that when this was confirmed the paper should first be cleared before the Advisory Commission as soon as possible, prior to talks with Monnet.

He said that the British Joint Chiefs had just approached the Foreign Office and suggested that conversations with Monnet be started at once, subject to confirmation of the latter’s competency. The Foreign Office had replied that the Russians had said they had certain observations to make on this document and that it would be better for this reason to bring it first before the Advisory Commission. It was his idea that when the paper was produced before the Commission, we would say to the Russians in effect: “We have been talking together about this matter and wish to talk to the French about it. We would like to know any views you may have, before entering into our discussions with the French.” The Commission could then take note of Russian observations, and could ask that they be communicated to our Governments, to be borne in mind in the talks with Monnet.

He did not consider that the document itself would have to be discussed in detail by the Commission. “We don’t regard the EAC as a body which can go into detail on civil affairs”, he said.

He understood that our Government had already received confirmation of Monnet’s competence to discuss this matter. The British Government had also wired asking for such confirmation, and expected to receive it at any time.

They proposed, therefore, to raise the matter in the EAC, unless Mr. Winant wished to do so himself.

G[eorge] F. K[ennan]

38 John J. McCloy, Assistant Secretary of War.

39 Jean Monnet, Commissioner of Armaments, Supplies and Reconstruction in the French Committee of National Liberation.

The Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs (Matthews) to the First Secretary of the British Embassy (Hayter) 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/62

[Document 12]

The Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs (Matthews)40 to the First Secretary of the British Embassy (Hayter)

Washington, January 19, 1944.

Dear Mr. Hayter: There is one point in your letter dated January 10, 1944 which I do not believe we have covered in our conversations regarding the scope of the European Advisory Commission with particular reference to the Norwegian Civil Affairs Agreement.

On page 3 of your letter you say that the Foreign Office does not feel that these Civil Affairs Agreements are operational in character. In our opinion, although these agreements obviously have a political flavor, they are essentially military in character since they are intended to control not only the question of the jurisdiction of the Allied Commander in Chief over, for example, the Norwegian civil population but also go into considerable detail with respect to jurisdiction over and the responsibility for the discipline of Allied military forces. Accordingly, we feel that the agreements are essentially military and therefore operational in character.

As you know, your Foreign Office has already communicated its views on the European Advisory Commission directly to Ambassador Winant. In order to avoid crossing wires, therefore, we are communicating our views to the British Government through the same channels.

Sincerely yours,

H. Freeman Matthews

40 Mr. Matthews assumed this post on January 15.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/55: Telegram

[Document 13]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 20, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received January 20—3:15 p.m.]

528. Comea 15. I am informed that the British, since the receipt of my letter to Strang mentioned in my Comea 6 of January 15,41 have abandoned their intention of bringing the Anglo-Norwegian Agreement before the Commission and are approaching the Soviet Government through ordinary diplomatic channels to ascertain whether it has any observations to make with respect to the document.

With respect to the question of the liberated areas as a whole, the Foreign Office is not prepared to confirm that they do not wish to submit to the Commission their proposed declaration on liberated areas which the Department considered the principal basis for discussion under item 14 of the Moscow secret protocol (see Department’s 303, January 12, midnight). They may still bring the document before the Commission, with a view to inviting discussion there as to its applicability to the various areas to be liberated. In this case, they would probably not introduce the document as one to which the British Government was committed but simply one which the British representative on the Commission would put forward as a basis for discussion, in the hope that the Commission might arrive at some joint recommendation on this subject.

The Foreign Office is, of course, well aware of our position on this matter.

Winant

41 Telegram 392, p. 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 851.01 American Military Government/9a: Telegram

[Document 14]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 21, 1944—1 p.m.

512. For your information, the British Embassy has informed the Department that Mr. Strang proposed to bring before the Commission the paper on Civil Affairs in France dated October 6, and desired to suggest at the same time that the Committee adopt a recommendation that the whole question of French Civil Affairs be discussed with the French Committee. The Embassy was informed that we could give no approval to such a recommendation, and it was suggested that the Commission take note of the paper without making any recommendation as to methods of carrying it out.

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/60: Telegram

[Document 15]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 24, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received 6:06 p.m.]

632. Comea 17. The British have heard from their Embassy at Washington that a new scheme is under advisement there for the treatment of the French civil affairs question, and that this scheme would make unnecessary the clearance of the existing “basic scheme” by the Advisory Commission (see my 544, January 20, 9 p.m., Comea 1642 ).

They have therefore dropped their intention of bringing the existing paper before the Commission at the next meeting, and are awaiting further clarification of the matter.

Winant

42 Not printed. This telegram stated that the British wished to bring the document entitled “Civil Affairs in France” before the next meeting of the European Advisory Commission; the Ambassador requested further instructions on the subject (740.00119 European Advisory Commission/56).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/60: Telegram

[Document 16]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 28, 1944—8 p.m.

701. Inasmuch as the paper on French Civil Affairs (your 544, January 20,43 and 632, January 24) was referred by the Moscow Conference to the European Advisory Commission, our view is that the paper is now formally before the Commission by reference from Moscow, and you are authorized to discuss it on the basis of your present instructions. If the Russians have any important objections, they will no doubt be developed in the course of the discussions, and we can consider them upon report from you.

Should there be any fundamental change here, such as envisaged in your 632 of January 24, you will be promptly informed.

Hull

43 See footnote 42, above.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 857.01/122: Telegram

[Document 17]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, March 14, 1944—8 a.m.
[Received March 15—2:10 p.m.]

837. The British Ambassador here tells me that Halifax44 was instructed on March 9 to inform you45 of the attitude expressed by the Soviet Government in a reply of February 28 to the British Ambassador here in regard to the signature at once of the Anglo-Norwegian draft of agreement respecting arrangements for civil administration and jurisdiction in Norwegian territory liberated by an Allied Expeditionary Force, and in regard to non-reference of the Norwegian agreement to the European Advisory Commission. In its reply the Soviet Government draws attention to point XIV of the Moscow Conference agenda which provided that the question of policy in connection with the territory of Allied countries liberated from the enemy was passed to the European Advisory Commission for consideration. The Soviet Government states that it sees no reason why the decision of the Moscow Conference should not have been carried out, especially as the Norwegian Government, according to information at the disposal of the Soviet Government, also felt that the agreement hi question should be referred to the European Advisory Commission. The Soviets state further that questions of administration in liberated territories, as the experience in Italy has shown, are complicated and require careful study. The Soviet Government says that it is unable to agree with the proposal that the Anglo-Norwegian agreement be signed at once and not be considered by the European Advisory Commission.

The British Embassy here, in a note of January 9, communicated text of the draft Anglo-Norwegian agreement to the Soviet Government for its information. In that note the British Embassy stated that the draft had been drawn up prior to the Moscow Conference and expressed the hope that pursuant to decisions at the Moscow Conference the question of broad policy to be pursued in Norway and other liberated territories would soon be the subject of discussion at the European Advisory Commission. The British Embassy referred also to discussions which were being carried on with the Netherlands and Belgian Governments with the view of drawing up similar agreements. In a further note of January 23, the British Embassy informed Molotov that the British Government had intended to refer the Anglo-Norwegian agreement to the European Advisory Commission but that as the Norwegian Government was pressing for signature and as the United States Government did not consider it necessary that the Norwegian agreement be brought before the European Advisory Commission, the British Government was, in deference to the United States Government, prepared to use diplomatic channels. The British reserved the right to bring their draft resolution presented at the Moscow Conference on the subject of liberated territories before the European Advisory Commission.

It is, of course, unfortunate that this difference of view has developed with regard to procedure for handling the Norwegian agreement and that the Soviets seem to have gained the impression that we have wished to avoid carrying out a procedure which they consider was agreed to at the Moscow Conference. It appears this same question will come up in other similar situations. Without criticizing the British presentation, I believe it is better in matters of this kind if in the future we should be instructed to present our position with full explanation.

Sent to Department; repeated to London.

Harriman

44 Viscount Halifax, British Ambassador in the United States.

45 The information contained in this paragraph was transmitted by the British Embassy to the Department in an informal note dated March 11, not printed, from the Secretary of the British Embassy (Wright) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 857.01/124a: Telegram

[Document 18]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)46

Washington, March 15, 1944—midnight.

593. As a result of a series of negotiations with the Norwegian Government, the British and this Government have made similar agreements with regard to civil administration and jurisdiction in Norwegian territory liberated by an Allied expeditionary force. The British Embassy here has informed us that the British Embassy in Moscow presented to the Soviet Government a copy of the Anglo-Norwegian agreement, and that the British Ambassador was informed by Mr. Molotov that the Soviet Government suggests that this agreement be laid before the European Advisory Commission in London for consideration there. Mr. Molotov is reported to have pointed out that as a result of the discussions on point 14 of the Agenda of the Moscow Conference it was decided that questions affecting liberated Allied territory should be considered by the European Advisory Commission.

For your own information, the British Government had in the first instance suggested to us that this agreement be laid before the European Advisory Commission. At that time we told the British Government that it was our view that the European Advisory Commission was charged with the consideration of the terms of surrender and machinery of control of Germany, and such other matters as had been referred to it specifically by the Moscow Conference. These other matters were (a) the formula for Civil Affairs Administration in; France, presented at the Conference by the United States and United Kingdom Secretaries for Foreign Affairs; and (b) a suggested form, of public declaration to be made by the three Governments with respect to the policy and attitude to be adopted toward the governments of the liberated areas.

This latter document is that referred to in Article 14 of the Moscow Protocol. It will be noted that Article 14 related to a draft declaration on policy presented to the Conference by the British delegation, and did not include general reference to the European Advisory Commission of all questions dealing with the period of military operations, in the liberated areas.

It is the intention of this Government, as well as that of the British Government, that the Soviet Government should be fully informed of matters which lie within the period of military operations against Germany for the information and comment of the Soviet Government, but this Government feels sure that the Soviet Government will understand that it is not advisable for the military authorities conducting the operations against Germany in the liberated areas to be hampered in any way in carrying out their strategic planning and operations through the necessity for awaiting recommendations or advice in matters the planning and carrying out of which cannot be delayed without affecting the success of the military operations. Furthermore, it is to be noted that the Soviet representative on the European Advisory Commission has stated that until agreement has been reached on the terms of surrender for Germany, which remains the primary task of the Commission, he is not in a position to give consideration to any other matter, even surrender terms for any other country.47

You are requested to seek an interview with Molotov and explain to him the situation along the above lines, omitting any reference to the views of the British Government on the subject. You should emphasize to him that the United States military authorities do not in any sense desire to deprive the Soviet Government of an opportunity of passing on agreements of this character related to the problems of civil administration directly connected with military operations in liberated areas, but feel that this should be done through diplomatic channels rather than by submission to a purely recommending body such as the European Advisory Commission. Submission to the latter body would inevitably involve delays which would seriously hamper the progress of vital planning for military operations. You should emphasize that the arrangements in question merely deal with civilian matters as connected with strictly military operations and do not involve questions of policy once the administration of liberated areas has been returned to civilian authority when in the opinion of the Commander-in-Chief the military situation permits. The question of policy in regard to liberated areas in the subsequent phase might properly form the subject of discussion in the European Advisory Commission under the terms of Item 14 of the Moscow Protocol. A precedent for the distinction between civil affairs in zones of active military operation and general policy in regard to a given area was established at the Moscow Conference in the case of Italy since the declaration on Italy48 in regard to a common policy does not and was not designed to affect in any way the question of civil affairs in a manner that would hamper active military operations. You should communicate to Mr. Molotov the text of the United States-Norwegian agreement for civil administration and jurisdiction in Norwegian territory liberated by an Allied expeditionary force.49 Since this agreement is identical with the British-Norwegian Agreement on the same subject and in order to save time you should be able to obtain from your British colleague the exact text, substituting “the United States of America” for “the United Kingdom” where necessary.

Hull

46 Repeated to London as telegram 2012, March 16, midnight.

47 See telegram 1939, Comea 37, March 9, 9 p.m., from London, vol. iv, p. 149, and footnote 95, post, p. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30].

48 See Annex 3, “Advisory Council for Italy,” and Annex 4, “Declaration Regarding Italy,” to the Moscow Conference Protocol, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 758 and 759, respectively.

49 For text of the Memorandum of Agreement, signed at London, May 16, 1944, see Department of State, Treaties and Other International Acts Series No. 1514, or 60 Stat. (pt. 2) 1581.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/160: Telegram

[Document 19]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, April 14, 1944—midnight.

2992. For Phillips.50 (Your 2962, April 12, 6 p.m.51 ) Combined Chiefs of Staff have authorized signature of United States agreements with Norway, Holland, and Belgium.52

While we wish to have these agreements communicated to the Soviet Government, we do not wish to have it done through the EAC. We have, therefore, presented the text of the agreement with Norway to the Soviet Government through our Embassy in Moscow,53 and are about to notify them of agreements with the Netherlands and Belgium.54 Some ten days ago we sent a further message through the Embassy at Moscow55 to the Soviet Government stating that as these agreements are connected with our military planning we could not delay much longer their final signature. We hoped, therefore, to receive any comments Soviet Government might have before it becomes necessary to sign the agreements.

It was our thought that SCAEF56 under his authorization will sign the agreements when he considers it necessary to do so from the point of view of his military planning without necessarily awaiting to hear that Soviet Government has commented. In the event of receiving anything from Moscow, we will communicate with you.

Hull

50 William Phillips, Political Adviser at the Headquarters of the Supreme Allied Commander, with the personal rank of Ambassador.

51 Not printed; in this telegram Mr. Phillips asked to be given the status of the agreements to be signed with Norway, the Netherlands, and Belgium (740.00119 EAC/160).

52 See bracketed note, p. 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28].

53 See supra.

54 Telegram 922, April 15, 1944, 4 p.m., to Moscow, not printed, requested that the Soviet Government he so informed (855.01/78a).

55 Telegram 768, March 31, midnight, to Moscow, not printed.

56 Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force, Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 Stettinius Mission/24: Telegram

[Document 20]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

[Extracts]

London, April 14, 1944—midnight.
[Received April 14—11:59 p.m.]

3071. Deles57 8. For the Secretary from the Under Secretary.

I

Winant, Matthews and I had lunch and spent the afternoon with Eden at his country place on Tuesday, April 11. We discussed fully and frankly many different subjects. The most important of these were:

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2. The European Advisory Commission. Eden is very discouraged with the slow progress that the Commission is making and the restricted scope of its authority. He feels that it is absolutely essential for this first important tripartite body to be a success and that we must make every effort to increase the speed and efficiency of its work. He feels that we are running a very real risk, as matters stand now, of the Commission proving a disappointment.

A separate detailed cable on the European Advisory Commission will follow.58

Winant outlined the views of the three Governments on surrender terms and the outstanding differences between them, and we discussed them at length.59

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

VI

Later Wednesday afternoon60 Winant and I called upon the Soviet Ambassador at the Soviet Embassy. I explained to him the purpose of my visit to London and made it clear that our talks were only exploratory in character.

Winant stated to the Soviet Ambassador that while I am in London I am giving attention to the work of the European Advisory Commission. Thereafter both Winant and I expressed the hope that the work of the Commission could be speeded up, particularly on the surrender terms. The Soviet Ambassador expressed agreement with this.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

[Stettinius]
Winant

57 Series designation for telegrams from Under Secretary of State Edward R. Stettinius, Jr., in connection with his conversations in London, April 7–29, 1944. For the Report to the Secretary of State by the Under Secretary regarding his mission to London, see vol. iii, pp. 1 ff.

58 Telegram 3069, Deles 7, April 14, midnight, from London, infra.

59 For correspondence regarding the negotiations in the European Advisory Commission on the question of surrender terms for Germany, see pp. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75] ff.

60 April 12.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 Stettinius Mission/28: Telegram

[Document 21]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, April 14, 1944—midnight.
[Received April 14—11:59 p.m.]

3069. Deles 7. From Stettinius. As we anticipated before our departure the primary problem affecting Anglo-American relations with which the British appear to be preoccupied is the question of the functioning and scope of the European Advisory Commission. This was the principal question which Mr. Eden took up with me on Tuesday61 and was also the matter uppermost in the minds of Cadogan62 and Strang during our talks with them. The Department has since the Commission’s inception been aware of the very much broader field ascribed to it by the British than by us—and the British now, in the light of the Russian position with respect to the Anglo-Norwegian agreement and the French directive,63 insist that the Russians share their point of view. In reply to our question as to the relationship between the EAC and the overall World Security Organization64 we were told that the EAC should under its terms of reference concern itself with the short term clearing up of Europe after cessation of hostilities rather than long term peace and security arrangements. It was admitted, however, that under this conception the Commission “might grow into the instrument for the control machinery for Europe”. The British envisage it gradually broadening its field and becoming the focus for tripartite forward planning in both the pre-hostilities and post-hostilities periods though they admit that the bulk of its work will be concerned with the latter. We have, of course, fully set forth the point of view of the Department and our Joint Chiefs of Staff that questions affecting the operational period should not come before the Commission.

I have been given by Strang at my request an informal memorandum65 outlining the British views. The memorandum asserts that there was no intention at Moscow to confine the Commission’s functions to the post-hostilities period and cites the specific questions referred to it of Civil Affairs for France and treatment of other Allied liberated territories as confirmation of problems which “would manifestly arise in the operational period”. The memorandum continues: “Our conception was that the Commission would be in the nature of an Anglo-American-Soviet clearing house for certain European questions, as well as a Three Power Planning Organization for questions more specifically connected with the termination of hostilities. We had hoped that in addition to the questions enumerated above, the three Governments would from time to time refer to the Commission other questions, including those of a general European character, for which forward planning by the three powers would be desirable. As an example may be quoted the proposal to set up an European Inland Transport Organization.66 The British suggestion that the necessary studies in this matter should be carried out by a special committee under the aegis of the EAC has not been accepted by the United States Government”.

As to the question affecting liberated areas, the memorandum sets forth that broadly speaking the British view is that this question “was indubitably referred to the Commission by the Moscow Conference; that it was contemplated that the Commission would review the situation as regards each country individually; that the unwillingness of the United States Government to bring the Norwegian, Netherlands and Belgian agreements before the Commission not only tends to stultify one of the main objects for which the Commission was established, namely to secure that certain general European questions should be brought under three power discussions, but may well cause a serious setback to collaboration between the western democracies and the Soviet Union. The Soviet Government share the British view that the Moscow Conference decided that questions affecting liberated territory should be considered by the Commission; and they have stated that they see no reason why this procedure should be sidetracked. If the United States Government maintain their unwillingness to allow these questions to go to the Commission, the Soviet Government will, among other things, have an excuse for excluding ourselves and the Americans from any say in the policy in Allied territory liberated by Soviet forces, e.g. in Czechoslovakia, as regards which the Soviet Government are at present in negotiation with the Czechoslovak Government.68 According to the recollection of the United Kingdom delegation, it was precisely in order to ensure that the question of the administration of eastern European Allied territories no less than of western European Allied territories should be dealt with on a tripartite basis that the question of the policy as regards Allied liberated territory was referred to the Commission. The matter is one of first-class political importance.[”]

Prior to our departure from the United States the Department took up through our Embassy at Moscow the question of the Norwegian-American agreement. It would be helpful to us to know what reply may have been received from the Russian Government. It would also be helpful to us to know whether in the light of the Soviet attitude and the pressure of events there has been any change in the feeling of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Department that questions pertaining to civil affairs problems in the period prior to the termination of hostilities has undergone any modification.

As to the current business of the Commission it is felt that some progress is at last being made, though even with the approach of general agreement on the surrender terms for Germany69 Strang estimates that it will require at least another month for actual completion of an agreed text of surrender terms. (He does not feel that this need delay parallel consideration of the French Civil Affairs directive treated in Deles No. 570 provided the Russians agree.) In all our talks I have continued to urge the importance of concluding the negotiations and recommending an agreed text of surrender terms to the three Governments at the earliest possible moment. I have also emphasized the importance of working out some procedure which will speed up consideration of future questions referred to the Commission.

Any views which you may wish us to communicate to the British with regard to the Advisory Commission or comment on the above would be helpful. We shall further explore with the British the general question of the scope and functioning of the Commission and be prepared, we hope, to submit recommendations upon our return. We do not wish to delay, however, any decision which the Department have in mind with respect to the specific problem of the Norwegian agreement (and presumably similar Dutch and Belgian agreements) or the French Civil Affairs matter. [Stettinius.]

Winant

61 April 11.

62 Sir Alexander Cadogan, British Permanent Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

63 For the text of the draft directive of March 15, 1944, to General Eisenhower regarding the administration of civil affairs in France at the time of liberation, see telegram 836, April 8, 3 p.m., to Moscow, vol. iii, p. 675. For a summary of the steps leading to the formulation of this draft directive, see telegram 835, April 8, 2 p.m., to Moscow, ibid., p. 673. For text of Soviet Foreign Commissar Molotov’s note of May 17, 1944, approving the draft directive, see telegram 1754. May 17, 9 a.m., from Moscow, ibid., p. 687. For further correspondence regarding the concern of the United States over civil administration of France immediately following liberation from the Germans, see ibid., pp. 634 ff.

64 See section entitled “Preliminaries to the establishment of an international organization for the maintenance of international peace and security”, pp. 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 376] ff.

65 Dated April 12; not printed.

66 For correspondence regarding the establishment of a European Inland Transport Organization, see vol. ii, pp. 743 ff.

68 For correspondence regarding the interest of the United States in the agreement between the Soviet Union and the Czechoslovak Government in Exile at London regarding the administration of liberated Czechoslovak territory, signed in London, May 8, 1944, see vol. iii, pp. 515 ff. For text of the agreement, see Hubert Ripka, East and West (Lincolns–Prager Limited, London, 1944), p. 77, and War and Peace Aims of the United Nations, vol. ii, January 1, 1943–September 1, 1945, compiled and edited by Louise W. Holborn (Boston, World Peace Foundation, 1948), p. 767.

69 For correspondence regarding the negotiations in the European Advisory Commission on the question of surrender terms for Germany, see pp. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75] ff.

70 Dated April 13, not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.0011 Stettinius Mission/41c: Telegram

[Document 22]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, April 18, 1944—midnight.

3108. Esdel71 No. 35. For the Ambassador and the Under Secretary. As we see the functioning of the European Advisory Commission right now, (your Deles 7, Embassy’s 3069, April 14, midnight), it has the responsibility for drawing up and recommending the terms and conditions to be imposed upon Germany at the time of surrender, and the control machinery for putting them into effect in Germany and satellite states. The Moscow Conference itself set these duties forth as one of the Commission’s first tasks, in paragraph 3 of the terms of reference. From reports we have received from the Embassy, we are led to believe that the Soviet Government is not inclined to discuss any other subject in the Commission until the recommendations with regard to the German surrender are completed. This seems to be further borne out by the fact that although the Commission has before it, referred by the Moscow Conference, two other subjects, namely, the tripartite statement with regard to the attitude toward civil administration in the liberated areas, and (2) the formula on civil affairs in France, and while this Government has been at all times ready and willing to discuss either of these subjects in the Commission, the Commission has not seen fit to bring them up for even an exchange of views. The United States military, including the highest authorities, are definitely opposed to having matters come before the Commission which are involved in military planning and operations as they feel they cannot place themselves under the handicap of having to wait for possibly delayed decisions when they might have to act in extreme cases without being bound to submit to delay. They draw a sharp division between general and overall policy and actual military operations. The field of activity of the Commission, as applied to Germany and the satellite states and all of the tremendously important political and military decisions therein involved, appears to us to be an enormous task and one of the highest importance. The agreed decisions to be arrived at with respect to the coordinated policies and activities of the three Governments with respect to those areas are of basic and vital importance to the whole field of cooperation in the post-hostilities period. We would like to see the Commission devote itself to the speedy and satisfactory solution of these great problems in the first instance, and if the working out of these questions is found to be best done by the Commission or that form of body by the three Governments concerned, it might very well be possible to give the Commission expanded duties at a later time. We should first see how well it works and see how well the three Governments concerned work with it. We fully realize the difficulties it has had in organizing its work up to the present time, but even so we do not feel that it has yet made a record which entitles it to claim expanded scope.

With respect to the Norwegian, Netherlands, and Belgian agreements,73 it was our view that in the face of the disinclination expressed by the Soviet member to consider anything other than surrender terms for Germany at this time, we could obtain a more expeditious expression of view from the Soviet Government by presenting these instruments directly to it in Moscow which we have done in the case of the Norwegian agreement and are now doing with the other two. Because of the necessity for proceeding with planning with regard to those three countries, we have already, some week or ten days ago, informed the Soviet Government that it might become necessary for the Allied Commander-in-Chief to sign these agreements with the respective refugee governments very shortly, and of course that may have to be done without waiting for the Soviet comment if their response is delayed too long. It would, of course, be much more difficult to follow such procedure once it was before the European Advisory Commission.

In the case of the proposed Czechoslovak civil affairs agreement,74 our information is that the British Government itself has already told the Czechoslovak Government in London that it does not desire to enter into such an arrangement. It is likely that we shall take the same position although we have not yet had a final response from the military authorities on this matter. One point to note here is that the Soviet Government in notifying us of the proposals they had received from the Czechoslovak Government on civil affairs administration did so directly through their Embassy in Washington. Of course, we have every intention of keeping the Soviet Government fully informed of the developments as we go forward with respect to general policy related to the operations in Western Europe.

However, our military authorities, as stated above, are extremely reluctant to have their hands tied by the necessity for waiting for decisions from other than the Governments under which the Combined Chiefs are operating. We consider that it is the problem of our two Governments to keep the Soviet Government fully informed without in any way hampering the responsibilities of our military officials.

Hull

71 Series designation for telegrams to the Under Secretary of State during his stay in London.

73 See bracketed note, p. 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28].

74 For text of the civil affairs agreement with the United States proposed by the Czechoslovak Government in Exile, see telegram Zecho 3, March 17, 1944, from the Chargé to the Czechoslovak Government in Exile at London, vol. iii, p. 515.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 Stettinius Mission/59: Telegram

[Document 23]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

[Extracts]

London, April 25, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received 9:09 p.m.]

3387. Deles 30. For the Secretary from the Under Secretary. Winant and I spent two hours and a half with Eden, Law75 and Cadogan in the Foreign Office this afternoon (Monday76 ). The following matters were discussed.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3. European Advisory Commission: I outlined and emphasized your feeling that it was inadvisable for the EAC to assume additional duties at this time because of the large amount of work still to be done on surrender terms, etc., and mentioned the position of the US Military opposing the placing before the Commission of matters involving military operations. Eden expressed great disappointment with this view. He felt it is not in accordance with the agreement reached at Moscow, and is not in keeping with the scope laid out and agreed upon there. Moreover, he expressed the view, to which Winant agreed, that the present attitude of our Government is conducive to whittling down the standing of the Commission in Moscow, and if this is continued it will be more and more difficult to persuade the Russians to bring matters to the EAC table in London. During the discussion of the EAC, we reviewed the status of the surrender terms. Winant produced a new draft within the last three days which has been submitted informally to the Russian representative, and he is expecting to hear momentarily whether it is acceptable as a basis for discussion.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

[Stettinius]
Winant

75 Richard K. Law, British Minister of State.

76 April 24.

The Chargé to the Norwegian Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State 857.01/132: Telegram

[Document 24]

The Chargé to the Norwegian Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State

London, April 28, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received April 28—4:30 p.m.]

Norwegian series 10. In a note of April 25 to Soviet Ambassador Lebedev,77 Foreign Minister Lie78 refers to a conversation with him on April 22 regarding a civil affairs agreement and says Norwegian Government understood that three great powers had agreed that liberation of Norway should be left to British and American forces. Hence Soviet Government was not approached when civil affairs agreement was under negotiations with the British and American Governments. He adds Norwegian Government does not know whether such understanding between great powers for operations in Norway was arrived at and, if so, whether it is still valid or whether some other arrangement has been made. Accordingly in order to meet foreseen and unforeseen circumstances, Norwegian Government regards it as highly desirable that there be a similar agreement with the Soviet Government. In the absence of certain knowledge about the plans of the military leaders, the Norwegian Government would be grateful if the Soviet Government would be willing to commence discussions with view to arriving at such an agreement.

By air.

[ Schoenfeld ]

77 Viktor Zaharovich Lebedev, Soviet Ambassador to the Governments in Exile at London.

78 Trygve Halvdan Lie, Norwegian Foreign Minister.

The Chargé to the Norwegian Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State 857.01/134: Telegram

[Document 25]

The Chargé to the Norwegian Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State

London, May 5, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received May 5—6:55 p.m.]

Norweg 14. My 10, April 28, 6 p.m. Foreign Minister Lie tells me Soviet Ambassador Lebedev has sent him a note dated May 3 in reply to the Norwegian Government’s note of April 25 regarding a civil affairs agreement.

According to Lie, note is to following effect: The Soviet Government has received from the United States and British Governments for purpose of consultation, their draft agreements with Norway regarding civil affairs. However, Soviet Government’s study of these drafts is not yet completed and the Soviet point of view has not yet been communicated to the United States and British Governments. Regarding the Norwegian Government’s wish to conclude an agreement with the USSR and to determine beforehand forms of cooperation between the authorities of the two countries in case of Allied military operations in Norway, the Soviet Government has no objections in principle to the proposal and is prepared to start discussions. Lie adds that he entered upon such discussions with Lebedev on May 4 using as a basis the same draft as that agreed upon with us. Lebedev is now studying the draft but Lie believes he already has authority to sign.79 Lie hopes the matter may be concluded shortly and says Norwegian Government would be pleased if the agreements with all three powers could be signed the same day.

[ Schoenfeld ]

79 In his telegram 15, May 15, noon, the Chargé to the Norwegian Government in Exile at London reported that Soviet Ambassador Lebedev had informed Foreign Minister Lie of the willingness of the Soviet Government to sign a civil affairs agreement with the Norwegian Government (857.01/136).

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton) to the Secretary of State 855.01/82: Telegram

[Document 26]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, May 13, 1944—11 a.m.
[Received 6:30 p.m.]

1690. Reference Department’s 922, April 15, 4 p.m.,80 and Embassy’s 1449, April 6, noon.81 I have received a letter from Molotov dated May 1282 stating that the Soviet Government has no observations to make in connection with the concluding of the proposed agreements on the civil administration and jurisdiction of Belgian and Netherland territories. The letter continues that the Soviet Government has taken into consideration the statement made in Ambassador Harriman’s letter of April 17 to the effect that the draft agreements were prepared by the United States Government jointly with the Belgian and Netherland Governments and that those Governments were interested in the conclusion of the agreements in the nearest future.

Mr. Molotov’s letter continues that the Soviet Government has no observations to make with respect to the draft American-Norwegian agreement. Mr. Molotov states that the Soviet Government deems it necessary to bring to the attention of the United States Government that the Norwegian Government has approached the Soviet Government with a proposal to conclude a like agreement in the event that Soviet troops might participate in military operations in liberating Norwegian territory. Agreement has been reached at the present time between the Soviet and Norwegian Governments on the signing of such an agreement the text of which is identical with the text of the American-Norwegian draft. The Soviet Government would appreciate being informed of the opinion of the United States Government with respect to the signing of a Soviet-Norwegian agreement on civil administration and jurisdiction on Norwegian territory after its liberation.

A draft83 of the Soviet-Norwegian agreement in the Russian language is attached to Molotov’s letter. Upon comparison, this draft is in general identical with the American draft although it appears to be a somewhat loose translation. There are no differences in meaning. It contains one additional clause to the effect that the agreement enters into force immediately after its signature and that the agreement is drawn up in two copies in the Russian and Norwegian languages both texts having equal force.

Hamilton

80 Not printed; it requested that Foreign Commissar Molotov be informed that the United States Government had drawn up agreements on civil administration with the Belgian and Netherlands Governments (855.01/78a).

81 Not printed; it reported that Foreign Commissar Molotov had not yet finished his study of the civil affairs agreements with Norway, Belgium, and the Netherlands (855.01/81).

82 A copy in translation was transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 477, May 19, from Moscow; neither printed.

83 Transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 477, May 19, from Moscow; neither printed.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Bucknell) 855.01/82a: Telegram

[Document 27]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Bucknell)

Washington, May 13, 1944—midnight.

3847. For Phillips.

1. British Embassy has advised the Department of certain conversations between the Foreign Office and the Soviet Ambassador in London on the subject of civil affairs agreements to be made by the British with the Belgian, Norwegian and Netherlands Governments. We understand from the British Embassy that Gousev has advised Foreign Office that Soviet Government has no objections to the signing by the British of the Belgian and Netherlands agreements, but that he has requested the British not to sign the Anglo-Norwegian agreement until the Soviet Government has negotiated a parallel agreement with the Norwegians. We understand that Foreign Office has advised Gousev that the signing of the Anglo-Norwegian agreement will be postponed temporarily but that the British intend to sign the Belgian and Dutch agreements early next week.

2. The British Embassy also states that Foreign Office considers it desirable to issue press release concerning the three civil affairs agreements, and the text of the proposed release has been submitted to the Department.84 The draft states that identical agreements have been concluded by the United States and United Kingdom with the Belgian and Netherlands Governments, and it describes the nature of the agreements in general terms. It then goes on to say that the Soviet Government has been consulted concerning the arrangements and has agreed. It closes with a statement to the effect that a similar agreement has been negotiated with the Norwegians but that signature is being temporarily deferred in the light of the Norwegian-Soviet negotiations. If you do not have copy of the proposed text, we suggest you request one from Foreign Office.

3. The Department has received no comments from the Soviet Embassy on this matter, and we can only assume that the Soviets expect that the British will arrange with us to synchronize our action in respect to the three agreements. After consulting the military authorities, the Department has advised the British Embassy that the United States Government is prepared to go along with the British proposals, that is, (a) to authorize the signing of the agreements with the Belgian and Netherlands authorities in the immediate future, (b) to withhold signing of the Norwegian agreement temporarily pending the outcome of the Soviet-Norwegian negotiations, and, (c) to make the press release proposed by the British immediately upon the signing of the agreements with the Belgian and Netherlands authorities, provided, however, that the text of the release is cleared by the British with the Belgian, Dutch, Norwegian and Soviet authorities in London. The British Embassy is advising Foreign Office in this sense.

4. Combined Chiefs of Staff are also advising S.H.A.E.F.85 that we approve the proposals put forward by the British. It might be helpful if you would communicate with S.H.A.E.F. and the Foreign Office to make sure that the signing dates for the Belgian and the Netherlands agreements are synchronized. Will you also make sure that the text of the proposed press release is cleared by the British with the four Governments concerned.

Hull

84 For the statement regarding civil affairs agreements with Belgium, the Netherlands, and Norway, released to the press on May 16, see Department of State Bulletin, May 20, 1944, p. 479.

85 Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Bucknell) to the Secretary of State 857.01/138: Telegram

[Document 28]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Bucknell) to the Secretary of State

London, May 15, 1944—11 p.m.
[Received May 15—6:09 p.m.]

3949. From Phillips. Re Department’s 3847, May 13, 1944. The Foreign Office has today been notified by the Norwegian Government and the Soviet Embassy that the Soviet Government has accepted the Norwegian draft which is identical with the United States-British-Norwegian drafts and are ready to sign it. We all hoped it would be possible to sign all the agreements tomorrow but it now appears that the Soviet Ambassador to Norway is still awaiting the necessary authority to sign.

In the circumstances, the Foreign Office is telegraphing the text of the revised press statement to Moscow and to Washington for approval and proposes that its release be postponed until it has been approved by the State Department and Soviet Government.

We are proceeding tomorrow with the signatures of the Belgian and Dutch agreements without publicity and are hoping to sign our Norwegian agreements as soon as the signatures can be synchronized with the Soviet-Norwegian signatures. [Phillips.]

Bucknell

[On May 16, 1944, agreements in identical terms were concluded by the United States and the United Kingdom with the Governments of Belgium and the Netherlands and by the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union with the Government of Norway. These agreements concerned arrangements to be made for civil administration and jurisdiction in the Belgian, Netherlands, and Norwegian territories when they were liberated by the Allied forces. For text of the agreement signed at London May 16, 1944, between the United States and Belgium, see Foreign Relations, 1944, volume III, page 296. For text of the agreement signed at London May 16, 1944, between the United States and the Netherlands, see Department of State, Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS) No. 2212, printed in United States Treaties and Other International Agreements, volume 2, page 601. For text of the agreement signed at London May 16, 1944, between the United States and Norway, see Department of State TIAS No. 1514, or 60 Stat. (pt. 2) 1581.]

II. The preparation of surrender terms for Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria, and FinlandII. The preparation of surrender terms for Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria, and Finland

[The conclusive negotiations of surrender terms for Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria, and Finland were held outside the European Advisory Commission. Hence, it was decided that documentation concerning the role of the European Advisory Commission in the preparation of these surrender terms should not be presented here.

According to the terms of reference of the European Advisory Commission, agreed upon at the Tripartite Conference of Foreign Ministers at Moscow, October 18–November 1, 1943, “… the Commission will study and make joint recommendations to the three Governments upon European questions connected with termination of hostilities which the three Governments may consider appropriate to refer to it.” (See Annex 2 to the Secret Protocol of the Moscow Foreign Ministers Conference, signed November 1, 1943, Foreign Relations 1943, volume I, page 756.) It was the position of the United States Government that the armistice terms for Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria, and Finland were proper subjects for consideration by the European Advisory Commission.

In the case of Hungary, the United States and the United Kingdom sought during August and September 1944 to initiate consideration in the European Advisory Commission of Hungarian armistice terms (see memorandum from the British Embassy, August 11; instruction 4433, August 15, to London; memorandum to the British Embassy, August 15; telegram 7991, September 25, from London; and telegram 7929, September 28, to London, volume III, pages 882, 883, 887, 890, and 893, respectively). However, the armistice negotiations in fact took place in Moscow, entirely outside the Commission. For correspondence regarding the negotiations by the Allies of an armistice with the Hungarian Government, signed at Moscow, January 20, 1945, see ibid., pages 847 ff.

In the case of Rumania, the Soviet Government was unwilling to undertake in the European Advisory Commission any consideration of the terms of surrender for Rumania (see letter from the Director of the Office of European Affairs to Ambassador Winant, February 2; telegram 1268, February 15, from London; and telegram 1939, March 9, from London, volume IV, pages 136, 145, and 149, respectively). For correspondence regarding the negotiations leading to the signing of an armistice with Rumania at Moscow, 5 a.m., September 13 (as of September 12), 1944, see volume IV, pages 133 ff.

Until the end of August, the Soviet Union was unwilling to take up in the Commission the question of the Bulgarian surrender terms (see telegram 486, March 4, to Moscow; telegram 1666, March 4, to London; telegram 1942, March 9, from London; telegram 2023, March 13, from London; telegram 2035, March 17, to London; telegram 619, March 17, to Moscow; telegram 924, March 19, from Moscow; telegram 3147, April 19, to London; instruction 4268, July 5, to London; telegram 5533, July 13, from London; despatch 16837, July 13, from London; and telegram 7028, August 29, from London, volume III, pages 308, 311, 313, 315, 316, 321, 340, 345, 346, and 377, respectively). However, on September 9 the Soviet Government informed the European Advisory Commission of its readiness to discuss Bulgarian surrender terms in the Commission (see letter from the Soviet Ambassador in the United Kingdom to Ambassador Winant dated September 9, ibid., page 405), and from that time forward through October the Commission devoted much of its attention to the preparation of Bulgarian armistice terms on the basis of drafts proposed by the Delegations. For correspondence regarding the negotiations leading to the signing of the armistice with Bulgaria at Moscow, October 28, 1944, see ibid., pages 300 ff.

In the case of Finland, the United States had no objection to a consideration by the European Advisory Commission of the question of surrender terms for Finland, but since the United States was not at war with Finland, it was not anticipated that the United States Representative would participate in the Commission’s formulation of such surrender terms (see telegram 4570, June 9, to London, and telegram 5031, June 24, from London, ibid., pages 608 and 609, respectively). In fact, no discussion of the Finnish surrender terms was ever conducted by the Commission. For correspondence regarding the United States interest in the Allied armistice with Finland, September 19, 1944, see ibid., pages 608 ff.]

III. Consultation by the Commission with European Allied countriesIII. Consultation by the Commission with European Allied countries

[29] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 27, 1944—4 p.m. [Received 8:45 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/63: Telegram

[30] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 29, 1944—9 p.m.

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/63: Telegram

[31] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , 3 February, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/2537

[32] Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)

London, 7 February, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/93

[33] The Acting President of the Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Affairs (Bech) to the Chargé to the Polish Government in Exile (Schoenfeld)

London, February 23, 1944.

740.00119 EW/2238

[34] The Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington , February 26, 1944.

740.00119 EW/2103

[35] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, March 27, 1944—8 p.m. [Received 11:23 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/138: Telegram

[36] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, April 5, 1944.

740.00119 European War/2238

[37] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , April 15, 1944.

740.00119 EW/2625

[38] Draft Telegram From the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, May 9, 1944.

EAC Files, Lot 52M64, Box 9605, “131 Allied Consultation Preliminary Stage”: Telegram

[39] The Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington , May 9, 1944.

740.00119 EW/2625

[40] The Chargé to the Netherlands Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State

London, June 10, 1944—4 p.m. [Received 9:14 p.m.]

740.00119 EW/2662: Telegram

[41] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 14, 1944—11 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/198: Telegram

[42] American Minutes of an Informal Meeting of the European Advisory Commission

London, July 5, 1944, 3:30 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/8–144

[43] American Minutes of an Informal Meeting of the European Advisory Commission

London, July 6, 1944, 3:30 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/8–144

[44] The Chairman of the European Advisory Commission (Winant) to the Foreign Ministers of Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Luxemburg, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, and Yugoslavia, and to the Representatives in London of Greece and the French Committee of National Liberation

[London, July 25, 1944.]

740.00119 EAC/7–2644

[45] The Italian Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Visconti-Venosta) to the American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk)

Rome, September 12, 1944.

740.00119 E.W./9–1644

[46] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, September 27, 1944—8 p.m.

740.00119 E.W./9–1344: Telegram

[47] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , 4 October 1944.

740.00119 European War/10–444

[48] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 16, 1944. [Received October 21.]

740.00119 E.A.C./10–1644

[49] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 19, 1944—7 p.m. [Received October 19—5:34 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/10–1944: Telegram

[50] The British Embassy to the Department of State

October 18, 1944

740.00119 E.A.C./10–2644

[51] The Soviet Ambassador (Gromyko) to the Secretary of State

Washington, October 29, 1944.

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/10–2944

[52] The Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger) to the Counselor of the Netherlands Embassy (van Vredenburch)

Washington, November 4, 1944.

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/11–444

[53] The Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington , November 15, 1944.

740.00119 EW/10–444

[54] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 14, 1944—8 p.m. [Received December 15—7:30 a.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/12–1444: Telegram

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/63: Telegram

[Document 29]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 27, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received 8:45 p.m.]

726. Comea86 19. It was stated in my Comea 1887 that a separate message would follow on the discussion, which took place at yesterday’s session of the Commission,88 concerning participation of other governments in the Commission’s work.

I expressed the view that every consideration should be given to the interests of our Allies in the work we were performing, but that we would have to bear in mind the great need for speed and security in our deliberations.

Strang89 reported to the Commission that the Czechoslovak Government had filed with the British Government a request to participate in the drafting of surrender terms for Germany and Hungary;90 furthermore that the Netherlands and Belgium had complained that in the drawing up of the surrender terms for Italy,91 that [they?] had not been informed or consulted, and had expressed the hope that this would not be a precedent for the future. In reply to a question as to whether the United States Government had received similar approaches, I said that I did not know but would try to find out.

I would appreciate any information you could give me on this subject.

Strang further reported that the Committee of Allied Foreign Ministers, comprising representatives of the Norwegian, Dutch, Belgian, Luxembourg, Greek, Yugoslav, Czechoslovak and Polish Governments and the French Committee of National Liberation, had also drafted a number of points they wished to see considered in the preparation of armistice terms for Germany, and stated that these had been taken into consideration in a general way in the preparation of the British document.92 To this Gousev93 observed that he had no official knowledge of the existence of that Committee.

In general, Gousev considered that the question of the participation of other governments should be taken up as it might arise in specific instances in the course of the work, and considered that any previous discussion on this subject would be undesirably abstract. Strang agreed, but felt that we must examine whether our Governments should not be asked to take steps at once to inform at least some of the other United Nations’ Governments of the work we are undertaking and to see that their suggestions are made available to us for use in our work.

(Incidentally I learn from the Mission to the Allied Governments in exile that the Dutch Government has prepared and transmitted to that Mission a list of points which it considers should be embodied, in the interests of the Netherlands Government, in any surrender terms for Germany, but this document94 has not been brought officially before the Commission.)

It was decided to hold a general discussion on this subject at a later meeting of the Commission.95

Winant

86 Series designation for telegrams from London dealing with the work of the European Advisory Commission.

87 Telegram 725, January 27, 4 p.m., from London, p. 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86].

88 The second formal session of the Commission.

89 Sir William Strang, United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission; Assistant Under Secretary of State in the British Foreign Office.

90 For correspondence regarding the consideration by the European Advisory Commission of the terms of surrender for Germany, see pp. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75] ff. The Hungarian surrender terms were, in fact, never discussed in the European Advisory Commission. For correspondence regarding an armistice with the Hungarian Government signed at Moscow, January 20, 1945, see vol. iii, pp. 847 ff.

91 For correspondence regarding the Allied armistice with Italy, September 3, 1943, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. ii, pp. 314 ff.

92 “Summary of Draft German Armistice”, p. 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 79].

93 Fedor Tarasovich Gousev, Soviet Ambassador in the United Kingdom and Soviet Representative to the European Advisory Commission.

94 A 38-page report, dated December 22, 1943, on “Armistice and Peace Terms and Relations with the Enemy after the War”, which was prepared by a Committee of the Netherlands Study Group for Reconstruction Problems, transmitted to the Department by the Chargé to the Netherlands Government in Exile at London as an enclosure to his despatch 123, February 7, 1944 (neither printed).

95 At the fourth formal meeting of the Commission, held on March 3, 1944, the United Kingdom Representative raised the question of consultation with the other Allies. The Soviet Representative stated that his delegation was not in a position to discuss the question and pointed out that the Commission already had before it the very important and urgent task of drafting the terms of surrender for Germany. The United Kingdom Representative stated that while the drafting of German surrender terms was the important matter before the Commission, this task could not be finally accomplished without consultation with at least some of the other Allied Governments at some stage in the discussions. The United States Representative expressed agreement with the views of the United Kingdom Representative. The matter of consultation with other Allied Governments was not raised again in the Commission until May 1944.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/63: Telegram

[Document 30]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 29, 1944—9 p.m.

747. With respect to the participation of other Allies in the work of the European Advisory Commission (your 726, January 27, 4 p.m.), informal approaches have been made by several missions here, but no formal request for participation has been received by the Department. It is our opinion that the Commission, under paragraph 4 of its terms of reference,96 can, in its discretion, arrange for the participation of representatives of other governments in such manner and to such extent as the Commission may think desirable in the current deliberations on surrender terms.

With respect to Strang’s proposal that other United Nations’ governments might be informed of the work which the Commission is undertaking, it is our feeling that (aside from such participation as may be arranged under paragraph 4 of the terms of reference) if some of these governments were informed in this sense, we might find it desirable to inform all of them, including American republics.

Hull

96 See Annex 2 to the Secret Protocol of the Tripartite Conference of Foreign Ministers at Moscow, October 18–November 1, 1943, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 756.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2537

[Document 31]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

Reference is made to discussions which have taken place between Mr. Jones97 of the State Department and Mr. Hayter98 of the British Embassy regarding the notes99 addressed to the United States and United Kingdom Governments by the Belgian and Netherlands Governments on the subject of the terms of surrender for Italy.

2. His Majesty’s Government believe that the real object of the notes is to obtain an assurance that the procedure followed in the case of the Italian instrument of surrender will not be used as a precedent in future cases. The answer to be given must therefore deal with this particular point.

3. His Majesty’s Government adhere to the views that they have expressed on previous occasions (see for example paragraph 3 of the Embassy’s Aide-Mémoire 1 handed to Mr. Matthews2 of the State Department on January 18th on the subject of German Armistice Terms) that on both legal and practical grounds any general armistice presented for signature to an Axis power must apply to and cover the interests of all United Nations who are at war with that power. Such United Nations must, therefore, be given the opportunity of concurring in the Armistice presented in their behalf, in order that they may consequently be bound by it. Owing to the number of United Nations who are at war with the Axis, it would be unduly cumbrous to attempt to agree detailed terms with all of them in advance; and His Majesty’s Government accordingly consider it legitimate to make a clear distinction as to the amount of prior consultation and agreement which can reasonably be required in order to produce the desired result. In the case of Latin American or Middle Eastern countries which are not actually engaged in hostilities against, for instance, Germany, and have no particular interests which would be directly affected by an Armistice, a certain amount of prior information as to the terms to be presented might well suffice. But in the case of those Allies whose forces are actually engaged in hostilities or whose countries have been over-run by the Axis power in question, much more is required because their forces will have to comply with the terms of the armistice, and because they have special interests which will require to be protected in the instrument of surrender. It therefore seems to His Majesty’s Government that these Allies should, if possible, be informed beforehand of the precise terms which it is proposed to present, should have an opportunity of commenting upon them and of having their comments considered, and should definitely agree to the presentation of the terms in their names. The precise method of consulting such Allied Governments and securing their concurrence is a matter which will have to be decided in due course by the Governments of the United Kingdom, the United States and the Soviet Union in the light of recommendations submitted to them by the European Advisory Commission (so far as the European members of the Axis are concerned). In the meantime the United Kingdom representative on that Commission has suggested to his United States and Soviet colleagues that the Commission in the course of its consideration of possible Armistice terms should bring certain Allied Governments into consultation, in view of the discretion conferred upon the Commission in paragraph 4 of its terms of reference.

4. While His Majesty’s Government do not wish to pre-judge the exact method of associating the Governments of the United Nations with future surrender terms, they feel that it is necessary to give some assurance now to the Belgian and Netherlands Governments in answer to their notes. His Majesty’s Government accordingly propose, if the United States Government agree, to inform the Netherlands and Belgian Embassies that the procedure followed in the case of the Italian Armistice will not serve as a precedent in future cases, and that for their part His Majesty’s Government are glad to give an assurance that the Netherlands and Belgian Governments will be given prior knowledge of the terms of surrender to be imposed upon Germany and an opportunity of commenting upon them.

5. His Majesty’s Government have recently received from the Czechoslovak Government a specific request that they should be given the opportunity of participating in the preparation of the armistice to be imposed upon Germany and Hungary. Subject to the views of the United States Government, His Majesty’s Government propose to reply in the same terms as those used with the Netherlands and Belgian Governments.

6. Lord Halifax3 would be glad to receive an expression of Mr. Hull’s views on the above points.

Washington , 3 February, 1944.

97 J. Wesley Jones, of the Division of Southern European Affairs.

98 William G. Hayter, First Secretary of the British Embassy.

99 Note D.8248, No. 5951 from the Belgian Embassy dated December 3, 1943, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. ii, p. 398. A similar note of the same date from the Netherlands Ambassador, not printed.

1 Not printed; attached to this aide-mémoire were copies of British Draft German Armistice and Summary, printed on pp. 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 79] and 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 79], respectively.

2 H. Freeman Matthews, Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs.

3 British Ambassador in the United States.

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang) 740.00119 EAC/93

[Document 32]

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)4

E. A. C. (44) 6 London, 7 February, 1944.

Consultation With Other Allied Governments Concerning Terms of Surrender for Germany

1. The European Advisory Commission at its meeting on January 26th, 1944, agreed to discuss further at a later meeting the question of consultation with other Allied Governments concerning the terms of surrender for Germany.

2. At that meeting I gave my colleagues certain information showing the keen interest taken by the European Allied Governments in the proceedings of the Commission on this subject.

3. The Commission’s responsibility as regards consultation with other United Nations is defined in paragraph 4 of the Commission’s Terms of Reference which says: “Representatives of the Governments of other United Nations will, at the discretion of the Commission, be invited to take part in meetings of the Commission when matters especially affecting their interests are under discussion”.

4. In the view of the United Kingdom Delegation, the question of the terms of surrender for Germany is, as a whole, a matter especially affecting the interests of the European Allies. These countries are either neighbours of Germany or numbered among her principal victims. They are participating in military operations against Germany. They have an immediate interest in satisfying themselves that the terms of surrender take due account of their needs. The peoples of countries which have suffered so long under the German yoke will naturally expect their Governments to be adequately consulted on a matter which so closely concerns their future security and well-being.

5. The United Kingdom Delegation do not suggest that the Representatives of the European Allies need be forthwith invited to take part in meetings of the Commission when the terms of surrender for Germany are under discussion. The Commission will be in a better position to decide upon the moment for the issue of such invitations when its own studies have made further progress. But the United Kingdom Delegation would propose that, as a first step towards such consultation, the European Allied Governments and the French Committee of National Liberation should now be informed that the European Advisory Commission is studying the question of terms of surrender for Germany, and invited to submit in writing for the consideration of the Commission any ideas which they may wish to express on the form and content of the terms of surrender which should be imposed on Germany. The United Kingdom Delegation think it desirable that the Commission should be in possession of this material as soon as possible, both in order to assist its own studies, and as a first step towards the discharge of the responsibility placed upon it by the three Governments for consulting other Governments whose interests are especially affected.

6. The Commission is competent, at its discretion, to invite Representatives of other Governments to take part in its meetings; as the greater includes the less, it is equally competent, as a preparatory measure, to invite such Governments to submit their suggestions in writing for consideration by the Commission.

7. The duty of approaching the Governments concerned could be entrusted by the Commission either to its Chairman or to one of its members. In making the approach, which would be secret, due regard would be paid to the interests of security. It could also be suggested to the Governments concerned that if they could, so far as possible, submit combined views, this would be of convenience to the Commission.

8. The United Kingdom Delegation therefore propose that the Commission should now decide:— (i) to inform the Governments of Norway, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxemburg, Yugoslavia, Greece, Czechoslovakia and Poland, and the French Committee of National Liberation that the Commission is now considering the terms of surrender for Germany;

(ii) to invite them to submit in writing for the consideration of the Commission any ideas they may wish to express on the form and content of the terms of surrender which should be imposed on Germany.

W[illiam] S[trang]

4 Transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 13820, February 10, 1944; received February 17.

The Acting President of the Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Affairs (Bech) to the Chargé to the Polish Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) 740.00119 EW/2238

[Document 33]

The Acting President of the Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Affairs (Bech)5 to the Chargé to the Polish Government in Exile (Schoenfeld)6

London, February 23, 1944.

Mr. Chargé d’Affaires: Following the interview which Mr. van Langenhove,7 President of the Inter-Allied Armistice Study Committee, and I had with you yesterday, I have the honor, as Acting President of the Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Affairs, to send you the documents enumerated below: 1. Program of work in connection with disarmament, drawn up by the Inter-Allied Armistice Study Committee and approved by the Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Affairs.

2. Extract from the discussions of the Inter-Allied Armistice Study Committee at their session on February 1, 1944, relating to question (1).

3. List of States which are members of the Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Affairs and of the Armistice Study Committee, together with their representatives on these Committees.8

In accordance with the attached extract from the discussions of the Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Affairs, the latter has directed its Acting President and the President of the Armistice Study Committee to consult the American, British and Soviet Governments on the program of work in connection with disarmament which it has drawn up.

To this end I should therefore be obliged, Mr. Chargé d’Affaires, if you would submit this program to your Government with the request that it be examined. The Committee of Foreign Affairs would be grateful if your Government would communicate to it any observations which it may consider appropriate.

Accept [etc.]

J. Bech

[Enclosure 1—Translation]

Note by the President of the Inter-Allied Armistice Study Committee (van Langenhove)

Document No. 207 January 19, 1944.

Terms Relating to the Disarmament of the Enemy

At the session of November 10 I made known the decision of the Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Affairs inviting the Inter-Allied Armistice Study Committee to undertake a study of the Armistice terms which would ensure the military, naval and air disarmament of the enemy, and also prevent his secret rearmament, by means of appropriate provisions of an economic, financial and budgetary nature.

The Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Affairs further decided to request the Acting President to consult the American, British and Soviet Governments regarding the most suitable method of carrying out the work of the Inter-Allied Armistice Study Committee in this sphere, when the aforesaid Committee has drawn up the general outline of the program for this work.

No proposal of this nature has so far been presented to the Inter-Allied Armistice Study Committee. Since I am anxious that there should be no further delay in carrying out the request addressed to us, I have the honor to submit to the Committee the attached plan of work, with a view to its serving as a basis for discussion in the course of our next session.

[File copy not signed]

[Subenclosure—Translation]

Program of Work Drawn Up by the Inter-Allied Armistice Study Committee

Document No. 208 January 19, 1944.

I. Clauses regarding military, naval and air disarmament

a) List of equipment to be handed over,

b) Demobilisation. 1) Effective forces, officers, etc.

2) Arms, munitions, war material.

3) Fortifications.

4) Recruiting, etc.

II. Clauses regarding economic, budgetary and financial disarmament

a) List of works and factories contributing directly or indirectly to the construction, preparation, warehousing or study of arms, munitions and equipment of every kind which might be utilised in the conduct of the war;

b) Decisions regarding enterprises whose activities should be terminated, and the conditions under which such termination should be effected;

c) Control of enterprises contributing to the construction, preparation, warehousing and study of arms, munitions and equipment of every kind which might be utilised in the conduct of the war, whose activities should not be prohibited;

d) Regulations regarding the import and export of arms, munitions and equipment of every kind which might be utilised in the conduct of the war.

III. Methods of Control.

a) Control of enterprises contributing directly or indirectly to the construction, preparation, warehousing or study of arms, munitions and equipment of every kind which might be utilised in the conduct of the war; 1) The taking over of enterprises by competent Allied authorities;

2) The appointment of managers or commission agents, or controllers of any description;

b) Control of trade and particularly of imports of raw materials;

c) Control of rail, road, sea, river and air transport and of electric power transport;

d) Budgetary, financial and currency control.

IV. Inter-Allied regulations concerning the redistribution of the equipment and stores of enterprises whose activities are to be forbidden or limited.

[Enclosure 2—Translation]

Excerpt of the Minutes of the Meeting of the Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Affairs

The Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Affairs, at its 14th session held on February 1, 1944, discussed the following question: Program of work in connection with disarmament, drawn up by the Inter-Allied Armistice Study Committee.

The Committee approved the program without modification and requested the Inter-Allied Armistice Study Committee to start work immediately in order to put this program into effect. The Inter-Allied Armistice Study Committee is charged with making a thorough study of the problem of the economic disarmament of Germany, even if its studies have to go beyond the scope of an armistice. It is understood that the study of economic disarmament and that of military, naval and air disarmament will be carried out simultaneously; the first question will be submitted to direct study by the Inter-Allied Armistice Study Committee in plenary session, while the second question will be studied, in the first instance, by the Sub-Committee of Military, Naval and Air Experts.

H. E. the Acting President of the Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Affairs is directed to consult the American, British and Soviet Governments on the program of work on disarmament. The President of the Inter-Allied Armistice Study Committee is requested to accompany H. E. the Acting President of the Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Affairs on these visits. The results of these consultations will be communicated to the Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Affairs which in consequence may modify the program of work in connection with disarmament, taking into consideration the observations of the three Governments.

5 Joseph Bech was Luxembourg Minister for Foreign Affairs. The Committee of which he was Acting President was sometimes referred to as the Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Ministers.

6 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Chargé to the Polish Government in Exile in his despatch 538, March 1, 1944; received March 8. Rudolf Schoenfeld was simultaneously Chargé to the Governments in Exile at London of Belgium, Czechoslovakia, the Netherlands, Norway, and Poland. In March 1944, he also became Chargé to the Luxembourg Government in Exile. In his despatch, the Chargé reported that this communication was also being sent to the Governments of the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union; Foreign Minister Bech expressed the hope to the Chargé that the matter be brought informally to the attention of Ambassador Winant in connection with his work as United States Representative to the European Advisory Commission.

7 Fernand van Langenhove, Secretary General of the Belgian Ministry for Foreign Affairs.

8 These lists not printed. The members of the Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Affairs were as follows: Belgium—Foreign Minister Paul-Henri Spaak; France—Minister Plenipotentiary of the French Committee of National Liberation Maurice Dejean; Greece—Ambassador in the United Kingdom Thanassis Aghnides; Luxembourg—Foreign Minister Joseph Bech; Norway—Foreign Minister Trygve Lie; Netherlands—Foreign Minister Eelco van Kleffens; Poland—Foreign Minister Tadeusz Romer; Czechoslovakia—Foreign Minister Jan Masaryk; Yugoslavia—Ambassador in the United Kingdom Bogoljub Jevtić.

The Department of State to the British Embassy 740.00119 EW/2103

[Document 34]

The Department of State to the British Embassy

Aide-Mémoire

Reference is made to the British Embassy’s aide-mémoire of February 3, 1944 concerning the desire of some of the United Nations to participate in the preparation of the terms of surrender to be imposed upon Germany and its satellites, and adverting in particular to notes bearing on this question received by the British Government from the Netherlands, Belgian, and Czechoslovak Embassies.

The Department of State has also received similar notes from these Embassies.9 The substance of its replies to the Netherlands and Belgian Embassies10 was, it is understood, conveyed orally to Mr. Hayter of the British Embassy by Mr. Jones of this Department. A reply to the Czechoslovak note has now been made,11 and the pertinent portion thereof is quoted below for the information of the British Embassy: “I have likewise taken cognizance of your expression of your Government’s view that because of the vital interest of the Czechoslovak Republic in the armistices to be concluded with the enemy states, notably Germany and Hungary, the Czechoslovak Government is entitled to ask to be given the opportunity to participate in the preparation of their terms. That various of the United Nations, particularly those which are neighbors of enemy states, or which are numbered among their principal victims, have a vital interest in the surrender terms imposed upon Germany and its satellites was recognized by the American, British, and Soviet Governments in the terms of reference of the European Advisory Commission. It is provided therein that, at the discretion of the Commission, the Governments of other United Nations may be consulted when matters especially affecting their interests are under discussion. Although it is for the European Advisory Commission itself to determine at what juncture and in what form consultation is to take place, I am confident that the Czechoslovak Government will be given an opportunity to examine and comment upon the terms of surrender recommended by the Commission for imposition upon Germany and Hungary.”

It will be observed from the foregoing quotation that this Government recognized that other United Nations have interests which are affected by the nature of the surrender terms to be imposed upon the enemy powers, and considers that provision has been made for an opportunity to present those interests. Under paragraph four of its terms of reference, the European Advisory Commission is authorized to invite representatives of the governments of other United Nations “to take part in” its meetings when it so desires, and this provision is considered by this Government to furnish an effective, and at the same time elastic, method for implementing the policy just stated since, acting under the directives of their respective governments, the members of the Commission are in a position to decide in each instance as to the participation by each of the United Nations in the preparation of surrender terms. In so doing, it may be assumed that the Commission will bear in mind the confidential nature of the subject, and will avoid unnecessarily wide dissemination of information concerning the exact terms of surrender.

With regard to the view expressed in paragraph three of the British aide-mémoire under reference, namely, that agreement from the United Nations directly concerned to the presentation of the terms in their names should be obtained, this Government agrees as to the desirability, whenever circumstances permit, of seeking their approval. It is not believed, however, that formal agreement by certain of the United Nations should be required as a prerequisite to the presentation of the surrender terms. It is readily conceivable that there will arise certain divergencies of view with respect to the document among the various United Nations, and regardless of whether they are of a major or minor character, their differences of opinion might lead to lengthy discussions and consequent delay in formulation of the instrument of surrender. It was precisely to avoid such a contingency that this Government in its draft paper, entitled “Provisions for Imposition upon Germany at Time of Surrender”,12 now before the Commission used throughout the wording “the United Kingdom, the U.S., and the U.S.S.R. acting in the interests of the United Nations” rather than the phrase “on behalf of the United Nations” employed in the corresponding British draft.

It may be presumed that the Commission will invite representatives of the appropriate United Nations to take part in its meetings when matters especially affecting their interests are under discussion, and it is considered that thereby the just claims of the different United Nations for an opportunity to safeguard their vital interests in so far as they are involved in the terms of surrender are adequately met.

Washington , February 26, 1944.

9  Note D.8248, No. 5951 from the Belgian Embassy December 3, 1943, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. ii, p. 398. A similar note from the Netherlands Ambassador, December 3, 1943, not printed. Note from the Czechoslovak Ambassador, January 27, 1944, not printed; the pertinent portion thereof read as follows: “The Czechoslovak Government avails itself of this opportunity to emphasize the vital interest of the Czechoslovak Republic in the armistices which will be concluded with other enemy states, notably with Germany and Hungary, which border on Czechoslovakia and have occupied Czechoslovak territory since 1938. In the view of my Government this interest entitles them to ask that on the occasion of these armistices they may be given the opportunity to participate in the preparation of their terms in such a way that they can safeguard the interests of the Czechoslovak Republic.” (740.00119 EW/2103)

10 Memorandum to the Belgian Embassy, February 22, 1944, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. ii, p. 401. A similar note to the Netherlands Ambassador dated February 22, 1944, not printed.

11 Dated February 26, 1944, not printed.

12 Memorandum by the Working Security Committee, January 6, 1944, designated document WS–10a, p. 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]. WS–10a was circulated in the European Advisory Commission as a memorandum by the United States Representative, numbered E.A.C. (44) 4, dated January 25, 1944.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/138: Telegram

[Document 35]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, March 27, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received 11:23 p.m.]

2492. Comea 48. Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Ministers in London has given Schoenfeld copy of proposed study program for disarmament of Germany drawn up by its Armistice Study Committee13 and has requested program be submitted to United States Government for examination and comment (Schoenfeld’s despatch 538 March 1, 1944.)14 Similar requests were made to British and Soviet Governments.

Strang has sent me copy of his preliminary reply to Van Langenhove, President of above-mentioned Armistice Study Committee. Strang noted with approval comprehensive nature of proposed disarmament studies but commented that he assumed not all questions listed would be expressly provided for in armistice document itself since “it seems to us preferable to take broad powers under the armistice for dealing with these matters and to implement them by subsequent directives”. In conclusion Strang stated “It would still of course be essential to decide among ourselves in advance what those measures were to be and we feel therefore that your proposed study would be a most useful contribution”.

In letter of March 25, Jebb15 of Strang’s staff informed us British agreed this Committee should be encouraged to communicate its studies to the EAC officially but that it should preferably continue to approach the three Governments direct for comments or material to help in its work. Jebb indicated British were now considering what factual material they could make available to the Foreign Ministers Committee. (Strang evidently is acting in this matter in his capacity as Foreign Office official rather than as representative of EAC.)

Winant

13  Ante, p. 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 33].

14 Not printed, but see footnote 6, p. 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 33].

15 Hubert Miles Gladwyn Jebb, Counsellor in the British Foreign Office.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 European War/2238

[Document 36]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

No. 3924 Washington, April 5, 1944.

Sir: With reference to your telegram no. 2492 of March 27, 8 p.m., you are informed that in reply to his despatch no. 538 of March 1, 194416 transmitting a copy of a proposed study program for the disarmament of Germany drawn up by the Inter-Allied Armistice Study Commission,17 the Officer in charge of the American Mission near the Government of Poland is being instructed18 to thank the Luxembourg Foreign Minister for making this material available, and to tell him that this Government is appreciative of the intention of the Inter-Allied Armistice Study Commission to conduct research along these lines. Mr. Schoenfeld is being further instructed to inform M. Bech that if the Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Ministers would care to submit its proposed disarmament study to you when completed, you will be glad to see that it is made available to the European Advisory Commission for the consideration of the latter in the work which it is doing in the drafting of recommendations concerning surrender terms and attendant machinery for control in the case of Germany. In this connection, you are referred to the Department’s telegrams no. 747 of January 29, 9 p.m. and no. 1755 of March 8, 7 p.m.19

In his despatch no. 123 of February 7, 1944,20 Mr. Schoenfeld also transmitted for the Department’s information a report20 on “Armistice and Peace Terms and Relations with the Enemy after the War” prepared by a Committee of the Netherlands Study Group for Reconstruction Problems. Mr. Schoenfeld is being instructed to make this and other similar reports prepared by the Netherlands Study Group available to the European Advisory Commission for its consideration.

Very truly yours,

For the Secretary of State:
Breckinridge Long

16 See footnote 6, p. 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 33].

17  Ante, p. 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 33].

18 Instruction 76, April 5, 1944, not printed.

19 Latter not printed; it reported on the aide-mémoire of February 26 to the British Embassy, p. 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34].

20 Not printed.

20 Not printed.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00119 EW/2625

[Document 37]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

A copy of the Department’s Aide-Mémoire of February 26th, concerning the desire of certain United Nations to participate in the preparation of terms of surrender to be imposed upon Germany and its satellites, was sent to the Foreign Office, who have now made known their views on it to His Majesty’s Embassy, with the suggestion that these comments be passed to the Department of State.

The Foreign Office are not in agreement with the suggestion conveyed in the closing sentences of the quotation from the Department’s reply to the Czechoslovak Embassy, and developed in paragraph 3 of the Aide-Mémoire, that the European Advisory Commission alone is competent to determine at what juncture and in what form consultation with the Allied Governments will take place. The Foreign Office are, however, in full agreement with the State Department that the European Advisory Commission offers at present the most convenient channel through which to associate Allied Governments with the formulation of surrender terms for Germany. But the existence of the European Advisory Commission should not in their view preclude the United Kingdom, United States or Soviet Governments from themselves consulting other Allied Governments on this subject, nor divest them of the responsibility of ensuring that the latter are given adequate knowledge of surrender terms for Germany or proper opportunity to comment thereon.

The Foreign Office would also welcome further clarification of the fourth paragraph of State Department’s Aide-Mémoire. They share the view that formal agreement by certain of the United Nations is not required as a prerequisite to the presentation of the surrender terms, if “certain of the United Nations” here denotes those countries, e.g., the Latin American and Middle Eastern countries, who are not directly concerned with the German settlement. They consider, however, that formal agreement is an essential prerequisite in the case of those United Nations whose forces are engaged in active hostilities against Germany and must accordingly comply with the terms of any Armistice, or who have been the victims of German aggression and accordingly have special interests which must be covered in the Armistice. They recognise that consultation with such Allied Governments may reveal divergencies of view in regard to the terms to be imposed on Germany, but they do not regard this as an adequate reason for dispensing with such consultation. The right course in their opinion is to bring any such divergencies of view into the open now and to resolve them prior to the surrender of Germany. If they are left they will manifest themselves all the more forcibly at that time and imperil harmonious relations between the Allies at the precise moment when it will be of the utmost importance that a united front should be maintained. Provided consultation with Allied Governments is initiated at a sufficiently early stage, the Foreign Office cannot see that any inconvenience on the score of delay will be incurred.

The Foreign Office are glad to learn that the views of the two Governments coincide on the desirability of the European Advisory Commission associating other Allied Governments with its work on surrender terms for Germany, and the United States representative will receive full support from the United Kingdom representative in pressing for an early decision on the most suitable method of achieving the desired result.

Washington , April 15, 1944.

Draft Telegram From the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State EAC Files, Lot 52M64, Box 9605, “131 Allied Consultation Preliminary Stage”: Telegram

[Document 38]

Draft Telegram From the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 21

London, May 9, 1944.

There has been no action by the EAC on the question of consultation with other Allied Governments. The British delegate gave up pressing for a decision some time ago when the Russian delegate made it clear that he was not disposed to discuss any subject other than the surrender terms for Germany until those terms were agreed upon.22

In informal talks with Gousev and myself last week Strang reopened the question, recommending that interested European Allies be invited to submit to the EAC recommendations regarding surrender terms. I pointed out the need for security and speed in reaching agreement. Gousev was noncommittal and I suspect he had in mind that his Government would not wish him to have any dealings with certain refugee governments in London.

I am aware that the EAC is responsible for deciding this question but I feel you should know how matters now stand. It is very unlikely that the Russians will agree to consult in any way with any other government before the surrender terms are submitted to the three Governments. This is particularly true now in view of the disturbing articles published in the Observer on May 7 (see my Comea 5823 ).

Winant

21 A handwritten marginal note reads as follows: “Not sent—subject to be taken up by the Ambassador personally in the U.S.A.” Ambassador Winant was in Washington for consultation from May 14 to May 26. There is no Department record of discussions on this subject.

22 See footnote 95, p. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30].

23 Telegram 3760, May 8, from London, not printed. One article was concerned with the post-war treatment of Germany and went into the functions of the European Advisory Commission; the article stated that German armistice terms were almost the only subject being considered by the Commission, possibly because of an American reluctance to settle intricate European political problems in the Commission at that stage. The other article reported upon concerned the plan for the economic disarmament being prepared by the Inter-Allied Armistice Study Committee. (740.00119 EAC/176)

The Department of State to the British Embassy 740.00119 EW/2625

[Document 39]

The Department of State to the British Embassy

Aide-Mémoire

The Department of State has given consideration to the British Embassy’s Aide-Mémoire of April 15, 1944 relative to the participation of other United Nations in the preparation of surrender terms to be imposed upon Germany and its satellites now under discussion in the European Advisory Commission.

The Department is gratified to learn that the British Foreign Office agrees that the European Advisory Commission offers, at present, the most convenient channel through which the Allied Governments may be associated with the formulation of surrender terms. In the view of this Department, the most practical method of dealing with the question of the participation of other United Nations would be to arrange for such participation in several stages. These stages, it is suggested, might be as follows: 1. Agreement on all essential points of the surrender terms should be reached by the United Kingdom, the United States, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics before any formal approach is made to other United Nations. This plan, however, would not exclude consideration by the European Advisory Commission of any views which might be submitted to it by governments of other United Nations in the course of arriving at agreement among the three Powers. It is recognized by both the American and British Governments that those United Nations which have been the victims of German aggression have special interests which they will no doubt desire to call to the attention of the European Advisory Commission. It was for this very reason that this Government suggested that those be given an opportunity to present their views. It is understood that certain material of this nature has been, or will be, presented shortly to the European Advisory Commission for its consideration. In this connection, reference is made especially to a proposed program for German disarmament drafted by the Inter-Allied Armistice Study Commission. The European Advisory Commission will no doubt be prepared to take such reports into account in the course of its deliberations, and the American representative on the European Advisory Commission has been instructed to lay before the Commission any such studies as may be submitted to him. In this manner, the Department of State believes that the views of those European states with special interests can be considered as the European Advisory Commission formulates its recommendations on surrender terms.

2. Following agreement by the United Kingdom, the United States, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on essential points of the surrender terms, the other United Nations who have primary interests in this matter could be notified of the recommendations agreed upon, and a request could be made for their formal acquiescence. If their views had been considered in the manner described in paragraph one above, this formal acquiescence would probably not be difficult to obtain.

3. With respect to United Nations of the Latin American or Middle Eastern regions, this Department shares the view of the Foreign Office that formal agreement by these United Nations is not required for the presentation of surrender terms; this Government, however, would presumably desire to inform these Governments of the terms at some later date to be decided upon. In this connection, the Department assumes that Greece would be considered as coming within paragraph two, as would Turkey in the event that Turkey should become one of the United Nations and actively participate in the war.

The foregoing views are set forth as the tentative opinion of this Department which believes that before any decision on this question is reached, the recommendations of the European Advisory Commission should be sought. This Department will therefore instruct the American Representative on the European Advisory Commission to bring this question to the attention of the Commission with a request for its recommendations respecting the manner and time at which consultation with other United Nations could best be effected.24

Washington , May 9, 1944.

24  Instruction 4067, May 13, 1944, to London, read in part as follows: “In accordance with the concluding paragraph of the Department’s aide-mémoire, the Ambassador is requested to bring this question before the European Advisory Commission and to explain the Department’s point of view as set forth therein. After discussion, the Department would welcome the recommendations of the Commission respecting the manner and time in which the proposed consultations with other United Nations could best be effected.” (740.00119 EAC/109)

The Chargé to the Netherlands Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/2662: Telegram

[Document 40]

The Chargé to the Netherlands Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State

London, June 10, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received 9:14 p.m.]

Neter25 11. Dr. Van Kleffens, acting on behalf of the Belgian, Luxembourg, Netherlands and Norwegian Governments, last evening handed me a memorandum26 (in French) regarding the desire of those Governments to secure some method for exchanging views with the U.S., U.K. and U.S.S.R. on conditions to be imposed on Germany, the organisation of security and related matters.

He said memorandum was also being presented simultaneously to British and Soviet Governments. He had been delegated to perform this mission with respect to U.S. Government. Monsieur Spaak, Belgian Foreign Minister, was performing similar mission with British Government through Mr. Eden,27 Mr. Lie, Norwegian Foreign Minister, was doing likewise with Soviet Union through Ambassador Lebedev.28

The substance of the memorandum is as follows: 1. The principal problems to be solved on the termination of hostilities have been the subject of an exchange of views between the Allied great powers. Those which concern Europe particularly are discussed in the European Advisory Committee.

2. Desiring to contribute to the solution of those problems, especially those which are of special importance to them, the Belgian, Luxembourg, Netherlands and Norwegian Governments have already had occasion to present various suggestions. Though those suggestions have been received with evidence of interest, the Allied great powers have nevertheless expressed no definite opinion regarding them nor given any information as to the way in which they envisage those questions.

3. In consequence, the present four Governments have only been able to formulate provisional and general suggestions. Such a procedure involves the risk of eventually confronting them with decisions determined in their absence and taken without their knowledge on problems that are of capital importance to them. This procedure would be incompatible with the solidarity developed between them and the Allied great powers during the war, a solidarity which must continue after hostilities have ended if peace is to be definitely assured.

4. Among the questions that are particularly important for the present four countries, they cite especially the conditions to be imposed on Germany and the organisation of their security. The latter problem involves particularly the precautions to be taken to render impossible a new German aggression; the arrangements to be made to assure the most effective cooperation between the armed forces of the four countries and their Allies; the political safeguards to be set up, possibly within the framework of a world-wide international system.

5. They regard it as their duty to invite the attention of the Governments of the United States, Great Britain and the U.S.S.R. to these considerations, stressing at the same time that it seems to them to be necessary to make all headway called for by the present situation in reaching a solution of the above-mentioned problems. Van Kleffens said the “suggestions” referred to in paragraph 2 were those embodied in the various reports made by the Committee of Foreign Ministers in London (my despatches Polish series Nos. 293, April 20, 382, August 18, 434, October 9, 1943, and 521 February 3 and 538, March 1944.)29 These, of course, embodied the views of a larger number of occupied countries than the four presenting the present memorandum. Van Kleffens explained that the present four powers realised the difficulties confronting the great powers in working out some method for meeting the situation. He said that, speaking quite frankly, he recognised that aside from the inherent difficulties, there were special problems arising from differences between certain powers, particularly between Poland and the Soviet Union, which rendered the latter unwilling to deal with a group embodying those elements. Without entering into the merits of the differences, the powers presenting the present memorandum did not feel they should be the victims of this situation.

The Governments of Belgium, Luxembourg, Netherlands and Norway expressed no opinion as to the form that might be chosen for the collaboration they were seeking. They left that aspect of the matter to the American, British and Soviet Governments. If official exchanges of views were not possible, they would be agreeable to unofficial exchanges of views, so long as these took place before final decisions were taken. If the unofficial method were adopted, they would undertake to keep the fact of such exchanges completely confidential.

He said that in discussing this matter he wished to stress that in all he did there were two things uppermost in his mind: the desire to be helpful in the war effort and the desire to contribute to future solidarity. He thought that the countries which had been occupied had by reason of that fact certain experience which would be a valuable contribution to the discussions. The Soviets, of course, had suffered partial occupation but he thought the occupied viewpoint should be more fully represented. Furthermore, for the different countries to be associated with decisions was important not only individually but for the future generally. It would be harmful for the Government if, when it returned to the homeland and when questioned in Parliament, it had to say it had not been consulted in decisions. But he was equally concerned as to the effect that such a situation would have on the attitude toward the great powers.

In conclusion he said he hoped I would make it clear that despite the general phraseology of paragraph 5 of the memorandum the four Governments were making “a request”.

Original text of memorandum by air mail.30

[ Schoenfeld ]

25 Series designation for telegrams from the Chargé to the Netherlands Government in Exile at London.

26 Not printed.

27 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

28 Viktor Zakharovich Lebedev, Soviet Ambassador to the Governments in Exile at London.

29 None printed; for the reports transmitted to the Department as enclosures to despatch 538, March 1, 1944, see note from the Acting President of the Inter-Allied Committee of Foreign Affairs to the Chargé to the Polish Government in Exile dated February 23, and enclosures, pp. 47–50 [Pgs. 47–50 include portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34].

30 In despatch 148, June 12, 1944; neither printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/198: Telegram

[Document 41]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 14, 1944—11 p.m.

4729. We welcome the information set forth in your Comea 61 (Embassy’s 4655 of June 10).31 With respect to the question of consultation with other Allied Governments, we very much hope for definite recommendations at an early date, particularly in view of the developments reported in Schoenfeld’s Nater [Neter] 11, June 10, 4 p.m. Department’s views on consultation were explained in its 374T of May 10, 9 p.m.32 and its instruction 4067 of May 13.33

Please keep Schoenfeld as well as the Department fully informed of all developments on this subject.

Hull

31  Post, p. 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119].

32 Not printed; it reported on the British Embassy’s aide-mémoire of April 15, p. 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], and the Department’s reply of May 9, p. 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39].

33 See footnote 24, p. 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 39].

American Minutes of an Informal Meeting of the European Advisory Commission 740.00119 EAC/8–144

[Document 42]

American Minutes of an Informal Meeting of the European Advisory Commission 34

London, July 5, 1944, 3:30 p.m.

[Extract]

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4. Sir William35 then dropped a bombshell into the meeting. He asked the following question:— “Is EAC willing to recommend immediate communication with the Allied Governments without waiting our dispatch of our Instrument of Surrender36 and the Protocols37 to our Governments?”

Sir William continued that approximately six months had elapsed since the British initiated this request that the Allied Governments should be informed as to the contents of the Instrument of Surrender. Sir William stated that Mr. Eden told him that if something was not done by the Commission that he, Mr. Eden, would have to act independently and notify the Allied Governments as to the situation.

The American Ambassador said that: “I very much object to breaking away from the common action of the three Powers although I do support the proposal that we consult with the other Allied Governments. With industry and a little luck, we might get all our work done by the end of the next week so as to approach these Governments.”

Mr. Gousev made the following statement: “We are all interested in speeding up this work. We are all interested in completing the work before us. That is why I cannot understand why consultation with the Allied Nations involves such hurry. The main task of the work of this Commission is not consultation with the Allies. However, I do not want to underline the importance of this question. But I do not understand why it has such political sharpness. And I cannot understand why the British Government want to act independently in this question. Of course, they have the right to do so but it means that the Governments of the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. would also act at their discretion. This would not be the common interest.”

Sir William replied: “I wish Mr. Gousev would look at it from our viewpoint. He said he cannot see why it is so important. I would ask him to remember that it is now six months since we made this proposal first.38 In the first paper before the Commission we accepted it. In spite of repeated attempts on our part, it has not been possible to give any answer. All the while we have been under considerable pressure from the Allied Governments. The last few days we have been approached by the Belgians, the Netherlands, Luxemburg and Norway jointly,39 who again invited attention to the vital importance of the question we are considering. These Governments expressed grave apprehension that decisions might be taken which are vital to them without consulting them. I am not sure but I believe this communication has also been addressed to the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A.

“H.M.G. does not want to take separate action. However, unless we can send this communication forthwith, he feels no alternative except to apprise the Allied Governments.”

Mr. Gousev replied that he remembered that the U.K. agreed that before the Allied Governments should be notified we should agree among ourselves and should work out the Instruments. At the first stage when we hadn’t determined our common general lines, we did not know how to address the Governments because we had no lines worked out. That is why he thinks it not possible to count the time of circulation of proposals from last January.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

34 Meeting held at Lancaster House on Wednesday, July 5, 1944, at 3:30 p.m. These minutes were prepared by Brig. Gen. Vincent Meyer, Ambassador Winant’s Chief Military Adviser, and were transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 17219, August 1, 1944, from London (not printed).

35 Sir William Strang, the British Representative to the European Advisory Commission.

36 The Instrument of Surrender is printed on p. 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 134].

37 Reference here is to the agreements then under discussion in the Commission regarding zones of occupation in Germany and control machinery for Germany. For the text of the protocol between the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union regarding the zones of occupation in Germany and the administration of “Greater Berlin”, signed at London September 12, 1944, see Department of State, Treaties and Other International Acts Series No. 3071, printed in United States Treaties and Other International Agreements, vol. 5, pt. 2, p. 2078. For text of the agreement between the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union on Control Machinery in Germany, signed at London November 14, 1944, see TIAS No. 3070, printed in 5 UST 2062. For correspondence regarding the discussions in the European Advisory Commission relating to these agreements, see pp. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75] ff.

38 See memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative dated February 7, p. 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32].

39 For the substance of the memorandum presented simultaneously to the American, British, and Soviet Governments, see telegram Neter 11, June 10, 4 p.m., from the Chargé to the Netherlands Government in Exile at London, p. 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 40].

American Minutes of an Informal Meeting of the European Advisory Commission 740.00119 EAC/8–144

[Document 43]

American Minutes of an Informal Meeting of the European Advisory Commission 40

London, July 6, 1944, 3:30 p.m.

[Extract]

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Sir William—I reported to Mr. Eden yesterday about the question of consultation with the other Allied Nations and in particular I reported to him the confidence of my U.S. colleague that we could finish discussion of the protocols and draft letter41 to the other Allied European Nations by the end of next week. I also said Mr. Gousev had expressed his willingness to examine the text of the proposed communication to the Allied Governments. Mr. Eden replied that he was glad to hear this and that he hopes we shall be able to make good and finish off this stage of the discussion by the end of next week. He will make no declaration to the Allied European Nations in the meantime. He hopes we will do as well as we expect to do.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

40 Meeting held at Lancaster House on Thursday, July 6, 1944, at 3:30 p.m. These minutes were prepared by Brig. Gen. Vincent Meyer, Ambassador Winant’s Chief Military Adviser, and were transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 17219, August 1, 1944, from London (not printed).

41 A draft letter of invitation to these Governments in connection with the surrender of Germany had been prepared by the British delegation and circulated to the United States and Soviet Representatives at the end of June. The draft letter, not printed, was discussed and revised at an informal meeting of the European Advisory Commission held on July 10. At an informal meeting of the Commission on July 24 it was agreed to send the letter to the nine Allied European Governments on July 25, simultaneously with the sending of the Instrument of Surrender for Germany and the accompanying report from the Commission to the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union. For text of the Surrender Instrument and the Report, see pp. 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 134] and 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 134], respectively. For text of the letter to the European Allied Governments, see infra.

The Chairman of the European Advisory Commission (Winant) to the Foreign Ministers of Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Luxemburg, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, and Yugoslavia, and to the Representatives in London of Greece and the French Committee of National Liberation 740.00119 EAC/7–2644

[Document 44]

The Chairman of the European Advisory Commission (Winant) to the Foreign Ministers of Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Luxemburg, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, and Yugoslavia, and to the Representatives in London of Greece and the French Committee of National Liberation 42

[London, July 25, 1944.]

Under instructions received from the Governments of the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the European Advisory Commission has been entrusted with the task of making recommendations to the three Governments on the terms of surrender to be imposed upon Germany and the machinery required to ensure the fulfilment of those terms.

The Commission has reached a point in its studies at which it would welcome an expression of the views of the European Allied Governments* on any of these matters which those Governments* would wish to convey to the Commission.

I am therefore desired by the Commission to say that if the Government/French Committee of National Liberation should wish to lay before the Commission any statement of their views on any of the problems referred to above or any exposition of their special interests in any of these matters, the Commission would be glad to receive such statements in writing so that it could take them into account in its further deliberations.

I would emphasize that, since the work of the Commission in its present phase has important military aspects, the proceedings of the Commission are secret, and that it is essential that there should be no public disclosure either of the content of the communications which may be addressed to the Commission by the Governments* concerned, or even of the fact that such communications have been made at all. The Commission therefore counts on the Governments* concerned to take the necessary security precautions to this end.

42 Copy transmitted to the Department by Special Courier in despatch 17092, July 26, 1944, from London; received July 28.

*  Note: In the letter addressed to the Representative of the French Committee of National Liberation the words “or authorities” have been inserted in the text after “Governments”. [Footnote in the original.]

*  Note: In the letter addressed to the Representative of the French Committee of National Liberation the words “or authorities” have been inserted in the text after “Governments”. [Footnote in the original.]

*  Note: In the letter addressed to the Representative of the French Committee of National Liberation the words “or authorities” have been inserted in the text after “Governments”. [Footnote in the original.]

*  Note: In the letter addressed to the Representative of the French Committee of National Liberation the words “or authorities” have been inserted in the text after “Governments”. [Footnote in the original.]

The Italian Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Visconti-Venosta) to the American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) 740.00119 E.W./9–1644

[Document 45]

The Italian Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Visconti-Venosta) to the American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk)43

A/504 Rome, September 12, 1944.

Dear Kirk: I should like to draw your kind attention on a question which is for us of extreme importance: the forthcoming armistice with Germany which will undoubtedly be imposed by the High Allied Command in the name of the United Nations. I venture to submit to you my considered opinion that it would be advisable to give us already an assurance that Italy will be enabled to participate in the armistice in question. The reasons on which our request is based appear to me to be evident: for one year now, Italy has been in a state of war with Germany, together with, and alongside the United Nations; Italian land, sea and air forces contribute to war operations against the common enemy in a manner which has repeatedly been appreciated by the Allied Command, under whose directions the Italian armed forces operate. The campaign which is being carried out by Italian patriots in occupied Italy has, on the other hand, reached the proportions of veritable war operations and the patriots themselves have consequently been included by the Allied Command in the forces that form the Allied Expeditionary Corps in Italy.

The most suitable juridical way of previously specifying the position of Italy in respect of the conclusion of an armistice with Germany seems to me that of accepting our adherence to the Atlantic Charter44 and to the Declaration of the United Nations signed at Washington on January 1st, 1943 [1942].45 As a result of the adherence to this Declaration, the armistice with Germany would be concluded by the Allied High Command also in the name of Italy and, consequently, the serious Italian interests connected with the state of war with Germany would be safeguarded.

I need hardly add that should Italy, on the conclusion of an armistice with Germany not find herself in a position corresponding to the legal and de facto conditions of her participation in the fight against the common enemy, the shock on Italian public opinion would be very strong and its probable effects detrimental to everybody.

Although I am certain that this is not the intention of the Allied Governments, however, I would ask you kindly to submit to your Government the advisability that an assurance in the above sense be given us, at the same time acquainting us with the form under which, bearing in mind the present situation, Italy also would be allowed to participate in the eventual armistice of the United Nations with Germany.

At a period particularly delicate as the one we shall be going through at the moment of the German retreat or collapse in Northern Italy, I should consider it absolutely necessary to give to the unsettled masses in the North the clear sensation that the United Nations are acting in a spirit of equity and justice: this would undoubtedly contribute to strengthen the elements of stability and order throughout the Country.

I shall be most grateful for your kind intervention in the matter, and meanwhile,

Believe me, dear Kirk,

Sincerely Yours,

Visconti-Venosta

43 Copy transmitted to the Department in despatch 341, September 16, 1944, from Rome; received October 3.

44 Joint statement by President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, August 14, 1941, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. i, p. 367.

45  Ibid., 1942, vol. i, p. 25.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 E.W./9–1344: Telegram

[Document 46]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, September 27, 1944—8 p.m.

7884. Kirk has received a personal note from the Italian Under Secretary of Foreign Affairs requesting that Italy be allowed to participate in the armistice with Germany.

[Here follows a summary of the note of September 12 from Visconti-Venosta to Ambassador Kirk, printed supra.]

The Foreign Ministry advised Kirk that it had sent the British High Commissioner46 a similar note.

While it is not feasible at this time to consider admitting Italy to the ranks of the United Nations, there is some justification for the request that Italy be included with the Allies in the armistice arrangements with Germany. The Italian declaration of war on Germany in October 194347 and that nation’s subsequent contribution to the campaign in Italy places a certain moral obligation, it is believed, on the United Nations to protect Italian interests vis-à-vis Germany and to terminate hostilities between Germany and Italy at the same time and through the same instrument with which they are terminated between Germany and the United Nations.

It is suggested that the European Advisory Commission might address a communication to the Italian Government inviting its views with respect to the German armistice arrangements as it has done to the United Nations in Europe having a direct interest in the German settlement. It should be made clear that such an invitation would carry with it no other obligations than the consideration of Italian views and possibly a delegation of powers to SCAEF48 to represent Italy as well as the United Nations in any armistice with Germany.

Please discuss this with your colleagues on the EAC and report their reactions, repeating to Rome.49

Hull

46 Sir Noel Charles.

47 October 13, 1943; for text, see United States and Italy, 1936–1946, Documentary Record (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1946), p. 69. See also telegram 1741, October 12, 1943, from Algiers, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. ii, p. 386.

48 Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force, Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower.

49 Substance repeated to Rome as telegram 210.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00119 European War/10–444

[Document 47]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Memorandum

Sir Noel Charles recently received from the Italian Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs a private letter regarding the “forthcoming Armistice with Germany which will undoubtedly be imposed by the Allied High Command in the name of the United Nations”. Marchese Visconti Venosta expressed the hope that Italy would be allowed to participate in the Armistice and gave the following reasons:— (a) Italy has been in state of war with Germany for one year on the side of the United Nations.

(b) Italian land, sea and air forces have contributed to the Allied effort in a manner which has repeatedly won the appreciation of the Allied Command.

(c) The campaign waged by Italian patriots in German occupied Italy has reached the proportions of war operations and patriots have been included by the Allied Command in the body of the Allied forces.

2. The Under Secretary suggested that the most suitable way of recognising Italy’s position juridically in respect of the Armistice with Germany would be to accept Italy’s adherence to the Atlantic Charter and to Declaration of the United Nations signed at Washington on January 1st 1943 [1942]. As a result of Italy’s adherence to the Declaration the armistice with Germany would be concluded by the Allied High Command also in the name of Italy and the more important Italian interests connected with state of war with Germany would be safeguarded.

3. In the event of Italy “not finding herself in a position corresponding to legal and de facto conditions of her participation in the fight against the common enemy, the shock on Italian public opinion would be very strong and its probable effects detrimental to everybody”.

4. In the opinion of His Majesty’s Government the Italian request is clearly prompted by two motives, (a) the desire for equality of status with the United Nations and (b) the desire for participation in the enforcement of surrender terms against Germany and for the support of the victorious Allies in asserting Italian claims against that country.

5. His Majesty’s Government still adhere to the view expressed in this Embassy’s Aide-Mémoire of March 31st 194450 that it would be inappropriate to permit Italy to adhere publicly to the Atlantic charter nor do they favour Italy’s formal admission to the ranks of the United Nations by any other means. They are not prepared to concern themselves in any way with any claims which Italy may have against Nazi Germany.

6. Apart from being undesirable in the view of His Majesty’s Government, Italian participation in any armistice with Germany is unnecessary. Hostilities between Italy and Germany could be terminated by declarations issued by the Governments of either state on instructions of the Allied Control Commission concerned, followed, if desired, by signature of a German-Italian instrument confined exclusively to recording the cessation of hostilities.

7. Similar considerations apply to Roumania51 who may also claim to be co-belligerent and to Bulgaria52 who has declared war on Germany, and would apply to any other state which after breaking with Germany might declare war on her and/or be regarded as co-belligerent.

8. The recent declaration by the President and Mr. Churchill53 and the execution of the concrete proposals which it has announced, will render it unnecessary to make any further concessions to the Italian Government in the interest of “stability and order”. His Majesty’s Government therefore see no objection to leaving the request of the Italian Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs unanswered. If pressed however, they would like Sir Noel Charles to return a reply on lines of the foregoing paragraphs.

9. His Majesty’s Government understand from Mr. Winant that Mr. Kirk has received a similar communication from the Italian Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and, as it is most desirable that the American and British Representatives should speak with one voice in this matter, they would be glad to learn whether the United States Government agree with the views expressed in paragraphs 5 to 8 above.

Washington , 4 October 1944.

50  Vol. iii, p. 1084.

51 For correspondence regarding the negotiations leading to the signing of an armistice with Rumania at Moscow, September 13, 1944, see vol. iv, pp. 133 ff.

52 For correspondence regarding the negotiations leading to the signing of the armistice with Bulgaria at Moscow, October 28, 1944, see vol. iii, pp. 300 ff.

53 For the statement regarding Italy by President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, released to the press September 26, 1944, see telegram 205 to Rome, September 27, ibid., p. 1153.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 E.A.C./10–1644

[Document 48]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

No. 18638 London, October 16, 1944.
[Received October 21.]

Sir: With reference to previous despatches transmitting replies from various interested Allied Governments54 to the letter of July 25, 1944, from the Chairman of the European Advisory Commission, I have the honor to submit two reports on the views of the above mentioned Allied Governments which were prepared by a Committee of Experts of the three Delegations.

It will be noted that the reports cover only certain aspects of the surrender of Germany. They do not cover subjects which the Commission plans to incorporate in general orders and directives.

In view of the unwillingness of the Soviet Delegation to examine the reply submitted by the Polish Government, a separate report has been prepared by the United States and British Delegations with respect to the Polish memorandum.55

Respectfully yours,

For the Ambassador:
E. Allan Lightner, Jr.
Secretary, U.S. Delegation European Advisory Commission

[Enclosure 1]

Report by the Committee of Experts of the European Advisory Commission

P12/11/44

Terms of Surrender to be imposed upon Germany and Machinery for their enforcement

Views of the European Allies

1. Replies to the Chairman’s letter of 25th July, 1944, (see the third Annex to the minutes of the 7th meeting of the Commission held on that date) have been received from the Governments of Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Greece, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway and Poland.* The French Committee of National Liberation has asked to participate in discussion on surrender terms for Germany,56 but has not submitted any detailed comments in writing. The Yugoslav Government has not replied.

2. This report is confined to an examination of the replies of the various Allied Governments as they relate to:— (1) the Instrument of Unconditional Surrender;

(2) the Occupation of Germany;

(3) Allied Control Machinery in Germany;

(4) Further consultation with the Allied Governments or association between them and the European Advisory Commission.

3. The Report covers only the more immediate and important points bearing on the above subjects, and it does not, in general, take account of proposals made on subjects which, according to the principles on which the European Advisory Commission has so far proceeded, would be more properly dealt with in General or Special Orders. Reference is, however, made to a few proposals of the Allied Governments which appear to be new or exceptional.

4. In general, it may be said that most of the replies are mainly concerned with dealing in considerable detail with subjects which cannot be fully dealt with in the Instrument of Unconditional Surrender, but which will have to be settled at a later stage. The Belgian, Greek, Luxemburg and Netherlands Governments express the view that the actual Instrument of Surrender should be brief and confined to military requirements, though each of them make certain proposals for the inclusion in the Instrument of matters of other kinds. The Czech, Norwegian and Polish Governments appear to think that the Instrument of Surrender itself should be longer and more elaborate and should deal in detail with many political and economic questions as well as military ones.

5. The Instrument of Unconditional Surrender would appear, broadly speaking, to cover the desiderata of the Allied Governments as far as military terms are concerned.

6. The Allied Governments assume that the surrender of Germany will be unconditional and that the terms will therefore be imposed on Germany without giving the Germans an opportunity to discuss them. They assume that Germany will be occupied by the victors. Most of the Governments definitely wish to participate in the occupation of Germany; one would be willing to do so if requested.

7. All the Governments assume that Germany will be controlled by a central inter-Allied body and they apparently expect to be represented on that body. They do not specifically mention the division of Germany into zones of occupation.

belgium, luxemburg and netherlands

(Note: These three Governments have sent to the European Advisory Commission replies which, except for a very few points, are identical. Unless otherwise indicated, the views summarised below are common to all three Governments.)

Instrument of Surrender

8. The three Governments “refrain from making specific proposals with regard to general provisions of a military nature …57 It is assumed that such general provisions of a military nature as will be necessary will be drawn up by the Allied High Command in such manner that the general interests of all the Allies … will be duly taken into account.… If the first protocol of surrender were confined to such military clauses as need immediate attention, coupled with an injunction to accept and carry out such further terms as will subsequently be made known to Germany, this procedure would be fully endorsed by” the three Governments … “The question as to which points should be imposed in the first instance would appear to be a matter of expediency, the answer to which will be largely determined by military and political considerations of the moment. It should be made quite clear to Germany from the beginning that any time supplementary terms of surrender may be imposed on her.”

9. The three Governments believe the Instrument of Surrender “should be signed preferably on German territory, and not only by a plenipotentiary of the responsible German authority of the moment, but also by a plenipotentiary of each of the three branches of the Wehrmacht (army, navy and air force).”

10. In the event of their territory not being evacuated by Germany at the moment of her capitulation, the three Governments propose detailed provisions, for embodiment in the Instrument of Surrender, to regulate the evacuation by German forces of their territory and the internment of those who remain.

11. The Belgian Government suggests that the Surrender Instrument should contain provisions whereby Germany would abrogate all annexations of Belgian territory and would immediately release the King.

Occupation of Germany.

12. The three Governments “fully realise the dangers and inconveniences inherent for the Allies in the complete occupation of Germany for a long time. Also, there would be no advantage to the Allies in wounding Germany’s pride, unnecessarily. The least humiliating and the most practical form of compulsion of Germany would perhaps be no more occupation of key-points than is necessary, coupled with unambiguous threat of suitable coercive measures … in case of infraction of the terms of surrender.”

13. It is improbable that the Netherlands would be able in the beginning to muster a contingent to participate in the occupation. “All available resources will be mobilised for the war against Japan. At a later stage, however, the Netherlands Government would reserve the right to furnish a contingent, on the theory that such occupation as there will be should be demonstrably Allied occupation.”

14. The Belgian and Luxemburg Governments attach importance to the participation by Belgium and Luxemburg in the occupation of Germany, in accordance with the means available to them.

Allied Control Machinery in Germany.

15. “There should be a permanent Central Allied Commission for the enforcement of the Terms of Surrender, which would be the Supreme Authority, under the direction of the Allied Governments, to ensure the fulfilment of the terms. Adequate representation should be guaranteed to all States with a direct interest in the fulfilment of the terms, including, in particular, the ex-occupied countries.”

16. Special sub-committees should be established under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Central Commission to deal with disarmament; German industry; press, radio and films; postal censorship; reparation; restitution of looted property; control of German imports and exports; apprehension of German foreign assets; control of German financial and monetary policy and fixation of the rate of exchange of the German mark; and such other matters as would prove to be desirable. Matters of general importance which would not be entrusted to a separate sub-committee should be dealt with by the Secretariat of the main Commission under the direction of the latter.

Future Consultation and Association With the European Advisory Commission.

17. The three Governments reserve the right to submit further observations as occasion and experience may require. Whenever their special interests are concerned, they trust that they will be duly consulted.

18. The experts of the three Governments and the three Foreign Ministers are at the disposal of the European Advisory Commission to give such explanations of their memoranda as the Commission may require.

19. The three Governments would be glad to learn the opinion of the European Advisory Commission with regard to their memoranda.

20. The three Governments hope the European Advisory Commission will find it possible to have a discussion with their representative or representatives on these subjects before a final draft for the Instrument of Surrender is submitted to the Governments represented on the Commission.

czechoslovakia

Instrument of Surrender.

21. The Czechoslovak Government suggests that the Surrender Terms should contain many subjects other than military, including several matters of particular interest to Czechoslovakia, for example:— (a) nullification of certain treaties;

(b) assertion of Czechoslovak sovereignty over its 1937 territory;

(c) a declaration that a state of war has existed between Czechoslovakia and Germany since 17th September, 1938;

(d) provisions for the transfer of German and Hungarian populations;

(e) renewal of international control of the Elbe, Oder and Danube rivers;

(f) “free harbor” privileges in Hamburg and Stettin.

Occupation of Germany.

22. “Should it be decided that other States besides Great Britain, the Soviet Union, the United States of America and France should participate in the occupation of enemy States in Europe, Czechoslovakia would ask to be allowed to take part in the occupation of Germany in the sectors of the Northern and Western frontiers of Czechoslovakia (and in that of Hungary, in the sectors on the Southern frontiers of Czechoslovakia).”

Allied Control Machinery in Germany.

23. The Czechoslovak Government mentions that an “Armistice Commission” will interpret the armistice clauses and carry out sanctions in case of infringement. It does not indicate the composition of such Commission.

Future Consultation and Association With the European Advisory Commission.

24. The Czechoslovak Foreign Minister will be able to provide any explanation or supplementary particulars required. A special memorandum on the transferring of Germans from Czechoslovakia will be submitted later.

greece

Instrument of Surrender.

25. The Greek Government “advocate the principle of a protocol embodying terms of surrender limited exclusively to conditions of a military nature, such conditions to impose upon the German authorities a clear obligation to comply with the orders to be issued by the Allies.”

26. The reply from the Greek Government proceeds to make detailed suggestions on the subjects of evacuation of occupied territories; delivery of war material, stocks and supplies; delivery of warships and merchant vessels; repatriation of prisoners of war, hostages, internees and displaced persons; restitution; reparation; and war criminals. The Greek Government draw attention to the special claims of Greece for compensation for damage done by the Germans. They suggest that certain industrial installations should be transplanted from Germany to Greece to make good Greek losses; that many types of raw materials and commodities in Germany should be ear-marked for the rebuilding of districts in Greece destroyed by the Germans; that 200 locomotives, 500 railway coaches, 3,000 railway wagons, 2,000 motor cars and 3,000 motor lorries shall be delivered by Germany to Greece.

Occupation of Germany.

27. “The Royal Hellenic Government would wish to have a part in the occupation of Germany, and are prepared to furnish the necessary forces to this end.”

Allied Control Machinery in Germany.

28. “These rules and regulations [for implementing general obligations imposed in the Instrument of Surrender]58 should emanate from a permanent Inter-Allied Armistice Commission … which would control all the organs and the machinery required for the enforcement of the said rules and regulations. The Royal Hellenic Government would wish to be represented on this Commission.”

Future Consultation and Association With the European Advisory Commission.

29. “The Royal Hellenic Government will appreciate it if the European Advisory Commission would keep them informed of any provisions relating to matters of interest to Greece that are envisaged by it, so that they may in due time submit their views thereon.”

30. The Greek Government say that they are preparing a fuller and more detailed report to be addressed to the European Advisory Commission at a later date.

norway

Instrument of Surrender.

31. The Norwegian Government assumes “that the supreme Allied military authorities will draw up the general military provisions required, taking into account the common interests of all the Allies.”

32. The Norwegian Government does not make any statement to the effect that the Instrument of Surrender should be confined to military questions only; but it does say: “It should be made clear to Germany that supplementary terms to those laid down in connection with the actual surrender may subsequently be imposed upon her at any time.”

33. “Besides the general conditions which are to be imposed upon Germany … it will, in the opinion of the Norwegian Government, be necessary to impose special terms on the Germans in those occupied countries which have not been evacuated at the time of Germany’s surrender.” The Norwegian Government accordingly submit a text of provisions for special terms of surrender for Germans in Norway, amounting to fourteen articles. The first of these reads: “The terms shall be notified to the Germans and their subordinates in Norway by two Allied plenipotentiaries, one of whom shall be appointed by the Norwegian Government.” The remaining thirteen articles provide detailed regulations for the control and disarmament of German forces and German-controlled organisations in Norway.

34. The Norwegian Government lay down a number of commercial, economic and political provisions which they say should be included in the general terms of surrender. In particular, they are specially concerned with German shipping and ship-building; they suggest that Germany should be forbidden to build whaling and sealing vessels, or to indulge in whaling and sealing; that the entire German Merchant fleet should be confiscated for the benefit of the Allies (subject to a possible exception for coastal shipping); that Germany should be obliged to receive on her territory persons who have become stateless as a consequence of an Allied country having deprived them of their citizenship by reason of breach of allegiance to that country; and that the Instrument of Surrender should include articles on the subject of war criminals.

Occupation of Germany.

35. The Norwegian Government “presume that it will be necessary to secure an effective military occupation of Germany after her surrender. Germany must be made to pay the cost of this occupation. Norway is willing to participate in the occupation with contingents corresponding to the country’s military capacity as regards manpower and war material, provided that the Norwegian Government is not thereby prevented from safeguarding vital national interests, and that the participation does not involve forces which are required for the maintenance of order in Norway or for the conduct of war.”

Allied Control Machinery in Germany.

36. “A Central Commission should be established under the direction of the Allied Governments in order to secure the enforcement of the terms of surrender. The countries which have suffered German occupation have a special interest in the solution of this question and the Norwegian Government therefore assume that these countries will be represented on such a Commission.”

37. “The occupation forces in a particular region of Germany should not issue orders or regulations except of local interest without the express approval of the Central Commission.”

Future Consultation and Association With the European Advisory Commission.

38. The Norwegian Government “would appreciate being given an opportunity to make supplementary proposals, or amendments, at a later date as they cannot claim to have stated in full all Norwegian wishes in this respect.”

39. The Norwegian Government “further assume that, when the special interests of any particular country are directly or indirectly concerned, the Governments of such countries will be consulted.”

40. The organisation of the Central Commission and of its subordinate organs and the definition of their powers must, in the opinion of the Norwegian Government, form the object of special discussions between the European Advisory Commission and the Governments of the countries having suffered occupation.

41. The Norwegian Foreign Minister states that he is personally at the disposal of the Commission for such explanations as they may wish him to give them as regards the various points raised in his Government’s reply.

London , 4 October, 1944.

[Enclosure 2]

Report by the Experts of the United Kingdom and United States Delegations

P12/12/44

Terms of Surrender to be imposed upon Germany and Machinery for their enforcement

Views of the Polish Government

Instrument of Surrender.

1. The Polish Government assume that, “in centra-distinction to a purely military armistice of the kind known in the pat, the terms of surrender at present under consideration will contain political, territorial and economic clauses which will become the basis of the Peace Treaty.”

2. “On this assumption, the Polish Government consider it to be of fundamental importance that already in the terms of capitulation Germany should renounce all rights to territories which are to be detached from her and which were within the frontiers of the Reich before the Nazi annexations, i.e. on 1st January, 1933. The Polish Government are vitally interested that Germany should renounce her claim to the free city of Danzig and her sovereignty over the territories of East Prussia, Oppeln Silesia with adequate extensions, and such territories between the River Oder and the Polish-German frontier of 1st September, 1939 which are to be acquired by Poland in connexion with the general settlement of the frontiers of Poland.”

3. “The articles of capitulation should stipulate for Allied control and administration of the Kiel Canal …59 The Polish Government are of the opinion that Poland, as Germany’s neighbour, with a Baltic coast, should be assured of participation in such arrangements. The Polish Government intend to submit at a later date more detailed observations on questions relating to the Western Baltic.”

4. “The Polish Government attach considerable importance to the obligation which Germany will assume by the terms of capitulation of receiving on her territory all persons of German extraction who will be expatriated from their territories—including the territories which Germany will lose as a result of this war—by the United Nations …”

5. The Polish Government make suggestions for inclusion in the Instrument of Surrender of provisions for disarmament; demilitarisation; reorganisation of German Police; transfer or destruction of German war industry; diminution of German raw material resources; complete abolition and prohibition of certain industries not exclusively devoted to war production; control of German finance; control of German trade; restitution; reparation; and war criminals.

6. “The Polish Government expect … that they will be invited to sign the articles of capitulation together with all the interested Allied Governments.”

Occupation of Germany.

7. “The Polish Government consider the occupation of the entire territory left to Germany as indispensable. Poland being vitally interested in the enforcement upon Germany of the whole of the armistice terms, the Polish Government attach the greatest importance to the participation of Polish troops in the occupation of Germany’s eastern provinces adjacent to the future Polish frontiers.”

Allied Control Machinery in Germany.

8. “The Polish Government expect that they will be fully represented on the Allied organs charged with the execution of the capitulation.”

Future Consultation and Association With the European Advisory Commission.

9. “The Polish Government trust that, when the time comes, they will have an opportunity to discuss with the European Advisory Commission or with the three Governments represented on it, the terms of Germany’s surrender proposed by this Commission. They will then present their observations in greater detail together with their full justification.”

London , 4 October, 1944.

54 None printed.

55 Letter and memorandum from the Polish Government dated September 6, transmitted to the Department in despatch 17985, September 12, from London; none printed.

* The experts of the Soviet Delegation declined to consider the reply of the Polish Government in London. [Footnote in the original.]

56 See letter of August 22, 1944, from the Chargé of the Delegation of the French Committee of National Liberation in London to the American Ambassador in the United Kingdom, p. 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56].

57 Omissions throughout this document indicated in the original report.

58 Brackets appear in the original.

59 Omissions throughout this document indicated in the original report.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/10–1944: Telegram

[Document 49]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 19, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received October 19—5:34 p.m.]

8951. Comea 114. I have been giving a good deal of thought to the question raised in Department’s 7884, September 27, 8 p.m.; Department’s 8605, October 17, midnight,60 and I fully sympathize with the desire to make some recognition of the Italian war effort. Before taking definite steps to ask the European Advisory Commission to invite Italy to present its views on German surrender arrangements I should like to consult the Department concerning several questions which are likely to arise in that connection.

One question is whether similar invitations should be extended to other co-belligerents. It is quite possible that the Soviet delegate, for example would take this opportunity to suggest that such an invitation be extended to Italy only if Rumania and Bulgaria are included. I should like to know what attitude the Department would want me to adopt in this case.

A second difficulty may be that placing Italy in the same relationship to the work of the EAC as the nine Allied Governments61 in Europe will lead some or all of those nine Governments to redouble their pressure for active participation in the settlement of the German surrender arrangements. The advantage secured in Italy by the proposed invitation might be more than offset by the reaction to it on the part of those Governments and peoples who have been on our side from the beginning.

The preamble to the instrument of surrender62 refers to the US, UK and Soviet Governments “acting in the interests of the United Nations”. Until or unless Italy becomes a member of the United Nations it is hard to see on what legal basis the Italian Government can participate in the formulation and imposition of the surrender. If Italy should fail to become a member of the United Nations prior to the German surrender it would seem from a juridical standpoint that some sort of separate surrender arrangement would have to be made between Germany on the one hand and Italy and other non-United Nations co-belligerents on the other. Would it not be putting the cart before the horse to try to bring Italy into the United Nations group by a back door invitation from the EAC? The more direct procedure of allowing Italy to adhere to the United Nations Declaration would resolve these difficulties.

Is it necessary or possible for the Italian Government to empower SCAEF to represent it in any surrender? There is no arrangement at present for such a delegation of powers by any of the United Nations and the surrender instruments state merely that the representatives of the supreme commands of the UK, US and USSR will be “acting by authority of their respective Governments”. It would seem premature to attempt to arrange for delegation of powers on the part of the Italian Government prior to arranging for similar delegations of powers by present members of the United Nations.

These considerations are based on an anticipation of the objections which the proposed suggestion is likely to meet in the Commission and which I am at present unprepared to meet. Careful thought will also have to be given to the timing of any such proposals in the EAC in order not to interrupt its progress in completing the basic agreements concerning occupation and control of Germany.63

Winant

60 Latter not printed; it reported on the receipt by the Department of the memorandum from the British Embassy dated October 4, p. 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47].

61 i.e., Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Greece, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Yugoslavia, and the French Committee of National Liberation.

62 For the text of the instrument of unconditional surrender of Germany, agreed to by the Representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union at a meeting of the European Advisory Commission at London on July 25, see p. 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 134].

63 Telegram 9606, November 15, 1944, midnight, to London, stated that the Department was inclined to agree that it was not necessary or desirable to have the EAC extend an invitation to the Italian Government to present its views on German surrender arrangements; the telegram also transmitted a summary of the memorandum of November 15 to the British Embassy, p. 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 53]. (740.00119–EAC/10–1944)

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00119 E.A.C./10–2644

[Document 50]

The British Embassy to the Department of State 64

October 18, 1944

Extract from telegram from Mr. Eden in Moscow dated October 18, 1944

I handed Molotov65 a separate note entitled “Participation of France and the Other Allied Governments in the Work of the European Advisory Commission”.

This note reviewed the history of French application of August 2266 to discuss German affairs with Commission and expressed the hope of His Majesty’s Government that Soviet Government would be willing to accept French proposal in view of importance of obtaining without delay authoritative French view on arrangements to be made in Germany. It was pointed out that this would not in any way prejudge attitude of the three Great Powers to any claims which the French might advance for a share in the occupation and control of Germany.

Advocated also giving the Commission discretion to invite other European Allied Governments who suffered from German aggression to send representatives to discuss questions connected with surrender of Germany in which these Governments had a direct interest.

Suggested the Commission should have discretion to inform other Allied Governments of substance of instrument of surrender and, where security permitted, to give them actual text in view of importance of these Governments being brought to agree to terms of surrender before they were presented to Germany.

In introducing my note I recalled that Marshal Stalin67 had said that we should need the little powers to help in policing Germany. I thought the time had come to bring into discussions at European Advisory Commission those who had suffered from German occupation. I attached much importance to small powers agreeing to instrument of surrender before it was handed to Germany.

M. Molotov said he thought discussion of several questions in the European Advisory Commission had not been finished, for example zones of occupation and control. On his opinion being asked M. Gousev said that there was still the question of control to be decided.

I pointed out that I was asking in my paper for the Commission to be authorised to meet the small allies and discuss with them. M. Molotov’s attitude towards the question of Allied Missions had not yet been decided; but he promised to examine my memorandum and to reply in due course.

As there was no time at our meeting I subsequently sent M. Molotov, under a letter asking for favourable consideration, a note entitled “Representation of Interests of the Other United Nations in Control of Germany”. It emphasised that, without prejudice to basic principle of Three Power responsibility and authority for control of Germany after her surrender, appropriate arrangements must be made for representation of interests in Germany of the other United Nations, particularly those who had suffered German aggression and removal of their citizens and property to Germany. It was a matter upon which the other European Allied Governments felt very strongly. The note recommended that in the interests of cordial relations between all United Nations the Soviet Government should instruct their representative at the European Advisory Commission to support our proposals.

64 Transmitted to the Director of the Office of European Affairs, James C. Dunn, by the First Secretary of the British Embassy, Michael Wright, on October 26, 1944.

65 Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov, People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union.

66 See letter of August 22, from the Chargé of the Delegation of the French Committee of National Liberation in London to the American Ambassador in the United Kingdom, p. 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56].

67 Iosif Vissarionovich Stalin, Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars of the Soviet Union.

The Soviet Ambassador (Gromyko) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/10–2944

[Document 51]

The Soviet Ambassador (Gromyko) to the Secretary of State

[Translation]

Washington, October 29, 1944.

Dear Mr. Secretary: I enclose herewith under instructions from the Soviet Government a memorandum on the question of the participation of France and other Allied Governments in the work of the European Advisory Commission.

Sincerely yours,

A. Gromyko

[Enclosure—Translation]

Memorandum

On the 16th of October the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Great Britain, A. Eden, transmitted to the People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the U.S.S.R., V. M. Molotov, a memorandum of the Government of Great Britain on the question of the participation of France and other Allied Governments in the work of the European Advisory Commission. In the memorandum it was stated that the Government of Great Britain supports the request of the French that they should be permitted to send a representative to the European Advisory Commission for the purpose of discussing the conditions of the surrender of Germany. It was further stated in the memorandum that “the Government of the United Kingdom suggests that the time has come to permit other European Allied Governments who have suffered from German aggression also to send representatives to be present in the Commission when and in such manner as the Commission may consider desirable in order to discuss any questions connected with the surrender of Germany in which these Governments are directly interested. It [the British Government]68 believes that the Government of the United States supports this view and will be grateful for the expression of the position of the Soviet Government.”

However, the British Government considers that in the interest of security the document concerning conditions of surrender of Germany cannot be communicated to other Allied Governments at the present time but that this may be done at a suitable time in the near future. In connection with this memorandum the Soviet Government has communicated the following to the British Government:

The question of the participation of France and of other Allied Governments has been considered by the representatives of the three Allied Governments in the European Advisory Commission in London but the Soviet Government considers that this question does not fall within the competency of the Advisory Commission but within the competency of the three Governments.

The point of view of the Soviet Government on the question of the participation of France and other Allied Governments in the work of the European Advisory Commission does not differ from the point of view of the British Government as set forth in the above-mentioned memorandum of the British Government. The Soviet Government considers that a French representative should be invited to take part in the discussions of German matters in the Commission. In addition the Soviet Government considers it necessary to examine the question of the permanent participation of France in the affairs of the European Advisory Commission. For its part the Soviet Government is in favor of the participation of a representative of the French provisional government in the affairs of the European Advisory Commission in the capacity of a fourth permanent member of the Commission. This is especially appropriate now that the three Allied Governments have recognized the provisional government of the French Republic. There is also no objection from the Soviet side against other representatives of Allied Governments being present in the Commission when and in such manner as the Commission considers it desirable as set forth in the British memorandum.

Likewise there is no objection from the Soviet side to the three Allied Governments authorizing the European Advisory Commission to inform the other Allied Governments of the contents of the document regarding the surrender of Germany in such manner and on such terms as are set forth in point 2 of the memorandum of the British Government.

A[ndrei] G[romyko]
October 29, 1944.

68 Brackets appear in the file translation.

The Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger) to the Counselor of the Netherlands Embassy (van Vredenburch) 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/11–444

[Document 52]

The Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger) to the Counselor of the Netherlands Embassy (van Vredenburch)

Washington, November 4, 1944.

My Dear Mr. van Vredenburch: Reference is made to your conversation on August 21, 1944 with Mr. Cumming69 of the Department regarding the participation of the Netherlands in the administration of Germany. You stated that the Netherlands authorities are considering the establishment of a training center for civil affairs officers in order that Dutch officials may be available for administrative duties in Germany at an early date after the liberation of the Netherlands.

The Department does not desire to discourage the Netherlands authorities from such a program. It is pointed out, however, that arrangements for the administration of Germany are currently under consideration by the European Advisory Commission in London and until agreement is reached upon the form of administration by this body, the Department is not in a position to express agreement with the Dutch plan here under reference.

It is assumed that the European Advisory Commission will provide an opportunity for the Netherlands Government and for the governments of other United Nations to express their views on such plans for administration of Germany as may be worked out by the Commission.

Very sincerely yours,

James W. Riddleberger

69 Hugh S. Cumming, Jr., Chief of the Division of Northern European Affairs.

The Department of State to the British Embassy 740.00119 EW/10–444

[Document 53]

The Department of State to the British Embassy

Memorandum

Mr. Alexander Kirk received from the Italian Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs a communication70 similar to that received by Sir Noel Charles and referred to in the British Memorandum of October 4 with respect to consideration of Italian views in the German surrender arrangements. The Italian request was submitted to the United States Representative on the European Advisory Commission and his observations71 have now been received. Careful consideration has likewise been given to the views expressed in the Embassy’s Memorandum under reference.

It is the view of the United States Government that sympathetic consideration should be given to the request of the Italian Government in recognition of Italian contribution to the war against Germany and the Italian co-belligerent position which has now been recognized by the United Nations as an acceptable working arrangement for a full year. It is, therefore, felt that the Italian request is not unreasonable and that it could to a certain extent be met without injury to the interests of any of the United Nations.

No objection is perceived by this Government in accepting for consideration and without obligation the views of the Italian Government with respect to the German surrender arrangements. While it is not considered necessary or desirable for the European Advisory Commission to invite the Italian Government to submit its views for consideration, it would seem appropriate to suggest to the Italian Government that they submit their views informally to the United States, United Kingdom and Soviet Governments through the representatives of those Governments in Rome for consideration. Mr. Kirk will be instructed to reply to the Italian Government in this sense.72 It is hoped that the British Government will find it possible to issue similar instructions to Sir Noel Charles.

When the Italian views have been received, this Government intends to forward them to its representative on the European Advisory Commission who will, in turn, introduce them into the Commission for consideration.

Washington , November 15, 1944.

70 Note of September 12, p. 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 45].

71 See telegram 8951, October 19, 7 p.m., from London, p. 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49].

72 Telegram 437, November 15, 9 p.m., to Rome, directed the American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy to delay his reply to the Italian Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs until the receipt of further instructions.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/12–1444: Telegram

[Document 54]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 14, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received December 15—7:30 a.m.]

11080. Comea 135. In accordance with a recent decision73 of the European Advisory Commission, invitations74 were issued yesterday, under date of December 12, B.I. [by?] Gousev as Chairman to the Governments of Belgium, Netherlands, Norway, Luxembourg, Greece and Czechoslovakia, for their representatives to meet with a committee of the Commission in order to receive information about the German surrender instrument and to discuss matters of special concern to their Governments in connection with the surrender instrument. The committee will hand to each representative individually a summary of the instrument which has been approved by the EAC and will discuss with him at later meetings any questions connected with the surrender instrument.

The Yugoslav Government is not included in the invitation as it has not replied to the letter of July 25 addressed to it by the EAC. The Polish Government is not included since the Soviet representative is instructed to refuse to take part in any dealings of the EAC with it. The United Kingdom Government is considering whether it would wish to consult the Polish Government either separately, or possibly in cooperation with the United States and France, regarding the surrender instrument. It is doubtful that such separate consultation is feasible since all members of the EAC are pledged not to disclose information and documents of the EAC to an outside government without the consent of all the representatives on the EAC.75

Winant

73 On December 7, 1944, the European Advisory Commission agreed to establish an Allied Consultation Committee to conduct discussions with representatives of the European Allied Governments. The Committee met for the first time on December 18, 1944, and met for the first time with representatives of the European Allied Governments on January 11, 1945.

74 Copy of letter of invitation transmitted to the Department as enclosure to despatch 19864, December 14, from London; neither printed.

75 In his telegram 11335, Comea 137, December 21, 6 p.m., Ambassador Winant reported that Strang had informed him and Gousev that the British Government would not inform the Polish Government of the contents of the German surrender instrument or consult it regarding this subject (740.00119 EAC/12–2144).

IV. Admission of France to full membership in the CommissionIV. Admission of France to full membership in the Commission

[55] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn)

[Washington,] August 14, 1944.

851.01/8–1444

[56] The Chargé of the Delegation of the French Committee of National Liberation in London (J. C. Paris) to the American Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

London, August 22, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/8–2844

[57] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 26, 1944—midnight. [Received August 27—2:30 a.m.]

740.00119 EAC/8–2644: Telegram

[58] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, September 5, 1944—midnight.

740.00119 European War/9–144: Telegram

[59] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , 11 September, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/9–1144

[60] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 19, 1944.

740.00119 E.A.C./9–1944

[61] The Delegation of the French Committee of National Liberation to the Department of State

September 19, 1944

740.00119 EAC/9–1944

[62] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 3, 1944—6 p.m. [Received October 3—4:44 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/10–344: Telegram

[63] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 9, 1944—4 p.m.

740.00119 European War/9–144: Telegram

[64] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 14, 1944—6 p.m. [Received October 14—2:40 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/10–1444: Telegram

[65] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 16, 1944—7 p.m.

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/10–1644: Telegram

[66] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, October 30, 1944—4 p.m.

740.00119 EW/9–144: Telegram

[67] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 3, 1944—7 p.m. [Received 7:21 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/11–344: Telegram

[68] The American Representative to the French Provisional Government (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, November 6, 1944—6 p.m. [Received 7:24 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/11–644: Telegram

[69] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 6, 1944—11 p.m. [Received November 6—9:10 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/11–644: Telegram

[70] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , November 7, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/11–744

[71] President Roosevelt to the Acting Secretary of State

[Hyde Park, N.Y.] November 8, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/11–844: Telegram

[72] The Acting Secretary of State to the American Representative to the French Provisional Government (Caffery)

Washington, November 8, 1944—4 p.m.

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/11–644: Telegram

[73] The American Representative to the French Provisional Government (Caffery) to the Acting Secretary of State

Paris, November 10, 1944—10 p.m. [Received November 10—7:50 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/11–1044: Telegram

[74] The American Representative to the French Provisional Government (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, November 20, 1944—4 p.m. [Received 5:10 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/11–2044: Telegram

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn) 851.01/8–1444

[Document 55]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn)

[Washington,] August 14, 1944.

Mr. Michael Wright of the British Embassy came in this morning for the purpose of informing the Department that on the occasion of the visit to London within the next few days of Mr. Massigli,76 Commissioner for Foreign Affairs in the French Committee, the British Government expects to take up with him questions now outstanding between the British Government and the French particularly with respect to the Levant.77 The British Government expects to have a general survey of the relationships between the French and the British and will expect to inform the United States and Soviet Governments of the conversations held with Massigli.

I told Mr. Wright that yesterday at a chance meeting with Mr. Alphand78 the latter had stated that he was proceeding to London today or tomorrow to be present at the signing of the agreements on civil administration in France and related matters,79 and that he expected thereafter to return immediately to Washington for the purpose of initiating negotiations with regard to lend-lease and mutual aid with respect to Continental France.80 Mr. Alphand said that he expected to take up also with the American Government other questions such as the participation of the French in questions related to Germany and the occupation of that country, and some other questions in the relationship between the French authorities and the United States Government. I said that I had told Mr. Alphand that we had received authorization to discuss civil affairs and connected matters with the French Committee of National Liberation, but that we had no authorization otherwise to deal with them on other than questions with regard to the administration in France and the relationship of the Allied forces thereto. I also said that questions related to the surrender and post-surrender treatment of Germany were being dealt with in the European Advisory Commission, and that that Commission was empowered to make and was making arrangements with a view to informing the other United Nations in Europe interested in the German questions of developments along that line, and the Commission would give the other United Nations most directly concerned an opportunity to state their views and comments on the question of Germany and the other enemy states in Europe. I said that the French authorities would be included in this arrangement for discussion of the matter, and that as I saw it now, the relationships with the Committee and under the arrangements which we had just arrived at in Washington with respect to the civil administration in France we felt that the French had every reason to believe that they would be included in at least informal discussions of matters concerning them, but that it was not possible for this Government to deal with the Committee as a Government of France. I said further that we thought the French Committee had been and was unduly apprehensive of the policies and attitude of this Government with regard to the position of France in the future, and that we were most anxious that France should take its proper place in the future developments in Europe and in the world.

I told all this to Mr. Wright because we have had indications that Mr. Eden81 expects to make promises to the Committee that they will be brought into discussions of postwar arrangements in Europe and the indications we have had are to the effect that Mr. Eden will probably go much farther in making promises to the French Committee than this Government would be willing to join in.

James Clement Dunn

76 René Massigli, Commissioner for Foreign Affairs in the French Committee of National Liberation, became Minister for Foreign Affairs on September 7, 1944, and French Ambassador at London on September 11, 1944.

77 For correspondence regarding recognition by the United States of the independence of Syria and Lebanon and the U.S. attitude on the question of treaty relations between those countries and France, see vol. v, pp. 774 ff.

78 Hervé Alphand, Director of Economic Affairs in the Commission for Foreign Affairs of the French Committee of National Liberation.

79 For correspondence regarding the concern of the United States over civil administration of France immediately following liberation from the Germans, see vol. iii, pp. 634 ff.

80 For correspondence regarding negotiations between the United States and France for a general Lend-Lease agreement to cover all French territories, see ibid., pp. 748 ff.

81 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

The Chargé of the Delegation of the French Committee of National Liberation in London (J. C. Paris) to the American Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/8–2844

[Document 56]

The Chargé of the Delegation of the French Committee of National Liberation in London (J. C. Paris) to the American Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)82

[Translation]

London, August 22, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: I have not failed to bring to the attention of the Provisional Government the letter83 which Your Excellency addressed to me under date of July 25 in your capacity as Chairman of the European Advisory Commission. The Provisional Government has taken note of this communication.

The surrender of Germany84 is of fundamental interest to France. Through its repercussions now or later it will affect the entire future of France, and France could certainly not consider herself bound by clauses in the working out of which she had not been associated.

The Provisional Government has, therefore, the sincerest desire to discuss as soon as possible all questions relating to the German surrender and it would be unreservedly pleased by the invitation addressed to it if it were to lead to such discussion. However, at present, the Commission seems to have in mind only the communication by the Provisional Government of a memorandum stating its views, which precludes the possibility of its knowing the views of the American, British and Soviet Governments and, at some future date, of defending its own opinions in oral discussion.

I am directed to express the firm hope that the members of the European Advisory Commission will take into account the abnormal character of the situation in which the Provisional Government is thus placed and that they will show a disposition to take, at the earliest possible moment, steps which would permit France to discuss the German problems with them under conditions which correspond to the extent of the French interests which are at stake.

Please accept, etc.

J[acques-Camille] Paris

82 Copy transmitted to the Department in despatch 17762, August 29, from London; received September 2. Copies of the letter were distributed to the British and Soviet Representatives on the European Advisory Commission.

83 Letter from the Chairman of the European Advisory Commission to the Foreign Ministers of Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, and Yugoslavia and to the Representatives in London of Greece and the French Committee of National Liberation, dated July 25, p. 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44].

84 For correspondence regarding the negotiations in the European Advisory Commission on the terms of surrender for Germany, see pp. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75] ff.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/8–2644: Telegram

[Document 57]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]

London, August 26, 1944—midnight.
[Received August 27—2:30 a.m.]

6970. Personal to the Secretary. In reading de Gaulle’s85 speech of yesterday,86 I could not help but connect it up with a letter written by the representative of the Free French in London87 to the EAC which I reported in my 6953.88 This impression was further strengthened by a call from Massigli this afternoon which was ostensibly to express his appreciation of the magnificent contribution made by our troops in France but which was in fact to support the contention of the Free French representative in London that under the changed circumstances they should be recognized as one of the four great powers in dealing with Germany. I told him I thought it was a time when persistence should be tempered with patience and that it would be well to inch along, which was a policy which at times you had followed with great success.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Winant

85 Gen. Charles de Gaulle, Chief of the French Provisional Government.

86 For text of General de Gaulle’s speech at the Paris City Hall, August 25, 1944, see Charles de Gaulle, Discours et Messages, 1940–1946 (Paris, Editions Berger–Levrault, 1946), p. 476.

87  Supra.

88 Telegram 6953, August 26, 7 p.m., not printed; it transmitted a summary of the letter printed supra.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 European War/9–144: Telegram

[Document 58]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, September 5, 1944—midnight.

7185. Referring to your telegrams 6953, August 26, 7 p.m.,89 and 7138, September 1, 8 p.m.,90 the Department is prepared to meet the request of the French National Committee of Liberation for an opportunity to consult with the EAC on those questions directly affecting French interests.

Accordingly you are authorized to agree to the submission to the representatives of the French National Committee of Liberation of the text of the instrument of unconditional surrender for Germany91 and to an invitation to the French to consult with the Commission with regard to the surrender terms and other questions arising from them.

Hull

89 See footnote 88, p. 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57].

90  Post, p. 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 155].

91 For text of the Instrument of Surrender for Germany, see p. 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 134].

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00119 EAC/9–1144

[Document 59]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

With reference to their communication of August 14th92 regarding proposed conversations in London between Mr. Eden and Monsieur Massigli, His Majesty’s Embassy is instructed to communicate to the State Department the outcome of these conversations.

2. Monsieur Massigli discussed the attitude of the French Committee to the European Advisory Commission as well as towards security against renewed German aggression. He also discussed the position in Indo-China and the Levant and the French attitude towards the combined boards and towards rubber and oil questions.

3. Enclosed are three notes giving the substance of views expressed at these talks on respectively the combined boards, rubber and oil, Indo-China, and the European Advisory Commission and security against German aggression.93 As regards the Levant States, a general exchange of views took place without any particular decisions having been reached.

Washington , 11 September, 1944.

[Annex]

European Advisory Commission and Security Against German Aggression

Monsieur Massigli said that the French Committee had decided to reply to invitation from European Advisory Commission that it did not meet vital interests of France merely to send written views about terms of surrender without any previous knowledge of the conclusions which had been reached by the Commission. They accordingly proposed formally to ask the Commission to allow a French representative to take part in oral discussion of terms of surrender, within the Commission. In the French view it was impossible to draw up terms of surrender for Germany without French participation. They attached the greatest importance to terms of surrender effacing Armistice of 194094 and this meant that Germany must not be able to say that she had only surrendered to the Three Powers.

It was suggested to Monsieur Massigli that it would be better to begin by giving French written views as requested by Commission, but he maintained that this would be useless until there had been an opportunity for discussion. The Secretary of State94a told him he thought that in view of strong French feeling on this subject he was entitled to put his alternative proposal to Commission, particularly as the latter was authorized by its charter to consult representatives of other countries when their interests were specially concerned.

Monsieur Massigli also expressed the view that importance of France in European affairs generally entitled her to full membership in European Advisory Commission. He was advised not to raise this question before a French Government had been established in France.

Security against renewed German aggression. Monsieur Massigli took the line that all planning for future security in Europe must be closely linked with policy of proper occupation and control of Germany. In the French view long-term policy must govern occupation plans from the outset, or the latter would achieve nothing, as last time. He developed in general terms the idea of placing under permanent international control what he described as Rheno-Westphalian Basin, the heart of Germany’s war potential. Although this area would remain under German administration and would not necessarily be completely severed from the rest of Germany, it would be permanently kept under Allied political, military and economic control. The special area would include industrial regions around Frankfurt and Mannheim. Monsieur Massigli also thought it essential that there should be permanent Allied military control of a stretch in the eastern bank of the Rhine running between southern boundary of special area and Switzerland.

The Secretary of State took note of this suggestion, which appears to be an alternative to dismemberment, and promised to have it examined by experts. Meanwhile the Secretary of State indicated arrangements which we had in mind would provide for complete disarmament both military and economic of Germany and for Allied military control of the whole country so long as required for this purpose. The powers which we proposed taking would be continuing and comprehensive. We were alive to the defects of the Armistice and control arrangements made at the end of last war.

92 See memorandum by the Director of the Office of European Affairs dated August 14, p. 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 55].

93 The note on the European Advisory Commission is printed as Annex below. The note on Combined Boards, rubber and oil, and the note on Indo-China are not printed. For information on the establishment and function of the Combined Boards (Anglo-American and Anglo-American-Canadian) for raw materials, food, production and resources, and shipping adjustment, see Department of State Bulletin, January 16, 1943, pp. 67–69. For correspondence regarding the Combined Boards, see vol. ii, pp. 16 ff, passim. For correspondence regarding the Anglo-American petroleum discussions and agreement of August 8, 1944, see vol. iii, pp. 94 ff. For correspondence regarding the discussions on the future status of French Indo-China, see ibid., pp. 769 ff.

94 For text of the German-French Armistice Treaty of June 22, 1940, see Documents on German Foreign Policy, 1918–1945, series D. vol. ix (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1956), p. 671. For correspondence regarding the invasion of France by Germany and the collapse of French resistance, see Foreign Relations, 1940, vol. i, pp. 217 ff.

94a Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 740.00119 E.A.C./9–1944

[Document 60]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 19, 1944.

The French Delegate95 called at his request. He said that his “Government” desired first to thank this Government for turning back to him and his associates the French embassy for reoccupation by them.96

He then handed me a note, copy of which is hereto attached,97 relating to the desires of the present French authorities in France to be placed on the European Advisory Commission in London.

I thanked him and said the matter would be given early and full attention, and that I would confer with my associates and pass it on to the President.

C[ordell] H[ull]

95 Henri Hoppenot, Delegate of the French Committee of National Liberation and later of the French Provisional Government.

96 For correspondence regarding the recognition by the United States of the French Provisional Government on October 23, 1944, see vol. iii, pp. 634 ff.

97  Infra.

The Delegation of the French Committee of National Liberation to the Department of State 740.00119 EAC/9–1944

[Document 61]

The Delegation of the French Committee of National Liberation to the Department of State 98

September 19, 1944

[Translation]

Following the note addressed on July 2599 by the President of the European Advisory Commission to the French Chargé d’Affaires in London, the Provisional Government of the French Republic has already had the opportunity to emphasize the vital interest it takes in the discussions which are being held at present between the American, British, and Soviet Governments concerning the armistice conditions with Germany and, more generally, the essential importance that France attaches to all questions pertaining to the German problem.

The Provisional Government of the French Republic has now settled in its normal seat in the French capital, wherefrom the Allied armies have chased the enemy with the participation of the French people. Until free elections become possible, it is backed by the unanimous and enthusiastic adhesion of the liberated population.

Therefore, the Provisional Government has the duty to call the attention of the Governments of Washington, London, and Moscow to a question which requires an immediate solution in view of the present accelerated pace of military operations. While the problem of the German capitulation is one of vital importance to France, the other questions which will arise from the collapse of the Reich cannot leave her unconcerned, particularly: the restoration of the countries invaded by Germany, the eventual setting of new frontiers, and, generally speaking, the reestablishment of fruitful and peaceful relations between the states of continental Europe—all questions which will have to be dealt with by the European Advisory Commission during the following weeks.

Therefore, the Provisional Government of the French Republic has the honor to request the American, British, and Soviet Governments to be admitted to sit on the Commission so as to allow France to take her part in the task of the reconstruction and reorganization of Europe. It trusts that this request will meet the views of those Governments and will be pleased to send a representative to the Commission as soon as it receives an invitation to do so.

98 Handed to the Secretary of State on September 19, 1944. The Department informed Ambassador Winant of this communication in its telegram 8037 to London, October 2, 1944, 7 p.m., and added: “It is suggested that you endeavor through your colleagues on the Commission to ascertain the views of their Governments on the French request. If they ask for your views, you may say that final decision has not been reached but that matter is receiving sympathetic consideration.” (740.00119 E.A.C. 9–1944)

99 See p. 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/10–344: Telegram

[Document 62]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 3, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received October 3—4:44 p.m.]

8273. Department’s 8037, October 2, 7 p.m.1 With reference to the request of the French Committee that its representative be admitted to sit on the European Advisory Commission I am glad to have your comment. Although this matter has never been officially before the EAC and might be favored by the British, I am certain that the Russians would be violently against it and I believe it would be a mistake to introduce any other national element into the Commission until the military phase is established, following the surrender of Germany. The essential task in the EAC at the present time is to reach agreed conclusion on a tripartite basis.

Winant

1 See footnote 98, p. 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 European War/9–144: Telegram

[Document 63]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 9, 1944—4 p.m.

8284. You were authorized by Department’s 71852 to agree to submit to French the text of German surrender terms and to invite them to consult with EAC regarding those terms and questions arising therefrom.

We understand that British are in agreement with this procedure but that Soviet representative remains without instructions.

We believe that in view of deep interest of this subject to the French, we should no longer delay consulting them, and you are therefore requested to take steps to that end within the Commission on the understanding that such consultation will not in any way prejudice our future position with respect to including France in the control machinery for Germany.

For your information we contemplate notifying the French informally of our willingness to have the question of German surrender terms fully discussed with them in the EAC in order that they may not be in doubt concerning our position in the matter.

Repeated to Paris and Moscow for their information.

Hull

2 Dated September 5, midnight, p. 88 [Pg. 88 includes portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/10–1444: Telegram

[Document 64]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 14, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received October 14—2:40 p.m.]

8743. Comea3 111. Department’s 8384 [8284], October 9, 4 p.m. In my opinion it would be a great mistake to introduce the French question into the deliberations of the European Advisory Commission until the basic military papers have been cleared with the Russians and the British.

Winant

3 Series designation for telegrams from London dealing with matters before the European Advisory Commission.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/10–1644: Telegram

[Document 65]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 16, 1944—7 p.m.

8547. Reurtel 8743, October 14. Caffery4 in Paris was authorized on October 135 to speak to the French informally along lines of final paragraph of Deptel 8284, October 9. I had assumed that since no objection had been received from you by that time that you were in agreement.

In our opinion it is important that the French be aware at this time of our willingness to discuss the German surrender terms with them within the EAC. This does not mean that the discussions need take place immediately, and it may even be that the Soviet representative will continue to oppose the suggestion. In such an event the French would at least appreciate that this Government was not standing in the way of their request.

While you state that you believe it would be a mistake “to introduce” the French question into EAC deliberations pending clearance of the basic military papers, we are told by the British Embassy that their representative on the Commission has raised the specific point which we are now discussing on at least two occasions and will probably do so again. Our immediate purpose is to place ourselves on record in support of the proposal already introduced by the British which we consider fair and reasonable.

Hull

4 Jefferson Caffery, United States Representative, with personal rank of Ambassador, to the de facto French Authority at Paris; Ambassador in France from November 25, 1944.

5 By the Department’s telegram 146 to Paris, not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) 740.00119 EW/9–144: Telegram

[Document 66]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, October 30, 1944—4 p.m.

9048. As indicated in Department’s 7185, September 5, we have been willing for the French to be consulted in the EAC on the German surrender terms and related subjects. Since American, British and Soviet Governments are now in agreement on this point,6 you are instructed to associate yourself with the invitation which the British Government now proposes be extended by the Chairman of the EAC7 to the French Ambassador at London8 to consult with the Commission on the above mentioned subjects.

Hoppenot has been informally told of our action here.

Sent to London as no. 9048, repeated to Paris as no. 301.

Stettinius

6 See the extract from telegram from Eden in Moscow dated October 18, 1944, transmitted to the Department by the British Embassy on October 26, and the Soviet memorandum of October 29, pp. 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 50], and 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], respectively.

7 Sir William Strang, United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission. Chairmanship of the Commission rotated monthly among the representatives of the three participating powers.

8 René Massigli.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/11–344: Telegram

[Document 67]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 3, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received 7:21 p.m.]

9552. Comea 118. Embassy’s 9323, October 28, 7 p.m.9 Strang reported to Mosely10 today that Gousev11 has informed Massigli of favorable Soviet attitude toward permanent French representation on the European Advisory Commission. Strang has now circulated to US and Soviet delegates a draft letter from EAC Chairman to the French Ambassador inviting the French Government to designate its representative “in order to take part in the consideration of German affairs when these questions are on the Commission’s agenda”. According to Strang, Gousev, appears willing to accept this text and to agree at an early EAC meeting, probably oil November 6, to issue this invitation. In accordance with instructions transmitted in Department’s 9048, October 30, 4 p.m., US Delegation will associate itself with this invitation.12

In private conversation today with de Jean,13 Director of Quai d’Orsay Political Department, Strang has urged French not to upset tripartite agreements on occupation zones and control machinery by abrupt injection of French desiderata. Early appearance of a French delegate in the EAC renders even more urgent completion of the Anglo-American amendment to the protocol on zones of occupation and earliest possible approval of the amended protocol in the EAC.14 Please show this to Mr. Winant.

Gallman

9 Not printed; it reported on a note handed by British Foreign Secretary Eden to Soviet Foreign Commissar Molotov on October 16 and a Soviet aide-mémoire in reply dated October 26; the exchange had to do with the presentation to the EAC of the French Government’s views regarding the future of Germany and consultation with European Allied Governments regarding the surrender instrument for Germany (740.00119 EAC/10–2844). For a summary of Eden’s note of October 16, see the extract from a telegram from Mr. Eden dated October 18, p. 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 50]. For text of the memorandum of October 29 presented by the Soviet Ambassador to the Secretary of State and similar to the Soviet aide-mémoire of October 26 to the British Foreign Office, see p. 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51].

10 Philip E. Mosely, Political Adviser to the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission and Acting United States Representative to the E.A.C. during Ambassador Winant’s trip to Washington, October 26–November 18.

11 Fedor Tarasovich Gousev, Soviet Ambassador in the United Kingdom and Representative to the European Advisory Commission.

12 Acting Secretary of State Stettinius replied in telegram 9232, November 4, 1944, 2 p.m., “You should as instructed associate this Government with the invitation to the French.” (740.00119 EAC/11–344)

13 Maurice Dejean, Director General of Political Affairs in the French Foreign Ministry.

14 On November 14, 1944, the representatives of the United States, United Kingdom, and Soviet Union on the European Advisory Commission signed an Amending Agreement to the Protocol on Zones of Occupation in Germany and the Administration of “Greater Berlin”. For text, see Department of State, Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS) 3071, p. 9, or United States Treaties and Other International Agreements, vol. 5, pt. 2, p. 2087. For correspondence regarding the discussions in the European Advisory Commission concerning this agreement, see pp. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75] ff.

The American Representative to the French Provisional Government (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/11–644: Telegram

[Document 68]

The American Representative to the French Provisional Government (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, November 6, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received 7:24 p.m.]

351. Bidault15 showed me this afternoon very confidentially a note from the Russian Ambassador here16 setting out that after conversations in regard to the European Advisory Commission with our Government and the British, it had been decided to issue the well-known invitation to Massigli. The Russian Ambassador went on to say that his Government had come to the conclusion that France should be invited to become a permanent member of the Commission and had so communicated to our Government17 and the British but had not yet had a reply in the premises from us or the British.

Caffery

15 Georges Bidault, French Foreign Minister from September 9, 1944.

16 Alexander Efremovich Bogomolov.

17 Presumably a reference to the Soviet memorandum of October 29, p. 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51].

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/11–644: Telegram

[Document 69]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]18

London, November 6, 1944—11 p.m.
[Received November 6—9:10 p.m.]

9643. For the Secretary and the Under Secretary. Department’s 9232, November 4, 2 p.m.19 At a long and useful meeting tonight of the European Advisory Commission, it was agreed to invite the French Provisional Government to appoint its representative “to take part in the consideration of German affairs”. The question of French participation in discussing Austrian affairs was left open. The letter of invitation,20 which goes forward tomorrow, does not make France a permanent member.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Gallman

18 The remainder of this telegram is printed on p. 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 192].

19 See footnote 12, p. 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 67].

20  The letter from the Acting Chairman of the Commission, Philip Mosely, to Ambassador Massigli, dated November 7, 1944, read as follows: “In a letter dated August 22nd to the Chairman of the European Advisory Commission, Monsieur Paris set forth the views of the Provisional Government of the French Republic as regards the participation of a French representative in the discussions in the Commission on questions relating to the surrender of Germany.

“I am happy to inform you, on behalf of the Commission, that the members of the Commission will be glad if a French representative will join them in order to take part in the consideration of German affairs.

“The Commission will be glad to learn the name of the French representative who will be designated for this purpose.” (EAC Files, Lot 52 M64, file “215—France”.)

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00119 EAC/11–744

[Document 70]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

His Majesty’s Government have now heard from French Embassy that the Soviet Government immediately informed M. Massigli of their decision in favour of permanent French membership of the European Advisory Commission. His Majesty’s Government and the United States Government cannot therefore delay much longer their own decision on the French request.

In the opinion of His Majesty’s Government the balance of advantage lies in favour of acceding to French request.

His Majesty’s Government have repeatedly declared it is their aim to restore greatness of France. The Prime Minister21 has recently spoken in the House of Commons of the importance of including representatives of France in all Allied discussions affecting the Rhine and German settlement and has expressed his desire to see France take her place at the earliest moment in the high counsels of the Allies. Moreover, with full support of His Majesty’s Government it has been provided in Dumbarton Oaks proposals22 that France shall in due course become a permanent member of Security Council of future world organisation. It seems to follow therefore that admission of France as an equal and permanent member of European Advisory Commission is a logical next step along the road towards her restoration as a great power. Both the French Provisional Government and the French people are known to attach the greatest importance to full membership of the European Advisory Commission. Failure to give the French satisfaction on this point, particularly now that the Soviet Government have come out in favour of meeting their requests, might seriously prejudice relations with the French. The present time is a critical one in the formation of future French foreign policy and it would be dangerous to risk inclining France away from western democracies.

His Majesty’s Government accordingly desire to accede to French request and propose that Prime Minister should so inform French Provisional Government during visit which he and Mr. Eden are going to make to Paris in the near future.23

His Majesty’s Government are most anxious to keep in step in this matter with the United States Government and earnestly hope that they will also feel able to accede to French request. If so, His Majesty’s Government propose that their respective statements should be communicated to French Provisional Government on the same day, Saturday, November 11th, and that arrangements should be made with the Soviet Government to publish the decision of the three Governments simultaneously.

Washington , November 7, 1944.

21 Winston S. Churchill.

22 For correspondence regarding conversations at Dumbarton Oaks, August 21–October 7, 1944, on the establishment of the international organization for the maintenance of international peace and security, see pp. 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419] ff.

23 Prime Minister Churchill arrived in Paris on November 10.

President Roosevelt to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/11–844: Telegram

[Document 71]

President Roosevelt to the Acting Secretary of State

[Hyde Park, N.Y.] November 8, 1944.

Approve French Membership on European Advisory Commission to be announced November 11th, but this should be so worded as to make advisory character of Commission clear.

The Acting Secretary of State to the American Representative to the French Provisional Government (Caffery) 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/11–644: Telegram

[Document 72]

The Acting Secretary of State to the American Representative to the French Provisional Government (Caffery)

Washington, November 8, 1944—4 p.m.

366. Department’s 363, November 8.24 This Government will be happy to accept France as full member of European Advisory Commission.

As indicated in Department’s telegram under reference British propose that Prime Minister inform French of British concurrence during his visit to Paris. Time and manner of informing French of this Government’s concurrence is left to your judgment.

We agree to proposal that statements of American, British and Soviet Governments be communicated to French on November 11 and that the publication of decision be simultaneous. Please so inform your British and Soviet colleagues and correlate with them the necessary arrangements at the same time keeping us fully informed so that we may make arrangements for release here at the time selected by you.

Text of this Government’s statement will be sent to you shortly.25

London and Moscow informed.

Stettinius

24 Not printed; it reported receipt of the British Embassy’s aide-mémoire of November 7, p. 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], and stated that the matter had been referred to President Roosevelt for decision (740.00119 EAC/11–644).

25 For the statement regarding full membership for the Provisional Government of France on the European Advisory Commission, released to the press on November 11, 1944, see Department of State Bulletin, November 12, 1944, p. 583. The text of this statement was sent in telegram 383, November 9, 8 p.m., to Paris (740.00119 EAC/11–944).

The American Representative to the French Provisional Government (Caffery) to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/11–1044: Telegram

[Document 73]

The American Representative to the French Provisional Government (Caffery) to the Acting Secretary of State

Paris, November 10, 1944—10 p.m.
[Received November 10—7:50 p.m.]

449. The Russian Ambassador came to see me this morning and suggested the text of the following press statement to be issued tomorrow. I agreed subject to Duff Cooper’s26 agreeing when I see him this afternoon.

Later: Duff Cooper has agreed.

“On November 11, 1944 the Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Great Britain and the United States of America, Messrs. Bogomolov, Duff Cooper and Caffery, made a joint declaration to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Provisional Government of the French Republic, M. Georges Bidault, that their Governments had agreed to invite the Provisional Government of the French Republic to participate in the work of the Consultative Commission on European Affairs in London as the fourth permanent member of that Commission. The Ambassadors of the U.S. of America, Great Britain and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics expressed to M. Bidault their conviction that the cooperation of the representatives of their countries on the Consultative Commission on European Affairs with their French colleague will help to prepare the way for a solid and durable peace in Europe founded upon democracy, order and justice.”

Caffery

26 Alfred Duff Cooper, British Ambassador in France.

The American Representative to the French Provisional Government (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/11–2044: Telegram

[Document 74]

The American Representative to the French Provisional Government (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, November 20, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received 5:10 p.m.]

594. In a note signed by Bidault dated November 17, 194427 which I have just received, the Provisional Government formally accepts the invitation conveyed to it on November 11 to become a permanent member of the European Advisory Commission.28 The note states in part that the Provisional Government appreciates the full value of the invitation and requests me to transmit its acceptance to the Government of the United States, copy of note being transmitted by despatch.29

Caffery

27 Not printed.

28 René Massigli, French Ambassador in the United Kingdom, was designated French Representative to the European Advisory Commission and took his seat in the Commission for the first time at the formal meeting held on November 27, 1944.

29 Despatch 194, November 20, 1944, not printed.

V. Questions of terms of surrender, zones of occupation, and control machinery for GermanyV. Questions of terms of surrender, zones of occupation, and control machinery for Germany30

30 For further documentation on this subject, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, 1945, section on pre-conference documents, Germany: “Agreements prepared in the European Advisory Commission”, pp. 110–133, and “Political and economic policies toward Germany”, pp. 134–197. Additional documentation regarding the formulation of political and economic policies toward Germany will be included in the material on the Second Quebec Conference, September 11–16, 1944, which is scheduled for publication in a subsequent volume of Foreign Relations.

[75] Memorandum by the Working Security Committee

[Washington,] January 3, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/1–344

[76] Memorandum by the Working Security Committee

[Washington,] January 6, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/1–644

[77] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 8, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 7:13 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/38: Telegram

[78] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 15, 1944—9 p.m.

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/38: Telegram

[79] Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)

London, 15 January, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/53

[80] Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)

London, 15 January, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/53

[81] Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)

London, 15 January, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/53

[82] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 19, 1944—11 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/52: Telegram

[83] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 20, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 8 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/57: Telegram

[84] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , January 21, 1944.

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/72

[85] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 21, 1944—5 p.m.

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/58a: Telegram

[86] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 27, 1944—4 p.m. [Received January 27—3:15 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/64: Telegram

[87] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 29, 1944—6 p.m. [Received 6:13 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/68: Telegram

[88] The Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn) to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 2, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/68

[89] President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill)

[Washington,] 7 February 1944.

[90] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 12, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/142

[91] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, February 16, 1944—7 p.m. [Received February 16—5:58 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/89: Telegram

[92] Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Acting Secretary of State

Washington, February 18, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/126

[93] Memorandum by the Representative of the Soviet Union to the European Advisory Commission (Gousev)

London, 18 February, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/97

[94] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] February 19, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/126

[95] The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt

London, February 23, 1944.

740.00119 EW/6–244: Telegram

[96] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 25, 1944—2 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/142: Telegram

[97] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 26, 1944—5 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/89: Telegram

[98] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 26, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/2109

[99] President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill)

Washington, February 29, 1944.

[100] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, March 2, 1944—8 p.m. [Received 10:32 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/103: Telegram

[101] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 3, 1944—10 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/104: Telegram

[102] Memorandum by the United States Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Winant)

London, March 3, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/3–444

[103] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 6, 1944—10 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/103: Telegram

[104] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 8, 1944.

800.0146/298

[105] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, March 10, 1944—noon. [Received March 10—8:55 a.m.]

740.00119 EAC/113: Telegram

[106] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 16, 1944—3 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/113: Telegram

[107] Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)

London, 22 March, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/146

[108] The Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn) to the Director of the Civil Affairs Division of the War Department (Hilldring)

Washington, April 5, 1944.

800.0146/298

[109] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, April 10, 1944—6 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/160a: Telegram

[110] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, May 1, 1944—11 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/172c: Telegram

[111] Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)

London, 2 May, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/179

[112] Memorandum by the United States and United Kingdom Representatives to the European Advisory Commission (Winant and Strang)

London, 15 May, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/187

[113] President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill)

[Washington,] 27 May, 1944.

[114] The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt

[London,] 31 May, 1944.

[115] Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)

London, 31 May 1944.

740.00119 EAC/195

[116] Memorandum by the Military Adviser to the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Wickersham)

[London,] June 1, 1944.

EAC Files: File 144 IThe files of the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission, while regarded as a part of the files of the American Embassy in London, were maintained separately from the latter files and form a separate documentary collection in the Department of State files.

[117] President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill)

[Washington,] 2 June, 1944.

[118] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 10, 1944—5 p.m. [Received June 10—4:10 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/198: Telegram

[119] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 10, 1944—10 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/198a: Telegram

[120] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 12, 1944—8 p.m.

740.00113 EW 1939/1429: Telegram

[121] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 22, 1944—5 p.m. [Received June 22—4:45 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/207: Telegram

[122] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, June 29, 1944—3 p.m. [Received 9:40 p.m.]

740.00113 E.W./6–2944: Telegram

[123] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 1, 1944—3 a.m. [Received 5:20 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/7–144: Telegram

[124] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 4, 1944—6 p.m.

740.00113 E.W./7–144: Telegram

[125] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 6, 1944—10 a.m.

740.00119 EAC/7–644: Telegram

[126] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, July 8, 1944—9 a.m. [Received 2:30 p.m.]

740.00113 E.W./7–844: Telegram

[127] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 8, 1944—8 p.m. [Received July 8—6:16 p.m.]

740.00119 E.A.C./7–844: Telegram

[128] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 11, 1944. [Received July 18.]

740.00119 EAC/7–1144

[129] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 11, 1944. [Received July 18.]

740.00119 EAC/7–1144

[130] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, July 14, 1944—11 a.m.

740.00113 EW/7–844: Telegram

[131] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 15, 1944—2 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/206: Telegram

[132] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 20, 1944—8 p.m. [Received 11:23 p.m.]

740.00113 EW/7–2044: Telegram

[133] Memorandum by the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn) to Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy

[Washington,] July 22, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/7–2244

[134] Minutes of the Seventh Formal Meeting of the European Advisory Commission, Lancaster House, London, July 25, 1944, 6 p.m.

London , 25 July, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/7–2644

[135] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 28, 1944—3 p.m. [Received July 28—12:43 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/7–2844: Telegram

[136] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 4, 1944—midnight.

740.00119 EAC/8–444: Telegram

[137] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 4, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/8–444

[138] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 8, 1944—3 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/8–844: Telegram

[139] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 9, 1944—1 p.m. [Received August 9—8:23 a.m.]

740.00119 EAC/8–944: Telegram

[140] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 9, 1944—2 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/8–944: Telegram

[141] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to Mr. Harry L. Hopkins, Special Assistant to President Roosevelt

London, August 10, 1944—1:30 a.m. [Received 4:35 a.m.]

[142] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 10, 1944—3 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/8–1044: Telegram

[143] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 10, 1944—6 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/8–944: Telegram

[144] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 11, 1944—9 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/8–944: Telegram

[145] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 16, 1944—1 p.m. [Received August 16—9:45 a.m.]

740.00119 EAC/8–1644: Telegram

[146] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 16, 1944—4 p.m.

740.00113 E.W./7–2044: Telegram

[147] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 16, 1944—11 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/8–1644: Telegram

[148] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 19, 1944—midnight. [Received August 20—1 a.m.]

740.00119 EAC/8–1944: Telegram

[149] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 21, 1944—8 p.m. [Received August 21—3:20 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/8–2144: Telegram

[150] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 22, 1944—midnight.

840.50/8–1444: Telegram

[151] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Stimson)

Washington, August 24, 1944.

862.50/8–2444

[152] Memorandum by the Representative of the Soviet Union to the European Advisory Commission (Gousev)

London, 26 August, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/8–2844

[153] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 28, 1944—5 p.m. [Received August 28—11:25 a.m.]

740.00113 EW/8–2844: Telegram

[154] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] August 28, 1944.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2844

[155] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 1, 1944—8 p.m. [Received September 1—7:25 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/9–144: Telegram

[156] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, September 5, 1944—midnight.

740.00113 E.W./8–2644: Telegram

[157] The Political Adviser to the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Mosely) to the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger)

London, September 5, 1944.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–544

[158] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 10, 1944—3 p.m. [Received September 10—12:30 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/9–1044: Telegram

[159] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 16, 1944—3 p.m. [Received September 16—11:22 a.m.]

740.00113 EW/9–1644: Telegram

[160] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, September 16, 1944.

740.00119 E.A.C./9–1644

[161] Memorandum by the Working Security Committee

[Washington,] August 30, 1944.

[162] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 17, 1944—9 p.m. [Received 9:10 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/9–1744: Telegram

[163] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, September 20, 1944—7 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/9–2044: Telegram

[164] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 21, 1944—11 p.m. [Received September 21—8:23 p.m.]

740.00119 E.A.C./9–2144: Telegram

[165] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 29, 1944—5 p.m. [Received September 29—2:41 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/9–2944: Telegram

[166] The Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of State

Washington, September 29, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/9–2944

[167] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington, September 29, 1944.]

CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 2057: Matthews Files

[168] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 3, 1944—6 p.m. [Received October 3—5:30 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/10–344: Telegram

[169] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 3, 1944—midnight.

740.00119 E.A.C./10–344: Telegram

[170] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 7, 1944—8 p.m. [Received 8:10 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/10–744: Telegram

[171] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 9, 1944—1 p.m. [Received October 9—9:14 a.m.]

740.00119 EAC/10–944: Telegram

[172] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 10, 1944—midnight.

740.00119 EAC/10–1044: Telegram

[173] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 18, 1944—4 p.m. [Received October 18—2 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/10–1844: Telegram

[174] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 19, 1944.

740.00119 E W/10–1344

[175] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 19, 1944—midnight.

740.00113 EW/9–1644: Telegram

[176] The Secretary of State to Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy

Washington, October 19, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/9–2944

[177] Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

Washington, October 20, 1944.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2044

[178] Memorandum by the Political Adviser to the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Mosely) of Conversation With the British Representative (Strang)

[London,] October 21, 1944.

740.0011 EW/10–2144

[179] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, October 22, 1944—2 p.m. [Received 3:22 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/10–2244: Telegram

[180] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 24, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/10–2444

[181] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 25, 1944—10 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/10–1844: Telegram

[182] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, October 26, 1944—8 p.m. [Received October 26—5:55 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/10–2644: Telegram

[183] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, October 27, 1944—midnight.

740.00119 EAC/10–2644: Telegram

[184] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, October 27, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 10:44 p.m.]

740.00113 E.W./10–2744: Telegram

[185] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, October 30, 1944—7 p.m.

740.00113 E.W./9–1644: Telegram

[186] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 1, 1944—6 p.m. [Received November 1—4:25 p.m.]

740.00113 E.W./9–1644: Telegram

[187] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, November 2, 1944.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2844

[188] The Secretary of the Treasury (Morgenthau) to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Washington, November 3, 1944.

740.00119 E.W./11–344

[189] The Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy) to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Washington, 4 November, 1944.

740.00119 E.W./11–444

[190] Memorandum by the Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs (Matthews) to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

[Washington,] November 4, 1944.

740.00119 E.W./11–344

[191] Draft Memorandum

undated

740.00119 E.W./11–444

[192] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 6, 1944—11 p.m. [Received November 6—9:10 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/11–644: Telegram

[193] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, November 7, 1944—8 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/11–644: Telegram

[194] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, November 7, 1944—11 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/11–744: Telegram

[195] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 9, 1944—8 p.m. [Received November 9—6:31 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/11–944: Telegram

[196] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 10, 1944—2 p.m. [Received November 10—11:15 a.m.]

740.00119 EAC/11–1044: Telegram

[197] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Washington, 10 November, 1944.

740.0011 European War/11–1044

[198] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 11, 1944—10 a.m. [Received November 11—9:36 a.m.]

740.00119 EAC/11–1144: Telegram

[199] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, November 11, 1944—noon.

740.00119 EAC/11–944: Telegram

[200] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, November 11, 1944, 4 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/11–944: Telegram

[201] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Acting Secretary of State

London, November 11, 1944—8 p.m. [Received November 11—6:55 p.m.]

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/11–1144: Telegram

[202] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 11, 1944—11 p.m. [Received November 11—8:10 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/11–1144: Telegram

[203] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, November 11, 1944.

740.00119 European Advisory Commission/11–1144

[204] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, November 11, 1944.

862.50/11–1144

[205] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 12, 1944—4 p.m. [Received November 12—2:10 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/11–1244: Telegram

[206] Report by the European Advisory Commission to the Governments of the United States of America, the United Kingdom, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

London , 14 November, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/11–1444

[207] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

[Washington,] November 14, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/11–1444

[208] The Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs (Matthews) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)

Washington, November 15, 1944.

Matthews File: Lot 5, Cabinet 110

[209] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State (Pasvolsky)

[Washington,] November 15, 1944.

Matthews Files

[210] The Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy) to the Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs (Matthews)

[Washington,] 20 November, 1944.

Department of Defense Files

[211] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] November 22, 1944.

740.00119 EW/11–2244

[212] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] November 29, 1944.

862.50/11–2244

[213] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 1, 1944—6 p.m. [Received 8:02 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/12–144: Telegram

[214] Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

[Warm Springs, Georgia,] December 4, 1944.

Matthews Files

[215] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 4, 1944—midnight. [Received December 4—10:46 p.m.]

740.00119 E.A.C./12–444: Telegram

[216] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 5, 1944—8 p.m. [Received 11:15 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/12–544: Telegram

[217] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 7, 1944—8 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/12–144: Telegram

[218] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 7, 1944—midnight. [Received December 7—9:05 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/12–744: Telegram

[219] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 11, 1944—9 p.m. [Received December 11—6:15 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/12–1144: Telegram

[220] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 12, 1944—7 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/12–744: Telegram

[221] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger)

[Washington,] December 14, 1944.

740.00119 E.A.C./12–1444

[222] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 14, 1944—8 p.m. [Received December 14—5:02 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/12–1444: Telegram

[223] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger)

[Washington,] December 16, 1944.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1644

[224] Memorandum Prepared in the Division of Central European Affairs for the Secretary of State

[Washington,] December 26, 1944.

740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–2644

[225] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 27, 1944—4 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/12–2744: Telegram

[226] Memorandum by the French Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Massigli)

London, 29 December, 1944.

740.00119 E.A.C./12–3044

[227] Memorandum by the Political Adviser to the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Mosely)

[London,] January 22, 1945.

EAC Files: Lot 55 D 375

Memorandum by the Working Security Committee 740.00119 EAC/1–344

[Document 75]

Memorandum by the Working Security Committee 31

WS–12 [Washington,] January 3, 1944.

Provisions for Imposition Upon Germany at the Time of Surrender

Preliminary Comment to Accompany WS–10 32

Detailed comment has been prepared in the State Department on most of the articles in Document WS–10. These draft comments are now being reviewed in the Working Security Committee which is composed of representatives of the State, War and Navy Departments under the chairmanship of Mr. James C. Dunn33 of the State Department. It is intended to forward them to the American representative34 as the review is completed.

However, in order that some explanatory material may be made available immediately, the following preliminary comments are offered on certain provisions:

Comment on Nature of Surrender Document

It is believed that the capitulation of Germany should be recorded in a single document of unconditional surrender. The statement of principles embodied in WS–10 would, it is felt, provide an adequate legal basis for the principal security, political and economic controls which the United Nations will need to impose on Germany at the time of surrender and thereafter. The principles listed therein should not, however, be considered as exclusive of such additional conditions which it may be found advisable or necessary to impose. Nor should it be considered that all such terms must necessarily be included in the instrument of surrender so long as the instrument includes the complete and unconditional surrender of Germany and such other broad and general terms as the three Governments may agree should be included therein in order to safeguard their rights and powers. In general, it is believed that the document of unconditional surrender should be a relatively brief instrument, with full power reserved to implement it by such proclamations, orders and ordinances as the occupation authorities and the Governments which they represent may deem advisable or necessary.

Comment on Article 1. The Signatories

It it believed to be desirable to have the instrument of surrender bind the German Government, whatever its political structure or complexion at the time of final defeat, to the acceptance and execution of the desired terms. To that end it is requisite that the individual or individuals making the formal capitulation for Germany possess suitable authorization to sign the document on behalf of the German Government as well as of the High Command.

Should there be a political regime with which to deal, it is further believed to be desirable to require the signatures of the highest military authorities who continue to hold responsible positions for the purpose of declaring their responsibility to carry out the conditions which may be imposed upon Germany as well as for the purpose of emphasizing the responsibility of the German military for the defeat. Should the German Government retain to that time essentially a National Socialist character, it would be equally desirable to stipulate the presence of such high National Socialist governmental officials at the formal surrender as may be available to participate in that act.

Comment on Article 4. Occupation Organs

Despite the precedent of the Italian Control Commission35 and also of the provision for a Control Commission for Germany in earlier versions of WS–10 (S 94 and S 94A),36 Article 4 does not contain any recommendation for the establishment of an agency with this name. It is recognized that, in view of the chaotic conditions to be anticipated in Germany, whether a capitulation occurs before invasion or after invasion and consequent establishment of military government, an initial period of military government in Germany is inevitable and should be provided for.

In general it is believed that the necessary enforcement agencies, their composition, functions, and authority, and the relation between them and the commanders of occupation forces in Germany should be explored jointly and agreed upon by the United States, United Kingdom, and the U.S.S.R. in advance of the time of occupation. Specifically, the problem of coordinating the administration of civil affairs in Germany by the forces under the Supreme Allied Commander and those under the Soviet Commander-in-Chief require study by the Commission and it is hoped that the recommendations of the Commission on this subject can be formulated and transmitted to the three governments at an early date. This problem is presently being analyzed with a view to providing the American representative with a more complete statement of the views of the Working Security Committee.

Comment on Article 7. Surrender of Materials of War

The phrase “arms, ammunition and implements of war” has been used in this article because it has a definite meaning in the United States, and, generally throughout the world. The generally understood meaning is based on the President’s Proclamation of May 1, 1937,37 listing the items included within the meaning of the phrase. However, its use here should not be interpreted as restrictive, but merely as illustrative, the idea being that it should be of use to the occupation authorities in defining the phrase at the time of surrender of materials of war.

Comment on Article 8. Occupation

No reference is made in this article to certain areas requiring particular consideration in the occupation of Germany. Two classes of areas are envisaged: (1) areas of predominately German population, for example, Austria, Danzig and Memel, which have been annexed by the German Reich but which were not part of Germany on January 1, 1938, and (2) areas which were within Germany on January 1, 1938, but which may come under consideration for transfer to other states. The occupation problems, especially of a political and administrative character, which will confront the occupation authorities in these areas are receiving special study.

Comment on Article 13. War Criminals

Because of the statement signed by President Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill and Premier Stalin regarding atrocities38 and because of the consideration now being given to this Subject by the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes39 no attempt is made in Article 13 to specify the procedures which should be employed in dealing with war criminals. The article is a statement of principle which it is felt should be included in the surrender document.

Comment on Article 24. Economic Reconstruction

The measures referred to in this article are those which may be undertaken by the United Nations with a view to the economic rehabilitation and reconstruction of Europe and of the world in general as well as those which may be taken by the governments of the occupying powers within Germany.

Comment on Article 25. Cooperation in Peace Measures

Because the United States, through the President, has called for the complete disarmament of Germany it is felt that Germany should not be in a position for an indefinite period in the future to provide any armed forces for the maintenance of international peace and security. If it is felt to be desirable by the United Nations, however, Germany might make contributions of a technical, economic, or otherwise acceptable character and the present article has been drawn in such a way as to permit the rendering of assistance of this kind.

Comments on Article 27. Duration and Enforcement of Instrument of Surrender

Consideration was given to the thought of drawing this article so that the instrument of surrender would be terminated by the entrance into force of the treaty of peace with Germany. This thought was rejected, however, because of the difficulty of predicting at present the time and the exact nature of the arrangements which will bring the war against Germany technically to an end.

Prepared and reviewed in the Working Security Committee:

Lieut. Col. E. P. Allen,
Civil Affairs Division,
War Department Lieut. Comdr. Willis Sargent,
Naval Office for Occupied
Areas

James W. Riddleberger, Division of European Affairs

Henry P. Leverich, Division of European Affairs

Leroy D. Stinebower, Division of Economic Studies

D. C. Blaisdell (drafting officer) Division of Political Studies

David Harris, Division of Political Studies

Philip E. Mosely, Division of Political Studies

31 For a discussion of the functions of the Working Security Committee, see telegram 392, January 15, 9 p.m., to London, p. 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78].

32 Document WS–10 dated December 29, 1943, not printed; it was the preliminary version of document WS–10a, January 6, infra.

33 Director of the Office of European Affairs.

34 John G. Winant, Ambassador in the United Kingdom, was the United States Representative on the European Advisory Commission.

35 For correspondence regarding the function of the Italian Control Commission, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. ii, pp. 402 ff.

36 Not printed.

37 50 Stat. (pt. 2) 1834.

38 For text of the Declaration of German Atrocities, signed at Moscow, November 1, 1943, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 768.

39 For correspondence regarding the establishment of the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes, see ibid., pp. 402 ff.

Memorandum by the Working Security Committee 740.00119 EAC/1–644

[Document 76]

Memorandum by the Working Security Committee 40

WS–10a [Washington,] January 6, 1944.

Provisions for Imposition Upon Germany at Time of Surrender

(Revised)

The provisions outlined below, which are deemed essential to the assurance of security and which have important political implications, are here recommended for imposition upon Germany at the time of her surrender. They are intended to be imposed at the will of the governments of the United Kingdom, the United States, and the U.S.S.R., acting in the interests of the United Nations, Germany having no free choice of assenting or dissenting. As used in this document, the word “Germany” means, wherever applicable, whatever central government is in existence, as well as all provincial, local, and lesser governmental organs, agencies and officials.

1. The Signatories. The instrument providing for the termination of hostilities should be signed by the Supreme Allied Commander and the Commander-in-Chief of the Soviet forces, by the Chief of the High Command of the German Armed Forces or his representative, and, if possible, by an authorized civilian official representing the German Government.

2. Unconditional Surrender. The German Government and the German High Command should be required to acknowledge the total defeat and the unconditional surrender of Germany’s armed forces and to agree to submit to such terms and faithfully to execute such duties as may be imposed upon them by the occupation authorities.

3. Additional Provisions to be Imposed upon Germany. The occupation authorities should be authorized to impose, in addition to the terms stipulated at the time of surrender, such terms as they may from time to time deem necessary or appropriate.

4. Occupation Organs. Germany should be obligated to cooperate with and submit to the regulations and orders of such enforcement agencies as the Supreme Allied Commander and the Commander-in-Chief of the Soviet forces may establish for the military government of occupied Germany and for the execution of the surrender terms.

5. Evacuation of Occupied Territories. German armed forces should be withdrawn from all areas other than territory held by Germany on January 1, 1938, their withdrawal to be carried out according to a schedule laid down by the occupation authorities. German officials in such areas, except those whose continued presence is desired by the occupation authorities, should likewise be withdrawn. Individuals or units in such areas may be designated to be held as prisoners of war.

6. Demobilization and Disarmament. German land, sea and air forces, including armed quasi-police forces, but excluding such civil police as may be approved by the Supreme Allied Commander and the Commander-in-Chief of the Soviet Forces, should be completely demobilized and the German General Staff abolished. Demobilization should be carried out under the direction of the occupation authorities with as much consideration for internal order and social stability as is consistent with military security. All German forces should be disarmed immediately under the direction of the occupation authorities. The movement and location of German troops within Germany, pending demobilization, should be subject to the direction of the occupation authorities. A permanent audit and inspection system should be established and maintained and there should be continuous and unhampered inspection by the occupation authorities of all areas and installations which are or might be used for the production of war materials, for the conduct of military staff work, or for military training.

7. Surrender of Materials of War. The further production of arms, ammunition and implements of war should be prohibited, except as it may be deemed desirable by the occupation authorities that it be continued. All arms, ammunition, and implements of war should be delivered, and all installations, facilities and services necessary or desirable for the full utilization thereof should be made available, to the occupation authorities for such disposition as they may wish to make of them, except that Germany should be permitted to retain such limited quantities of arms and ammunition as may be designated for internal police purposes by the occupation authorities. Lists of such materials and their locations, as well as of fortifications, mine fields, war production plants, etc., should be turned over to the occupation authorities. The German authorities should be required to prevent the destruction of such materials and installations until ordered to deliver, destroy, or otherwise dispose of them.

8. Occupation. The United States, the United Kingdom, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, acting in the interests of the United Nations, should have the right to occupy, with any forces at their disposal and in any way they deem necessary, and to utilize in any way they may deem appropriate, any or all parts of Germany and to exercise throughout the country all the rights of an occupying power as well as the other rights arising under the instrument of surrender. For political purposes Berlin and other principal cities to be designated should be occupied, at least temporarily. No time limit for the period of general occupation should be stated.

9. Archives. Germany should be required to preserve and make available to the occupation authorities all public and private archives, archival staffs, records, files, documents and information as those authorities may require.

10. Communications, Transport and Power. Germany should be required to place at the disposal of the occupation authorities, for such use and disposition as they may determine, all facilities for communication and transportation and for the generation, transmission and distribution of power, including establishments for the manufacture and repair of such facilities. It should be required to protect and maintain as efficiently as possible all such facilities and to inform the occupation authorities concerning them. 10a. Control of Press, Radio and Mail. The utilization of press, radio, mail, and similar instruments of dissemination of information should be made subject to such controls and supervision as may be imposed by occupation forces in the interests of military security and peace and order.

10b. Merchant Shipping. All merchant tonnage, including yachts and miscellaneous craft, wherever located, of German ownership or operated under or subject to German control (including ships which may be under foreign control but subject to recall by right of option, in which case such option shall be promptly exercised and the return of the vessels facilitated by the German Government), shall be immediately turned over to the occupation authorities acting in the interests of the United Nations, this action to be taken without prejudice to the ultimate disposition of such vessels.

10c. Prize Courts and Vessels. Neither Germany nor her nationals should be permitted to file or maintain any claim of any description against the United Nations or any national thereof in respect of the seizure, condemnation, appropriation, detention, employment, loss or damage, limited or otherwise, of any German ships or boats, whether arising under Prize Court proceedings or otherwise. Also, all pending German Prize Court proceedings should be suspended and terminated immediately, and neither Germany nor her nationals should be permitted to file or maintain any claim of any description for loss of or for damage to vessels or cargoes sunk by or in consequence of naval action and subsequently salved, in which any of the United Nations or their nationals may have had any interest either as owners, charterers, insurers or otherwise, notwithstanding any decree of condemnation which may have been made by a Prize Court of Germany or of any of the Axis powers. Nothing contained in this paragraph should be construed to imply the admissibility of any other types of claim on the part of Germany or of German nationals.

11. United Nations Nationals and Other Nationals in Custody. Germany should be required to safeguard and care for all nationals and members of the armed forces of the United Nations held as prisoners of war or in other custody and to deliver or liberate them as directed by the occupation authorities. Comparable provisions should be made for the safeguarding and care of the nationals and members of armed forces of states other than the United Nations held as prisoners of war or in other custody by Germany.

12. The Protection of Foreigners. Germany should be required to assume special responsibility for the care of foreign nationals and their property within Germany.

13. War Criminals. Germany should be obligated to hold in custody and to deliver to the occupation authorities all persons of German nationality and other persons within Germany or subject to German jurisdiction charged with having committed war crimes. Such persons should be delivered whether they are specified by name or by the rank, office of employment which they held in the German armed forces, the German Government, or other German organizations or agencies, at the time of the alleged crime. Germany should be required to cooperate in the trial and punishment of the persons delivered under this obligation and of any persons of like category held by the United Nations as prisoners of war at the time of surrender of Germany, through the production of records, the collection of evidence, the enactment of legislation, and any other steps necessary to facilitate such trial and punishment.

14. Control of the Movement of Persons. German nationals should not be permitted to leave or enter Germany without authorization from the occupation authorities. Germany should be obligated to deliver, as directed by the occupation authorities, persons who are nationals of any state at war with any of the United Nations or the nationals of countries occupied by such belligerent states.

15. Commercial and Financial Transactions. Germany should be obligated to take such measures as the occupation authorities may require to control both foreign and domestic commerce, exchange, finance and all other types of economic activity carried on in Germany or by German nationals.

16. Information and Possible Action Regarding Property. Germany, pending further directions from the occupation authorities, should be required to take all necessary measures to safeguard, maintain and prevent the dissipation of all property removed from territory which has been under German occupation or control; and all property in Germany belonging to, or seized, confiscated or transferred under duress from, the governments or nationals of the United Nations, or the governments or nationals of other states whose territories have been occupied by Germany; and such other property as the occupation authorities may specify. Germany should be required not to dispose or allow the disposal of property outside its territory, whether of the German State, or political subdivisions thereof, of the National Socialist Party, of German public or private institutions or organizations, or of persons resident in Germany, except with the permission or at the direction of the occupation authorities.

Germany should be required to take any measures concerning the disposition of all such property that the occupation authorities may require.

Germany should be required to furnish such information concerning property, rights and interests, and transactions or agreements with regard thereto, as the occupation authorities may require.

17. Reparation. Germany should be obligated to make such reparation and restitution as the United Nations may require and to comply with such directions as may from time to time be prescribed by the occupation authorities acting in the interests of the United Nations.

18. National Socialist Organizations. All National Socialist organizations, and such other organizations as may be regarded as a threat to the security of the occupation forces or to international peace, should be disbanded. Such parts of these organizations as it may seem desirable may be retained or converted for the purpose of performing economic or social functions. The formation of new organizations, designed to replace any which may be disbanded for the reasons stated above, or whose existence may be regarded as a threat to the security of the occupation forces or to international peace, should be prohibited.

19. Discriminatory Laws. All German laws discriminating against persons on grounds of race, color, creed, or political opinion should be suspended immediately and appropriate steps taken to effect their annulment.

20. Review of Cases of Persons Detained. All cases of persons held in custody or restrained or restricted under any German law, administrative order, or otherwise, should be subject to review in accordance with principles and procedures laid down by the occupation authorities, in order that those unjustly or illegally held may be released and relieved of any legal disability arising from their detention.

21. Maintenance of Law and Order. Subject to the paramount rights and power of the occupation authorities, the German Government should be obligated to maintain law and order in Germany. German governmental agencies should be required to keep their services intact and to perform their functions subject to the control of the occupation authorities and to the rights of these authorities to abolish or reform such agencies.

22. German Diplomatic Relations. Until otherwise determined the conduct of the diplomatic relations of Germany should be subject to the direction and control of the occupation authorities.

23. Cultural Agencies. The conduct of educational and other cultural agencies should be subject to the general supervision of the occupation authorities.

24. Economic Reconstruction. Germany should be required to assist and cooperate with the United Nations in such measures for relief, rehabilitation, and economic reconstruction as the United Nations may decide to undertake.

25. Cooperation in Peace Measures. Germany should be required to render such assistance, other than the provision of armed forces, as the United Nations may require for the furtherance of the measures for the maintenance of international peace and security taken by the United Nations.

26. Costs of Occupation. Germany should be obligated to bear the costs of occupation.

27. Duration and Enforcement of Instrument of Surrender. The instrument of surrender should continue in force until its termination by agreement among the United Nations. The governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, acting in the interests of the United Nations, should reserve full freedom of action in case Germany’s obligations under the terms of surrender are not fulfilled.

Prepared and reviewed in the Working Security Committee:

Lieut. Col. E. P. Allen,
Civil Affairs Division,
War Department Lieut. Comdr. Willis Sargent,
Naval Office for Occupied
Areas

James W. Riddleberger, Division of European Affairs

Henry P. Leverich, Division of European Affairs

Leroy D. Stinebower, Division of Economic Studies

D. C. Blaisdell (drafting officer) Division of Political Studies

David Harris, Division of Political Studies

Philip E. Mosely, Division of Political Studies

40 Circulated in the European Advisory Commission as a memorandum by the United States Representative (Winant), numbered E.A.C. (44) 4, dated January 25, 1944, copy of which was transmitted to the Department in despatch 13540, January 27, from London; received February 8.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/38: Telegram

[Document 77]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 8, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 7:13 p.m.]

175. As I mentioned in my HI, January 6, 5 p.m.,41 I envisage that the Advisory Commission will probably begin its work with the question of surrender terms and controls for Germany and that documentation will be requested for presentation to the second formal meeting. So far the only material on these subjects specified for handling by the Commission is that mentioned in the Commission’s terms of reference42 which referred to the British memorandum of July 143 and to such information as may be available regarding the experience gained in the application of the Italian terms of surrender44

I think that our authorities ought to know that present indications are that British thinking, and indeed planning on certain levels, is already taking shape and may attain early formulation not only regarding armistice terms but also means of control and the general treatment of enemy countries. In particular we have been informed confidentially by our British colleagues of the existence of a 70-paragraph British draft German armistice instrument.45 I understand also that the British have given considerable thought to such questions as the operation of Inter-Allied machinery in Germany during the period of occupation, a possible central organization for Europe, the nucleus of a high commission first to guide the Commanders in Chief and subsequently to assume ultimate authority, as well as an effective armistice or control commission to enforce execution of any instrument of surrender. While not all of. these are subjects that may be dealt with specifically by the Advisory Commission, they may nevertheless indirectly bear upon the Commission’s field of work. As regards an armistice commission, we are informed that the British are already considering the selection of personnel to start advance planning even though changes may be made later. It has been intimated that they would probably, welcome our doing the same and joining them in a combined group in London.

I mention these trends, which have been reported to me, in order to urge that our delegation be provided as soon as possible with information on such planning and ideas on these related subjects as may now have been cleared in their various stages by the American authorities concerned. I would suggest for example that a study be made and forwarded to us at once of the points covered in the Italian armistice and their actual effectiveness in application. From the standpoint of obtaining acceptance of our line of thinking and planning, I need not stress the importance of our being given definite material to present during this early and perhaps critical phase of the Commission’s work and I earnestly hope that the Department will be able to clear and to send us by courier or by telegram the material we need to work on.

This together with my 171 [131], January 6, 10 p.m. and 130, January 6, 10 p.m.,46 completes the review of the subjects proposed for consideration by the Commission, as mentioned in the last paragraph of my 82, January 4, 10 p.m.47

Winant

41  Ante, p. 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3].

42 See Annex 2 to the Secret Protocol Of November 1, 1943, of the Tripartite Conference of Foreign Ministers at Moscow, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 756.

43 See Moscow Conference Document No. 7, ibid., p. 708.

44 For text of the Italian armistice’ signed September 3 but not announced until September 8, 1943, see United States and Italy, 1936–1946: Documentary Record (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1946), p. 51, or 61 Stat. (pt. 3) 2740. For correspondence regarding the overthrow of the Fascist regime in Italy and the Italian surrender, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. ii, pp. 314 ff.

45  Post, p. 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 79].

46  Ante, pp. 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5] and 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 4], respectively.

47  Ante, p. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/38: Telegram

[Document 78]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 15, 1944—9 p.m.

392. We appreciate the information respecting British thinking and intentions relative to the development of the work in the European Advisory Commission as set forth in your 175 of January 8. We also have had similar indications and, for some time past, the Department has had under preparation a considerable amount of documentation for eventual transmission to London to guide you in these matters. The Department furthermore understands very well the urgency and importance of supplying you with definite material for utilization during the early phases of the Commission’s work. It therefore caused to be established some weeks ago an inter-departmental committee known as the “Working Security Committee” on which the State, War, and Navy Departments are represented. The primary functions of this Committee are: 1. To prepare for transmission by the Department documents from Washington for the instruction, information, and guidance of the American representative on the European Advisory Commission; and,

2. To deal with incoming reports and recommendations from the Commission and to draft instructions to our representative respecting the position of this Government on the various matters that may arise as a result of the Committee’s deliberations.

It was arranged that any documentation prepared by the Working Security Committee would have the approval of the three Departments, and at least the informal approval of the Joint Chiefs of Staff before transmission to you. This Committee has been in almost continuous session since December 21, 1943, and has agreed upon certain basic documents respecting the terms of surrender for Germany. Although we have continually emphasized the importance of your receiving these instructions at an early date, we have not been able to send them because the Joint Chiefs of Staff have not yet indicated their approval. The Department realizes that you cannot longer delay calling a meeting of the Commission. In view of our inability to obtain clearance on these papers, you have no alternative but to proceed on the basis of such documents as the British or Russian representatives may submit.

With reference to your 201 of January 8,49 your inquiry as set forth in the first paragraph was answered in the Department’s 207 of January 8, 10 P.M.50 A document giving our ideas on the modalities of a Rumanian surrender, similar to that which has been cleared by the Working Security Committee for Germany, is under discussion now, and will be transmitted as soon as the necessary clearances have been obtained.51

Hull

49 Not printed; the reference is to an inquiry whether the character of the Rumanian surrender terms and attendant control organization would be a matter for discussion in the European Advisory Commission (740.00119 EW/2058).

50  Vol. iv, p. 133.

51 Documents WS–16a, “Provisions for Imposition Upon Rumania at Time of Surrender”, dated January 13, 1944, and WS–17, “Aspects of Rumanian Surrender Requiring Agreement Between the British, Soviet, and American Governments”, dated January 14, 1944; for texts, see vol. iv, pp. 136 and 142, respectively. For correspondence regarding the negotiations leading to the signing of an armistice with Rumania at Moscow on September 13, see ibid., pp. 133 ff.

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang) 740.00119 EAC/53

[Document 79]

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)52

E.A.C. (44) 1 London, 15 January, 1944.

Terms of Surrender for Germany

1. At its first formal meeting held on January 14th, the European Advisory Commission invited delegations to circulate to it any papers they might wish to submit bearing on the question of the terms of surrender for Germany and of the machinery required to ensure their fulfilment.

2. In the present memorandum and its Annexes, I circulate for the consideration of the Commission some material on the question of the terms of surrender for Germany. In a separate memorandum53 I am putting forward for the consideration of the Commission some proposals on the subject of the machinery required to ensure the fulfilment of those terms.

3. It is impossible at present to foresee in what circumstances hostilities with Germany may in the end be suspended. We cannot tell, therefore, what mode of procedure would be most suitable; whether, for example, it will be found best to have a full and detailed armistice; or a shorter armistice conferring general powers; or possibly no armistice at all, but a series of local capitulations by enemy Commanders. But it is nevertheless already possible to form some idea of the things which the United Nations will desire to do in Germany as soon as hostilities are over, and it should even at the present stage be possible to evolve a general plan which will enable these things to be done, whatever the procedure ultimately adopted.

4. The content of such a plan falls naturally into three parts:— (a) general desiderata relating to the whole period between the end of hostilities and the conclusion of a treaty of peace;

(b) the taking of powers to secure these desiderata; and

(c) decisions as to how these powers should be utilised.

5. The ideal conditions for the attainment of these desiderata presuppose the existence of a German Government capable of assisting in the execution of the obligations which it will have undertaken. They also presuppose the prior concurrence by the United Nations primarily concerned in one single instrument terminating hostilities on behalf of them all simultaneously. The most convenient way of setting out a plan for the attainment of these desiderata is to draft it in the form of a hypothetical full-dress armistice to be agreed between the United Nations primarily concerned and imposing on the German Government and people the obligation to assist in its execution. Even if it proved impossible, under the circumstances prevailing at the time of the cessation of hostilities, to settle the terms of surrender in a single full-length document, the material contained in the draft of such a document would still be of use, whatever the form of armistice ultimately adopted; and the work devoted to the elaboration of this single comprehensive draft would therefore not be wasted.

6. It is for this reason that the United Kingdom Delegation thought it well to put forward the draft of a full-time armistice (see Annex 2) to which has been added, for convenience, a summary (see Annex 1). The fact that this draft is in legal terms and is self-contained and complete, does not mean that it is presented other than as a basis for discussion in the Commission. Indeed, His Majesty’s Government should not be regarded as committed to the particular terms of this draft; so far as they are concerned, the draft is still in the formative stage.

7. In accordance with paragraph 3 of the Commission’s terms of reference, the draft takes into account the memorandum of the 1st July circulated by the United Kingdom Government to the Governments of the United States of America and the Soviet Union (E.A.C. (P) 43/3), and the experience already gained in the imposition and enforcement of unconditional surrender upon Italy. In its preparation, consideration has also been given to certain principles set forth in a paper on Germany55 circulated to the Moscow Conference by the United States Delegation, and the draft will be found to be in harmony with those principles.

8. The draft is based on the principle of unconditional surrender56 and confers on the United Nations far-reaching powers which, under international law, they would not enjoy on a basis of ordinary military occupancy. In addition to specific rights of control, in the military, political and economic fields, certain general provisions are included which entitle the United Nations to exercise all or any of the powers of the German Government, of the German Supreme Command, or of any local government or authority (Article 59), and to take any steps, including conservatory or preventive measures, to secure the execution of the Armistice (Article 64), the interpretation and application of which will be determined by the United Nations (Articles 66 and 67). In general, the draft armistice imposes on the German Government and people the obligation to assist in its execution and to carry on the national life,’ economy and administration under the directions of the United Nations.

9. Conditions in Germany at the time of her surrender will almost certainly be chaotic, and the last thing the Allies will want to do is to saddle the High Command with all the vexations attendant on administering in detail a vast, hostile and bankrupt country, smarting under defeat, distracted by dissension and confronted with countless problems arising out of the switch-over from war to peace economy. The draft Armistice accordingly bases itself on the idea that the Germans should be enjoined to carry on all civilian activities until they are directed to do otherwise by the United Nations.

10. Finally, the United Kingdom Delegation would make the following further points:— (a) The United Kingdom Delegation believe that the best procedure would be, if possible, to impose a full-length instrument of surrender on Germany rather than an instrument in shorter form. But even the kind of full-length instrument they have in mind, namely the draft in Annex 2, must itself in places be expressed in general terms. An essential complement to this draft will, therefore, be a series of directives to be issued to the Supreme Allied Commander, North-West Europe, by the Combined Chiefs of Staff, and no doubt also to the Soviet Commander-in-Chief by the Soviet Government, containing particular instructions as to what is to be done where the provisions of the Armistice are stated in general terms. Many of these directives will have to be ready well before hostilities cease, as they will necessarily cover a wide field in which immediate action will be essential. Action under these directives will be taken by the Commanders by way of proclamations or declarations issued in virtue of general powders conferred upon them by the Armistice. It is therefore desirable that attention should be given as soon as possible to the elaboration of such directives. If there is no Armistice at all, or even if there is only a short one, a larger number of such directives will of course be required. In that case a great deal of the material contained in the draft Armistice (Annex 2) would have to be embodied in the directives, which would form the basis of proclamations or declarations to be issued by the Commanders-in-Chief.

(b) A special situation will arise as regards Austria. The Three Powers declared at the Moscow Conference that they wished to see re-established a free and independent Austria,57 Austria must accordingly receive different treatment from Germany under the terms of the Armistice; and while certain Articles of the Armistice will have to be applied in Austrian territory, others will be inappropriate. It will thus be desirable to prepare special directives for the guidance of Commanders-in-Chief, which will take into account the special position of Austria and embody a different policy from that which will be followed towards the rest of Germany. In any event, the evacuation of Austria by German forces is already provided for under Article 9 (a) of the draft in Annex 2.

(c) It is in the view of the United Kingdom Delegation desirable that certain of the Allied Governments chiefly concerned should be brought into consultation by the Commission while the terms of an Armistice are still in a formative stage. It is therefore suggested that, in virtue of the discretionary powers conferred upon the Commission by paragraph 4 of their Terms of Reference, they should, at an appropriate moment, invite the views of some of the Governments of other Allies, such for example as those who are either neighbours of Germany or numbered among her principal victims, or are substantially participating in military operations against Germany. The manner in which this could best be done might, it is suggested, engage the early attention of the Commission. The manner in which the other members of the United Nations should be consulted might be considered by the Commission at a later stage.

(d) I would add that, as a matter of convenience, arrangements are being made to make copies of Annexes 1 and 2 available to the United States and Soviet Governments through H. M. Embassies at Washington and Moscow simultaneously with—or, if circumstances prevent this, very soon after—their circulation to the Commission.

[File copy not signed]

[Annex 1]

summary of draft german armistice

Preamble

German acknowledgment of total defeat and unconditional request for suspension of hostilities. Injunction to German people to preserve order and continue their normal life.

Section I

Cessation of Hostilities

Hostilities to cease in all theatres of war. German forces to stay where they are pending future instructions and to surrender their arms, &c. Where no United Nations forces are present, the local German commander will store arms &c., and be responsible for their eventual surrender.

German warships to be assembled in specified ports and surrendered or dealt with as directed. No transfer to other flags. No scuttling. Minesweepers to continue their operations.

German aircraft not to leave the ground except as directed, and to he surrendered or dealt with as directed. No transfer to other countries.

Full information to be given as to location, &c., of German forces, defences, communication systems, minefield and obstacles to movement, &c. German labour and materials to be supplied as required for the removal of obstacles.

No broadcasting except as directed. No jamming.

Section II

Evacuation of Territory by German Forces

Withdrawal from all territories outside Germany’s 1937 frontiers and any specified areas within those frontiers of German forces and officials: the latter, however, to continue their functions until instructed to withdraw. German civilian inhabitants of such territories to be evacuated if so directed.

Complete cessation in such territories of deportation, forced labour, requisitioning, damage or removal of property, &c.

Section III

Stationing of United Nations Forces in Germany

United Nations may station forces or agencies anywhere in Germany. Germans to take any necessary steps for the security of United Nations forces and agencies and their communications. Germans to assist any advance parties sent into Germany and to comply with directions for regulating movements of population and controlling travel.

United Nations to enjoy all rights of an occupying Power throughout Germany. German public services to continue to function under United Nations control unless otherwise directed.

United Nations to have complete freedom of passage and unrestricted use of all facilities. Germans to supply any labour, equipment, &c., required.

United Nations may control and use press, broadcasting and public performances and establish censorship.

Section IV

Demobilisation, Demilitarisation, Disarmament and Surrender of War Material

German armed forces to be progressively demobilised and totally disbanded, except as permitted for police purposes under United Nations control. Complete prohibition of all forms of military training.

All war material, complete or incomplete, to be surrendered, destroyed or dealt with as directed. Prohibition on manufacture of, or traffic in, war material and of research, &c., relative to war. Destruction, dismantling or conversion of plants, &c., producing war material or utilised for war research. Bases, fortifications, &c., to be surrendered, destroyed or dealt with as directed. Construction of new defences prohibited. Germans to give all information required for above purposes and to afford access at any time to factories, establishments, &c.

Germans to carry out such further measures of demobilisation, demilitarisation or disarmament as may be prescribed.

Section V

Treatment of Forces, War Material, Shipping and Property of Germany’s Allies

Forces, ships, aircraft, &c., of Germany’s Allies to remain liable to attack or seizure in German territory. Germans to supply information about such Allies. Warships and merchant ships to be prevented from leaving Germany. Military and civilian personnel to be interned. Public and private property to be impounded pending instructions. Germans to comply with instructions as to disposal of the above.

Section VI

Shipping, Inland Transport and Telecommunications

No merchant ships to put to sea from German ports without United Nations permission.

All German merchant shipping, with crews if required, to be made available to United Nations and used as prescribed. No transfer to foreign flags. Crews to remain on board pending instructions. Options to reacquire vessels to be exercised as directed.

United Nations merchant ships to be restored. Neutral ships under German control to be transferred to United Nations. Cargoes to be disposed of as directed. Wrecked or sunk vessels to be destroyed, salvaged, or raised as instructed. United Nations to control and have unrestricted use of (i) all matters affecting shipping, including building and repair industries; (ii) inland transport system (including air) and connected facilities; (iii) telecommunication system and connected facilities.

German rights in telecommunication systems anywhere to be transferred to United Nations as directed. German rights in international transport bodies or telecommunication organs to be exercised as directed.

Section VII

Restitution, Reparation, Occupation Currencies, Cost of Occupation and Relief

Pending final arrangements, Germans to carry out restitution, reparation, relief and reconstruction as prescribed, and to surrender or transfer property, effect deliveries, carry out repair and construction work, and provide transport, materials, labour and services for use in or outside Germany as directed. United Nations property to be safeguarded pending return. Full information and facilities to be given for tracing property to be restored or surrendered.

Germans to supply free of cost German currency required by the United Nations, and to redeem and hand over currencies issued by United Nations during occupation.

Germans to pay costs of occupation, administering the Armistice and relief, as directed.

Section VIII

Control of German Economy and Assets

United Nations to have right to exercise control over German finance, agriculture, production, industry, trade and economy generally, and to use plant, products, stocks, &c., for the conduct of the war.

German State and municipal property, and all private German property outside Germany, not to be disposed of without United Nations sanction, and the latter to be handed over if required. Property inside Germany not to be transferred to persons elsewhere. Normal internal payments allowed.

All gold and silver in or owned by Germany to be held at the disposal of United Nations.

Section IX

Control of German Relations with other Countries

Germans to comply with directions issued in all matters affecting Germany’s foreign policy and relations with other countries. No undertaking or commitment to be entered into without United Nations sanction. Pending final arrangements, treaties to be abrogated, brought into force or applied as directed. Germany to become party to specified treaties as directed.

No trade or dealings with the enemies of the United Nations. Rupture of diplomatic and consular relations with such countries, whose diplomatic and other officials in Germany will be dealt with as prescribed. United Nations to control diplomatic relations with neutral countries.

Germans not to leave Germany without permission and to be re-called from other enemy countries as directed. Germany to receive back any persons designated by United Nations.

Section X

United Nations Prisoners of War and Internees, Political Prisoners, Foreign Nationals and Foreign Property

Prisoners of war and interned civilians with their property to be released and dealt with as directed. Command of camps to be handed over to local representatives of prisoners. Germans to maintain essential services. Germans not to remove prisoners from camps.

Political prisoners, including German sympathisers with United Nations, and persons detained on account of race, language, religion or political opinions, to be released and relieved from disabilities.

Full facilities for release and subsequent movements of prisoners.

No person to be prosecuted or molested on account of sympathies with the United Nations.

Foreign workers and their property to be repatriated as directed.

Lists of names and full information to be supplied.

Section XI

War Criminals and Quislings and Other Traitors

Hitler, his chief associates, war criminals, Quislings58 and traitors, whose names appear on lists to be furnished, to be surrendered to the United Nations. United Nations may arrest such persons, and Germans to facilitate such action.

Germans to furnish information and produce witnesses required for the trial of the above. Property of such persons to be impounded or surrendered as directed.

Section XII

Suppression of Nazi Organisations and Legislation: Control of German Law and Administration

All Nazi organisations to be disbanded except as specified. Nazi institutions to be abolished, personnel dismissed and interned, property controlled or seized, and Nazi ideology and teaching suppressed, as directed. German laws discriminating on grounds of race, language, religion or political opinions to be rescinded and legal disabilities cancelled. Nazi legislation to be repealed, and German law and legal system reformed, as directed.

Section XIII

Information and Inspection

Germans to furnish all information required. No suppression, &c., of information or documents, and United Nations to have right of entry to obtain them. Germans to give any necessary assistance.

United Nations may enter and inspect any building or place for the purposes of the Armistice.

Section XIV

General

United Nations may exercise all or any of the powers of the German Government, the German Supreme Command and any local government or authority.

Germans to maintain national life, economy and administration. Police to continue its functions.

German authorities and people to abstain from all action injurious to the United Nations, to the maintenance of public order or the security of the occupying forces.

No concealment, destruction or damage of warships, aircraft, war material, facilities, plant, stocks, &c. German authorities to be responsible for safeguarding the above and handing them over in good condition.

United Nations may exercise their powers either direct or by the issue of instructions to the Germans.

German authorities to take all executive, legislative and judicial measures necessary for the execution of the Armistice, and to comply with all directions given for this purpose.

United Nations may take all necessary steps, including conservatory or preventive measures, to secure the execution of the Armistice. Persons evading or obstructing such execution may be tried by United Nations courts.

The rights and powers of the United Nations under the Armistice may be exercised by United Nations Commanders-in-Chief, or any other authorities designated for the purpose.

These authorities may issue instructions as to the matters covered by the Armistice, and the manner in which it is to be carried out and interpreted. Germans to comply fully with all instructions of these authorities, who will determine finally any disagreement regarding the interpretation or application of the Armistice.

Section XV

Definitions

Definitions of Germany, German armed forces, war material and other technical terms, &c., to be laid down by the United Nations.

Section XVI

Final Clauses

Armistice to be confirmed by the German Government and to come into force . . . . . hours after receipt of such confirmation, when hostilities will cease. Armistice to remain in operation until superseded by a Peace Treaty or other arrangements.

If German obligations under the Armistice are not fulfilled, it may be denounced, or the United Nations may take appropriate punitive measures.

[Annex 2]

draft german armistice

Whereas the German Government and the German Supreme Command acknowledge that the German armed forces have been totally defeated and that Germany can no longer carry on against the United Nations the war begun by Germany’s unprovoked aggression;

And whereas the German Government and the German Supreme Command have accordingly unconditionally requested a suspension of hostilities;

And whereas the United Nations are willing to lay down the conditions on which they are prepared to suspend hostilities against Germany, and hereby require the German people to preserve law and order and go about their normal occupations so far as these are consistent with those conditions;

The following terms have been presented by on behalf of the United Nations, duly authorised to that effect;

And have been accepted by

representing the Supreme Command of the German armed forces, and duly authorised to that effect by the German Government:—

Section I

Cessation of Hostilities and Immediately Related Matters

1. On the entry into force of the present Instrument, hostilities shall cease in all theatres of war between all forces under German command (which expression throughout this Section and Section II includes any foreign contingents, warships or aircraft serving in or with the German armed forces or under German control) and the forces of the United Nations.

2.—(a) Except as may be otherwise directed by the United Nations, the personnel of all forces under German command, wherever they may be situated, will remain in their existing positions until further instructions.

(b) Demobilisation will take place only at such times and in such manner as the United Nations may direct.

3.—(a) All forces under German command, whether inside or outside the German frontiers, will surrender all their arms, ammunition, weapons of war and other war material to the local United Nations Command, in accordance with arrangements to be made on the spot.

(b) In any area in which United Nations forces are not present, and pending arrangements to be made under the preceding paragraph or under Article 18(a) below, the arms, ammunition, weapons of war and other war material of the forces under German command (other than such weapons and material as may be authorised for police or guard purposes in accordance with arrangements to be made by the United Nations) will be placed in depots under the instructions and supervision of the local German Commander, who will be held responsible for their eventual surrender.

4.—(a) German warships and naval, military or air force vessels of all descriptions, completed or under construction (including minesweepers, auxiliaries, transports, tenders, launches and landing craft), and any foreign vessels serving in or with the German forces or under German control, will remain or be assembled as directed in ports to be specified by the United Nations, and will be surrendered and delivered, employed (with or without their crews) or otherwise dealt with as the United Nations may prescribe. In particular, all minesweepers will be placed at the disposal of the United Nations with their crews, and pending further instructions will continue to sweep the existing navigational channels.

(b) Any of the said warships and vessels which are at sea or in non-German ports or waters will forthwith be recalled or ordered to proceed to or remain in such ports as the United Nations may prescribe, and will be dealt with as provided in paragraph (a).

(c) Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 61(a), scuttling is formally prohibited.

(d) There shall be no transfer to any other flag, service or control of any kind, except as may be directed by the United Nations.

5.—(a) No German aircraft of any kind, military or civil, and no foreign aircraft in German service, will leave the ground or water or ships except as may be directed by the United Nations. All such aircraft will be collected and will be surrendered and delivered, employed or otherwise dealt with as the United Nations may prescribe.

(b) All such aircraft in or over non-German territory, ports or waters, or over the sea, will forthwith be recalled and dealt with as provided in paragraph (a).

(c) There shall be no transfer to any other nationality, service or control of any kind, except as may be directed by the United Nations.

6.—(a) Without prejudice to the provisions of Section IV below, the German authorities will forthwith furnish full information on the following matters, whether these are under the control of the military or the civil authorities: (i) the location, disposition and condition of all land, sea and air forces under German command, wherever situated; (ii) all German naval, military, air and air defence devices, posts and installations, wherever situated; (iii) all transport and inter-communication systems established by Germany on German or other territory or in the approaches thereto; (iv) all minefields or other obstacles to movement by land, water or air established anywhere by Germany; (v) all such other particulars as the United Nations may require in connexion with the movements, security or welfare of the United Nations land, sea or air forces.

(b) German military and civilian personnel, materials and equipment will be made available as required by the United Nations for the removal of obstacles and for the other purposes above mentioned.

(c) All minefields and other dangerous obstacles will, so far as possible, at once be rendered safe.

7. The use of wireless, telephone, telegraph or other forms of intercommunication by or on behalf of units of the forces under German command is prohibited, except as may be sanctioned by the United Nations.

8. No broadcasting stations or wireless transmitters in Germany shall be operated otherwise than by, or with the express permission of, the United Nations and under such supervision and control as they may think fit to impose. The use of any apparatus in Germany for the “jamming” of broadcast or other wireless transmissions is prohibited.

Section II

Evacuation of Territory by the German Armed Forces, Officials and Civilian Population

9.—(a) With such exceptions as the United Nations may direct, all forces under German command will withdraw from all territories outside the frontiers of Germany as they existed on the 31st December, 1937, and from any areas within those frontiers indicated at any time by the United Nations.

(b) German authorities and officials in these territories or areas will comply with such instructions as to withdrawing therefrom as they may receive from the United Nations. Pending such instructions, they will continue their functions under the direction of the United Nations until otherwise ordered.

(c) In the event of the United Nations requiring the evacuation of all or any part of the German civilian inhabitants of the territories or areas concerned, the German authorities will issue the necessary instructions, and will make the necessary arrangements for the evacuation, reception and maintenance of such persons as may be specified.

(d) Withdrawals and evacuations under paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) above will take place at such times and under such conditions as the United Nations may direct.

(e) Any German sick or wounded who cannot be moved from territories or areas to be evacuated will be cared for by German personnel to be left on the spot together with all necessary medical and other supplies.

10. In the territories and areas referred to in Article 9 there shall immediately be, on the part of all forces under German command and German authorities and civilians, a complete cessation of all measures of coercion, deportation or forced labour, and all measures involving injury to life or limb. There shall similarly cease all measures of requisitioning, seizure, removal, concealment and destruction of property. In particular, the withdrawals and evacuation mentioned in Article 9 will be carried out without damage to or removal of persons or property (other than the removal of such personal property and effects as the United Nations may permit to be taken) and without harm to the local population.

Section III

Stationing of United Nations Forces in Germany and Certain Matters Connected Therewith

11.—(a) The United Nations will have the right to station their forces and agencies anywhere in Germany.

(b) The German authorities will take all such measures as are necessary, or as may be directed, in the interests of the security of the forces and agencies of the United Nations and the safety, freedom and unimpeded use of their communications and means of transport.

12. The United Nations will have the right to send advance parties into Germany to secure their lines of communication, to make arrangements for the entry of their forces and agencies and for the safety, welfare and evacuation of United Nations prisoners of war and internees, and for any other purposes which they may think necessary. The German authorities will afford all facilities to such parties and take all the measures requisite for their maintenance, security and movement, and will carry out such instructions as the commanders of these parties may give.

13. The German authorities will comply with all such directions as the United Nations may give for the regulation of movements of population and for controlling travel or removal on the part of persons in Germany.

14. Without prejudice to the other provisions of the present Instrument:— (a) the United Nations will enjoy all the rights of an occupying Power throughout Germany;

(b) the German administrative, judicial and public services will continue to carry out their functions under the control of the United Nations, unless and until otherwise directed.

15. Without prejudice to the other provisions of the present Instrument, the United Nations will have the following rights in and over all German territory, and the adjacent waters and air space:— (a) Complete freedom of movement and navigation for their personnel, military and civilian, and for their ships, aircraft, transport, supplies and material of all kinds, and all necessary facilities in connexion therewith:

(b) Unrestricted use of all such utilities, facilities, installations and resources generally as may be required for the maintenance, movements, operations and security of the forces and agencies of the United Nations. The German authorities will maintain all such utilities, facilities, installations and resources in good order and repair, and will furnish the labour, personnel, specialist services, plant, equipment and resources necessary for working or maintaining them, or for such other purposes connected with them as the United Nations may specify:

(c) The right to make such use of the press and publications generally, of broadcasting and of public performances of all kinds, and to establish such control and censorship of these and of all forms of publicity and inter-communication (including the right to control or take over buildings and installations), as the United Nations may see fit.

Section IV

Demobilisation, Demilitarisation, Disarmament, and Surrender of War Material

16.—(a) With the exception of such establishments as are authorised by the United Nations for police, guard and other special purposes, the German armed forces will be progressively demobilised, and totally disbanded, in accordance with instructions to be issued by the United Nations; pending which, and save as may be provided in such instructions, the provisions of Article 2 will continue to apply.

(b) The organisation and control of the establishments authorised for the purposes mentioned in paragraph (a) will be subject to the directions of the United Nations, and the German authorities will comply with all instructions given for this purpose.

17. There shall be a complete cessation and prohibition of all forms of military training and activities of whatever nature, including pre- or para-military training in youth organisations, political groups or other associations of any kind.

18.—(a) All war material, including unserviceable material and scrap, in so far as not previously surrendered under Section I of the present Instrument, or authorised by the United Nations for police, guard or other special purposes, will be held and maintained by the German authorities at the disposal of the United Nations, and will be surrendered, delivered, destroyed or otherwise dealt with, as may be directed.

(b) The provisions of paragraph (a) will apply in the same manner to all war material and instruments and devices for use in the conduct of warfare which are in process of research, experiment, development, design, manufacture or assembly.

19.—(a) The manufacture, production and construction and the acquisition from outside Germany of war material and of such other products used in connexion with such manufacture, production or construction as the United Nations may specify, and the import, export and transit thereof, are prohibited, except as directed by the United Nations.

(b) There shall likewise be immediate cessation of all research, experiment, development and design relative to war or the production of war material, whether in government or private establishments, factories, technological institutions or elsewhere.

(c) The German authorities will comply with any instructions which may be given by the United Nations for the destruction, dismantling, conversion or utilisation, as may be specified: (i) of factories, plants and establishments manufacturing, producing or constructing war material or such other products as the United Nations may specify; (ii) of stations, establishments, plant, equipment or installations, utilised for research, development or design relative to war or the production of war material.

20.—(a) All military, naval and air bases, stations, establishments, installations and equipment, and all fortifications and other defence installations, wherever situated, will be held and maintained by the German authorities at the disposal of the United Nations, and will be surrendered, destroyed or dismantled or otherwise dealt with, as the United Nations may direct.

(b) The construction, setting up or laying out of any new defence installations or any remodelling, renovation or extension of existing ones is prohibited, except as directed by the United Nations.

21. The German authorities will:— (a) furnish full and detailed information concerning (i) all categories of war material, wherever situated, showing the nature, quantities and location of the same; (ii) the nature, location and output of all factories, plants, establishments, equipment and installations referred to in Article 19 (c), together with such other particulars regarding their operations, methods of manufacture and processes of research, experiment, development or design as the United Nations may require; (iii) all war material and such other products as the United Nations may specify, in the stage of research, experiment, development or design; (iv) all military, naval and air bases, stations, establishments, installations and equipment, and all fortifications and other defence installations, wherever situated, showing their nature, location and the details of their construction and employment;

(b) afford the representatives of the United Nations unrestricted access at all times to the said factories, stations, buildings, establishments, plant, installations, property and areas, together with their records, equipment and other contents.

22. The German authorities will comply with and carry out all such further measures of or relative to demobilisation, demilitarisation or disarmament as may be prescribed by the United Nations during the period of the present Instrument.

Section V

Treatment of the Forces, Personnel, War Material, Shipping and other Transport and Property generally of other Enemy States and Nationals in Germany

23.—(a) Subject to those provisions of Section I of the present Instrument which affect foreign contingents, ships and aircraft under German command or control or in German service, the military, naval and air forces and material, and the ships, aircraft and transport of any country against which any of the United Nations is carrying on hostilities remain liable to attack or seizure wherever found in or over German territory or waters.

(b) The German authorities will place at the disposal of the United Nations all the documents, information and material in German possession which the United Nations may require in connexion with the conduct of hostilities against any such country.

24. Without prejudice to the provisions of Sections I and VI relative to the surrender or disposal of foreign material or personnel under German command or control or in German service:— (a) the warships, auxiliaries, transports, merchant ships and fishing and other craft of any country referred to in Article 23 which are in German ports or waters, and the aircraft and transport of such countries in or over German territory, will, pending further instructions, be prevented from leaving Germany;

(b) the military, naval and air personnel and the civilian nationals of any such country will be prevented from leaving Germany and will be interned and maintained pending further instructions;

(c) all property, assets, rights, titles and interests in Germany held for or belonging to any such country or to any country (other than Germany), which has, at any time since the 1st September, 1939, been at war with any of the United Nations, or held for or belonging to the nationals of any of these countries or any persons resident or carrying on business therein, will be impounded or taken over, and will be preserved pending further instructions;

(d) the German authorities will take all necessary steps to ensure the execution of the provisions of paragraphs (a) to (c); will comply with any instructions given by the United Nations concerning the surrender, internment, custody, disposal, utilisation or employment of any of the above-mentioned persons, vessels, aircraft, material or property; and will afford all information and facilities required for tracing the same.

Section VI

Shipping, Inland Transport and Telecommunications

25.—(a) No merchant ship (including fishing and other craft), of whatever nationality, shall put to sea from any German port except as may be sanctioned or directed by the United Nations. German ships in ports outside Germany shall remain in port and those at sea shall proceed to the nearest German or United Nations port and there remain, pending instructions from the United Nations.

(b) All German merchant shipping or foreign merchant shipping in German service or under German control (including fishing and other craft), wherever they may be, and any constructed or completed during the period of the present Instrument, will be made available in good repair and seaworthy condition by the competent German authorities at such places, for such purposes and periods, and for use on such terms, as the United Nations may prescribe.

(c) All transfer to any other flag, service or control is prohibited, except as may be directed by the United Nations.

(d) Crews will remain on board and be maintained by the German authorities, pending further instructions regarding their continued employment or disposal.

(e) Any existing options to repurchase or reacquire or to resume control of vessels sold or otherwise transferred or chartered by Germany during the war shall be exercised as directed by the United Nations, and paragraphs (a) to (d) shall apply to all such vessels and their crews.

26.—(a) United Nations merchant ships (including fishing and other craft) in German hands, wherever they may be (and also for this purpose those of any country which has broken off diplomatic relations with Germany), whether or not the title has been transferred as the result of prize court proceedings or otherwise, will be surrendered to the United Nations in good repair and seaworthy condition in ports to be specified by the United Nations, for disposal as directed by them.

(b) The German authorities will take all such steps as may be requisite to effect or procure transfers of title to the above vessels and to secure the discontinuance of any arrests of or proceedings against them in neutral ports.

27. The German authorities will transfer or cause to be transferred to the United Nations, as may be prescribed, all rights relative to any neutral merchant ships, fishing or other craft under German charter, requisition, operation or control.

28. The German authorities will comply forthwith with all instructions which may be given by the United Nations for the disposal of cargoes on board any of the classes of vessels mentioned in Articles 25–27.

29. The German authorities will comply with any instructions given by the United Nations for the destruction, dispersal, salvaging, reclamation or raising of wrecked, stranded, derelict or sunken vessels, wherever they may be situated. Any such vessel salvaged, reclaimed or raised shall be dealt with under the appropriate provisions of the present Instrument according to its national status.

30.—(a) The United Nations will have the right to exercise complete control over all matters affecting shipping, including control over, and the right to make unrestricted use of the German merchant shipping (including fishing) and shipbuilding and repair industries and of all matters and facilities directly or indirectly relative or ancillary thereto, or necessary to or connected with their operation for such purposes (whether inside or outside Germany) as the United Nations may decide. These matters and facilities, and the requirements of the United Nations in connexion with them, including the provision of the necessary labour and specialist services, will be specified in notifications or instructions to be from time to time communicated to the German authorities.

(b) The United Nations will, in the same manner, have the right to complete control and unrestricted use for all purposes of the whole of the German inland transport system (road, rail, air and waterways) and of all connected material, plant and equipment, and all repair, construction, labour, servicing and running facilities, in accordance with the notifications or instructions issued by the United Nations.

(c) The rights of the United Nations under paragraphs (a) and (b) may also be exercised by any such international organisations or agencies as they may specify.

31.—(a) The German authorities will transfer or cause to be transferred to the United Nations all such property, assets, rights, titles, interests and privileges in telecommunication systems and facilities, wherever situated, as the United Nations may direct.

(b) The United Nations will have the right to complete control and unrestricted use of all such systems and facilities and connected matters, in the manner and on the terms set out in Article 30.

32. All German rights in international shipping or other transport bodies or organisations or telecommunication organs, and in relation to the use of transport and the movement of traffic in other countries, and the use in Germany of the transport of other countries, will be exercised in accordance with the directions of the United Nations.

Section VII

Restitution, Reparation, Occupation Currencies, Costs of Occupation and Relief

33.—(a) Pending and in preparation for such arrangements as may be made in any eventual Treaty of Peace or otherwise, the German authorities will carry out, for the benefit of the United Nations such measures of restitution, reinstatement, restoration, reparation, reconstruction, relief and rehabilitation during the period of the present Instrument as the United Nations may prescribe. For these purposes the German authorities will effect or procure the surrender or transfer of such property, assets, rights, titles and interests, effect such deliveries and carry out such repair, building and construction work, whether in Germany or elsewhere, and will provide such transport, plant, equipment and materials of all kinds, labour, personnel, and specialist and other services, for use in Germany or elsewhere, as the United Nations may direct.

(b) The German authorities will also comply with all such directions as the United Nations may give relating to property, assets, rights, titles and interests in Germany belonging or having at any time since the 1st January, 1935, belonged to any of the United Nations or their nationals. The German authorities will be responsible for safeguarding all such property, assets, rights, titles and interests, and will for this purpose continue to administer the same pending directions from the United Nations.

(c) For the purposes of the preceding paragraph the German authorities will afford all information and facilities required for tracing any property, assets, rights, titles or interests.

34. The German authorities will supply free of cost such German currency as the United Nations may require, and will withdraw and redeem in German currency, within such time-limits and on such terms as the United Nations may specify, all holdings in German territory of currencies issued by the United Nations during military operations or occupation, and will hand over the currencies so withdrawn free of cost to the United Nations.

35. The German authorities will comply with all such directions as may be issued by the United Nations for defraying the costs of the provisioning, maintenance, pay, accommodation and transport of the forces and agencies of the United Nations in Germany, the costs of executing the present Instrument, and payment for any relief in whatever form it may be provided by the United Nations.

Section VIII

Control of German Economy and Assets

36.—(a) The United Nations will have the right to exercise such control as they think necessary over all or any part or aspect of German finance, agriculture (including forestry), production and mining, industry, trade, distribution and economy generally, internal and external, and over all related or ancillary matters, including the right to direct or prohibit the manufacture, production, construction, treatment, use and disposal of any buildings, establishments, installations, public or private works, plant, equipment, products, materials, stocks or resources. Detailed statements of the subjects to which the present provision applies, together with the requirements of the United Nations in regard thereto, will from time to time be communicated to the German authorities.

(b) The foregoing paragraph shall include the right to take and make unrestricted use (whether inside or outside Germany) of any articles covered thereby which the United Nations may require in connexion with the conduct of hostilities against any country with which any of them is at war.

37.—(a) The property, assets, rights, titles and interests (whether situated inside or outside Germany) of the German State, its political subdivisions, the German Central Bank, State or semi-State or municipal or local authorities or Nazi organisations, and those situated outside Germany of any person resident or carrying on business in Germany, will not be disposed of in any way whatever without the sanction of the United Nations.

(b) The German authorities will furnish full information about the property referred to in paragraph (a) and will comply with such directions as the United Nations may give as to its transfer and disposal; and (without prejudice to any further demands which may be made in this connexion) will deliver to the United Nations all securities, certificates, deeds or other documents of title held by, Germany, or by any person subject to German law, and relating to property, assets, rights, titles and interests situated in the territory of the United Nations, including any shares, stocks, debentures or other obligations of any company incorporated in accordance with the laws of any of the United Nations.

(c) Property, assets, rights, titles and interests situated inside Germany will not be removed outside Germany or be transferred or disposed of to any person resident or carrying on business outside Germany.

(d) Nothing in paragraphs (a)–(c) shall, as regards property, assets, rights, titles and interests situated inside Germany, be deemed to prevent sales or transfers to persons resident in Germany for the purpose of maintaining or carrying on the national life, economy and administration in conformity with Article 60.

38. The German authorities will hold at the disposal of the United Nations all gold coin and bullion and all silver coin and bullion situated in Germany, and all such coin and bullion situated outside Germany as is owned by or held on behalf of any person resident or carrying on business in Germany.

Section IX

Control of German Relations with Other Countries

39.—(a) The German authorities will comply with the directions of the United Nations in regard to all matters affecting Germany’s foreign policy and relations with other countries.

(b) In particular, no foreign obligations, undertakings or commitments of any kind will be assumed or entered into by or on behalf of the German authorities, without the sanction of the United Nations.

40. Pending such further arrangements as may be made in any Treaty of Peace or otherwise:— (a) the German authorities will comply with all such directions as the United Nations may give during the period of the present Instrument concerning the abrogation, bringing into force, revival or application of any treaty, convention or other international agreement, or any part or provision thereof, to which Germany is or has been a party;

(b) the German authorities will comply with any directions which the United Nations may give with a view to Germany becoming a party to any other treaty, convention or international agreement or arrangement which may be specified.

41. Except as permitted by the United Nations, there shall be no financial, commercial or other intercourse with, or dealings with or for the benefit of, countries at war with any of the United Nations, or territories occupied by such countries, or with any other country or person specified by the United Nations.

42.—(a) Diplomatic and consular relations with countries at war with any of the United Nations, and with any other country specified by the United Nations, will be broken off. German diplomatic, consular and other officials, and members of the German land, sea and air forces accredited to or serving on missions in such countries will be recalled. Diplomatic, consular and other officials, and members of Service missions of such countries in Germany will be dealt with as the United Nations prescribe.

(b) The United Nations reserve the right to require the withdrawal of neutral diplomatic and consular officers from occupied German territory, and to prescribe and lay down regulations governing the procedure for, and methods of, communication between the German authorities and their representatives in neutral countries, and regarding communications emanating from or destined for the representatives of neutral countries in German territory.

43.—(a) German nationals will, pending further instructions, be prevented from leaving German territory except as authorised or directed by the United Nations.

(b) The German authorities will comply with any directions issued by the United Nations for the recall of German nationals resident abroad, and for the reception in Germany of any persons whom the United Nations may designate.

Section X

Prisoners of War, Internees, Political Prisoners, Foreign Workers and other Foreign Nationals and Foreign Property

44. Prisoners of war, and any civilians of non-German nationality, who are confined, interned, or otherwise under restraint in German hands will, with their property and effects, be released and dealt with in accordance with arrangements to be made by the United Nations.

45.—(a) Pending instructions for their release or removal, all such prisoners of war and internees will remain in their existing camps, prisons, hospitals or other places of confinement. Where these are entirely or mainly utilised for the confinement of prisoners of war and internees, they will, together with all stores, records, arms and ammunition, be handed over forthwith to the command of the local United Nations camp leader, senior officer or other senior representative of the prisoners or internees, or to such other person as the United Nations may send or designate for the purpose. The German authorities will at all times be responsible for maintaining all the essential administrative, supply and other services of the camps, prisons, hospitals or other places of confinement so long as any prisoners or internees remain there, and for complying with any orders relative thereto given by the United Nations officer or representative to whom command has been handed over.

(b) There shall be no removal by the German authorities of prisoners of war or internees, nor removal nor destruction of their property or effects, or of the stores, records, arms or ammunition in their camps, prisons, hospitals or other places of confinement, nor any transfers between camps, except as directed by the United Nations.

46. Political prisoners, including Germans, who have been placed under restriction, detention or sentence (including sentence in absentia) on account of their dealings or sympathies with the United Nations, or of their race, language, religion or political opinions, will be released as and when directed by the United Nations, and relieved from all legal or other disabilities to which they have been subjected.

47. The German authorities will be responsible generally for the safety, maintenance and welfare of all prisoners of war, internees and political prisoners, and will afford the fullest facilities in regard to their release and subsequent movements.

48. No person shall be prosecuted or molested by the German authorities on account of his dealings or sympathies with the United Nations, including the performance of any action calculated to facilitate the execution of the present Instrument.

49.—(a) The German authorities will comply with all directions that may be given by the United Nations for the repatriation of foreign workers and of other persons of foreign nationality in or passing through Germany, their property and effects, and for controlling the movements of refugees and displaced persons.

(b) The German authorities will take all appropriate steps to ensure the safety, maintenance and welfare of persons not of German nationality and of their property and the property of foreign States.

50. The German authorities will furnish all such lists of names, statements of location and other information as may be required by the United Nations for the purposes of this Section.

Section XI

War Criminals and Quislings and other Traitors

51.—(a) Adolf Hitler and his chief associates, and all persons suspected of having committed, ordered or abetted war crimes or analogous offences, whose names or designations appear on lists to be communicated to the German authorities, will forthwith be apprehended and surrendered into the hands of the United Nations.

(b) The same shall apply in the case of any national of any of the United Nations who is alleged to have committed offences against his national law and whose name or designation appears on lists to be similarly communicated.

52. The primary responsibility for arresting and surrendering and for preventing the flight, escape or concealment of the persons mentioned in Article 51 will rest with the German authorities, without prejudice, however, to the right of the United Nations themselves to take such steps in this regard as they may judge necessary. The German authorities will comply with any instructions given by the United Nations for these purposes, and will take all measures and afford all information and facilities calculated to lead to the arrest and surrender of those concerned.

53.—(a) The German authorities will furnish any information and documents, and will secure the attendance of any witnesses, required for the trial of those concerned, and will in general give all other aid and assistance for this purpose.

(b) The German authorities will comply with any directions given in regard to the property of those concerned, such as its seizure, custody or surrender.

Section XII

Suppression of Nazi Organisations and Legislation, Control of German Law and Administration

54. All Nazi organisations as defined by the United Nations will be disbanded as and when the United Nations direct, except any such organisations or parts thereof as they may specify. The German authorities will comply promptly with all such further directions as the United Nations may give for the abolition of Nazi institutions, the dismissal and internment of Nazi personnel, the control or seizure of Nazi property and funds, and the suppression of Nazi ideology and teaching.

55.—(a) All German laws involving discrimination on grounds of race, language, religion or political opinions will be rescinded, and all legal or other disabilities resulting therefrom will be cancelled.

(b) The German authorities will comply with all such instructions as the United Nations may give regarding the property, assets, rights, titles and interests of persons affected by the laws mentioned in paragraph (a).

56. Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles 54 and 55, the German authorities will comply with any instructions issued by the United Nations for the repeal of Nazi legislation and the reform of German law and the German legal, judicial and administrative systems, their personnel and organisation.

Section XIII

Information and Inspection

57.—(a) Without prejudice to any specific obligations contained in other provisions of the present Instrument, the German authorities and any other person in a position to do so will furnish or cause to be furnished all such information and documents of every kind as the United Nations may require.

(b) There shall be no destruction, removal, concealment, suppression or alteration of any of the documents, or of any records containing any of the information, liable to be required by the United Nations under the present Instrument. They shall remain intact in their present locations until further directions are given.

(c) The United Nations shall have the right to enter any building, establishment, property or area for the purpose of safeguarding, inspecting or obtaining any of the documents or information which they are entitled to require under the present Instrument. The German authorities will give all necessary facilities and assistance for this purpose, including the services of archivists and other specialist staff.

58. Without prejudice to any other provision of the present Instrument, the United Nations will enjoy full rights of entry to and inspection of any building, installation, establishment, property or area, and of any of the contents thereof, for the purposes of the present Instrument.

Section XIV

General

59. Without prejudice to any other provisions of the present Instrument, the United Nations shall be entitled to exercise all or any of the powers possessed at the date of the present Instrument, or subsequently acquired, by the German Government, the German Supreme Command and any State, municipal or local Government or authority.

60.—(a) Subject to the provisions of the present Instrument, the German authorities and the German people will maintain and carry on the national life, economy and administration in all its aspects. In particular, without prejudice to any measures for their ultimate disbandment, the ordinary Police will continue their normal functions until otherwise directed.

(b) The German authorities and people will abstain generally from all action detrimental to the interests of the United Nations, to the maintenance of public order and good government, to the security and welfare of the forces and agencies of the United Nations in Germany, or to the execution of the present Instrument.

61.—(a) There shall, on the part of the German authorities and people, be no concealment, destruction, scuttling or dismantling of, nor damage to, arms, ammunition, warships, aircraft, or other war material, ships, transport, bases, airfields, ports or harbours, nor to any form of building, establishment, installation, device, means of production, supply, distribution or communication, plant, equipment, stocks or resources, or, in general, public or private utilities, services or facilities of any kind, wherever situated.

(b) Any such measures already ordered, undertaken or begun will be immediately countermanded or discountinued. All stocks, equipment, plant or other material already concealed will forthwith be declared, and will be dealt with as the United Nations may direct.

(c) Subject to the provisions of the present Instrument, the German authorities will be responsible for the preservation, safeguarding and upkeep of all forms of property and materials affected by any of the said provisions.

(d) All ships, aircraft, transport, war and other material, stores, equipment, plant, fortifications, bases, stations, establishments, installations, devices and property generally, which are liable to be restored, surrendered or delivered under or in consequence of the present Instrument, will be handed over intact and in good condition, subject only to ordinary wear and tear and to any damage caused during the continuance of hostilities which it has proved impossible to make good.

62. Any powers which the United Nations are entitled to exercise under any provision of the present Instrument may be exercised directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, either by the United Nations themselves or by the issue of instructions to the German authorities and people, and generally in such manner and according to such procedure and methods as the United Nations may determine.

63.—(a) The German authorities will take all executive, legislative and judicial measures necessary for the enforcement and execution of the present Instrument, and for securing compliance with its terms on the part of all persons subject to their jurisdiction.

(b) The German authorities will comply with all such specific directions as may be given by the United Nations under or for the purpose of executing any of the provisions of the present Instrument. All such directions may be given from time to time as may appear to the United Nations to be necessary or convenient.

64.—(a) The United Nations will be entitled to take all such steps as they may deem necessary to secure the execution of the provisions of the present Instrument, including any action of a conservatory, preventive or precautionary character required for safeguarding property, preserving the rights of the United Nations or preventing evasion of [or] non-fulfilment of German obligations.

(b) Without prejudice to their rights under other provisions of the present Instrument, the United Nations shall be entitled to make the evasion, non-fulfilment or obstruction of its execution an offence punishable by such tribunals as they may establish for the purpose.

65. Any of the rights, powers and functions conferred on the United Nations by the present Instrument may be exercised on their behalf by the Commander or Commanders-in-Chief of the forces of the United Nations, any person or persons thereto authorised by any such Commander-in-Chief, or any other authority or authorities which may be designated by the United Nations for the purpose of the execution of the present Instrument or any particular provisions thereof.

66.—(a) The competent authority under Article 65, and any person acting under the direction thereof, may issue such detailed instructions as may be required for determining, in relation to any provision of the present Instrument— (i) the matters covered by such provision,

(ii) the manner in which it is to be carried out,

(iii) generally, the interpretation and effect to be given to it.

(b) The German authorities will comply fully and in all respects with the instructions of any authority acting under Article 65.

67. Any disagreement regarding the interpretation or application of the present Instrument shall be determined by an authority to be designated by the United Nations for that purpose, whose decision will be final.

Section XV

Definitions

68. For the purposes of the present Instrument:— (a) all references to the German armed forces or forces under German command shall be deemed to include the Nazi Militia, S.S.,60 S.A.,61 police and such other military, semi-military, pre- or paramilitary or armed units, formations or associations as the United Nations may specify;

(b) the terms “war material”, “devices”, “installations”, “establishments”, “utilities”, “services”, “facilities” and other technical terms or terms of art employed in the present Instrument shall respectively have their normal meanings and scope, subject to any extension, limitation or variation thereof which the United Nations may specify for the purposes of any provision of the said Instrument;

(c) the term “German authorities” includes any German Government exercising power over all or any part of Germany, the German Supreme Command and all subordinate naval, military or air commands or authorities, all State, municipal and local governments or governing bodies or authorities, and all executive, administrative and judicial officials, officers or authorities;

(d) the provisions of paragraph (b) shall also apply to the terms “German”, “Germany”, “German territory”, “German officials” and “German nationals”;

(e) the term “person” or “national” shall, unless the context otherwise requires, include a body of persons, whether corporate or unincorporate.

Section XVI

Final Clauses

69. The present Instrument shall be confirmed by the German Government. It will enter into force . . . . . hours after the Instrument of Confirmation has been received at . . . . . ; and hostilities between the United Nations and Germany will cease in all theatres of war at that time. It will remain in operation until or save in so far as superseded by any other arrangements, or until the coming into force of the Peace Treaty with Germany.

70. The present Instrument may be denounced by the United Nations with immediate effect if German obligations thereunder are not fulfilled. As an alternative, the United Nations may penalise contravention of it by measures appropriate to the circumstances, such as air or other punitive action.

Signed on the . . . . . . . at . . . . . . . (hour) . . . . . . . (time) at . . . . . . .(place).
(Signatures)

52 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 13325, January 15; received January 20.

53 Dated January 15, p. 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81].

55 Entitled “Treatment of Germany” and printed as Moscow Conference Document No. 20; for text, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 720.

56 For correspondence regarding the attitude of the United States toward possible modification of the principle of unconditional surrender, see pp. 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258] ff.

57 For text of the Declaration on Austria, released to the press on November 1, 1943, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 761, or Department of State Bulletin, November 6, 1943, p. 310.

58 Those persons in German-occupied territories collaborating with the German authorities.

60 Schutzstaffel (Nazi Black Guards).

61 Sturmabteilung (Storm Troopers).

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang) 740.00119 EAC/53

[Document 80]

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)62

EAC (44) 2 London, 15 January, 1944.

Military Occupation of Germany

1. The Commission has decided to begin its work by examining the group of questions relating to Germany indicated in paragraph 3 of its terms of reference, namely the elaboration of the terms of surrender to be imposed on Germany and of the machinery required to ensure the fulfilment of those terms.

2. The Commission will therefore have to draft an instrument of surrender for submission to the three Governments. It will also have to advise on the constitution and functions of the various Allied or United Nations bodies, such, for example, as a Control Commission, required for enforcing the terms of surrender upon Germany.

3. There is, however, one measure which is fundamental for this latter purpose, and is indeed the indispensable condition for the enforcement of the terms of surrender upon Germany, namely military occupation.

4. The Commission will recall that the question of the military occupation of Germany appears in the item about Germany which was placed on the agenda of the Moscow Conference (Item No. 7) by the United Kingdom Government, (see Section 3 of E.A.C. (P)43/2 of the 20th December 1943) and was subsequently referred by the Conference to the European Advisory Commission for detailed study.

5. In the paper on Germany circulated at the Moscow Conference by the United States Delegation it was recommended that, for the purpose of securing the execution of surrender terms and ensuring the creation of conditions for a permanent system of security, the occupation of Germany should be effected by contingents of British, Soviet and American forces. During the discussion of this question at the Conference at its 7th meeting on October 25th,63 Mr. Eden64 said that he agreed generally with the American proposal. He suggested that the scheme might be worked out by experts chosen from the members of the London Commission. According to the records of the Conference prepared by the United Kingdom Delegation, M. Molotov65 and Mr. Hull66 agreed to this.

6. The annexed memorandum on the military occupation of Germany is circulated by the United Kingdom Representative as a contribution to the discussion of this question by the Commission.

7. It should be understood that the boundaries of the zones of occupation of the United Kingdom, United States and Soviet forces suggested in Part IV of the annexed memorandum and shown in the map are put forward tentatively and may have to be reviewed in the light of any examination of this question by the military staffs. The United Kingdom Government should not be regarded as being committed to them.

W[illiam] S[trang]

[Annex]

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Delegation to the European Advisory Commission

the military occupation of germany

Part I

Assumptions and Definitions

1. Throughout the present memorandum the following assumptions have been made:— (a) That the war against Japan will continue for some time after the defeat of Germany.

(b) That, although widespread rioting and disorder are to be expected in Germany after her defeat, and although Ministers and high officials must be presumed to have fled or to have been removed, yet there will exist, at any rate for some considerable time, some kind of central administration (although not necessarily a central government) as well as local authorities, both civil and military, with whom it is possible to deal.

(c) That the bulk of the troops needed for the occupation of Germany will be provided, at any rate for a considerable time, by the United Kingdom, the United States and the Soviet Union, preferably in substantially equal shares.

(d) That other Allied States whose territory borders on Germany will wish to participate in the task of occupation as soon as they are in a position to do so, beginning by sending token contingents, and later making a more substantial contribution.

(e) That Austria will not form part of Germany after the war.

(f) That East Prussia and Danzig, and possibly other areas, will ultimately be given to Poland.

(g) That it will be the policy to confine Germany elsewhere within frontiers no wider than those which obtained in 1937.

(h) That, if a “Zoning” plan is agreed on as the basis of the allied occupation of Germany, the boundaries of the zones will have been agreed on before hostilities cease, and will consequently not depend on the positions which the forces of the three principal allies respectively may have reached before the fighting stops.

2. Throughout the present memorandum the following phrases have been used in the senses set opposite to them respectively:— “Total Military Occupation” The right to move forces into any part of Germany. (N.B. This does not imply that there would be Allied troops in every part of the country at all times.)

“Partial Military Occupation” The right to move forces into certain specified areas only.

Part II

The Case For and Against Total Occupation

3. The object of this part of the memorandum is to set out the arguments for and against total occupation, and to arrive at a conclusion whether this is necessary or not. The memorandum also considers the extent to which air forces could replace land forces in carrying out the military occupation of Germany, and the degree to which it will be necessary to employ land forces, notwithstanding the development of Air Power since 1918.

United Nations Objectives.

4. When hostilities against Germany cease, the objectives of the United Nations should be:— (a) to prevent or, at least, minimise disorder in Germany;

(b) ensure the rapid and total disarmament of Germany and the break-up of the German military machine;

(c) to complete the destruction of the Nazi Organisation;

(d) to bring home to every German the realisation that Germany has suffered complete military defeat;

(e) to ensure that tolerable living conditions for the German people are restored, in order to promote objective (a).

Arguments in favour of Total Occupation.

5. These five objectives are considered below in relation to the question how far total military occupation of Germany will help towards their attainment:—

(a) and (e) Prevention of Disorder and Restoration of Tolerable Living Conditions.

Order must be maintained. Without an orderly Germany, there cannot be an orderly Europe. Without order in Germany tolerable living conditions for the German people cannot be brought about.

Immediately after the last war, it was found that the ordinary German police were inadequate to deal with various disorders and, in the absence of an Allied army occupying more than a small fraction of the country, voluntary bodies composed of the “toughest” ex-soldiers were called upon by the German Government to maintain order. They defended the frontiers in the East, and suppressed disturbances at home, thereby regaining some of the prestige which the army had lost through defeat in war.

Moreover, in the early days, before the new Reichswehr67 was constituted, Germany was able to build up considerable local paramilitary forces such as the various “Wehrverbände” which were ostensibly formed for purposes of local self-defence. Thus, the German General Staff were able to begin the reconstruction of the German military machine.

After the present war the prospects of riot and disorder in Germany will be greater than in 1918, and it is reasonable to suppose that similar problems will arise but in a more acute form. This time, however, no German armed forces will be available to restore order since complete disarmament of all German military and para-military forces will be necessary. Accordingly, responsibility for the suppression of disorder will rest on the forces of the United Nations alone and unaided: total allied occupation of the country is, therefore, essential.

(b) Disarmament.

The effective and rapid disarmament of Germany must depend on the efficient working of the Control Commission. The Reports of the Inter-Allied Commissions of Control which operated in Germany from 1920 onwards show how their tasks were made more difficult by the lack of military force behind them. There were many evasions and much obstruction, and these led to delays and difficulties in enforcing the military clauses of the Treaty of Versailles.68 In the result, many concessions had eventually to be made. These conditions should not be tolerated again; and it seems clear that only the presence of adequate armed forces distributed throughout Germany and the will to use them firmly when necessary, will suffice to ensure speedy and complete disarmament.

It is of the utmost importance that effective disarmament should be carried through with the least possible delay since, until this has been done, it will be impossible to begin working for the reconstruction of Germany as a reasonable and pacific member of the comity of nations.

(c) Destruction of the Nazi Machine.

The essential pre-requisite for the abolition of the Nazi system is the conviction in the minds of all Germans that this system has failed in the military field as elsewhere, and there can be little doubt but that the most effective means of bringing this failure home to the minds of the ordinary German will be a foreign military occupation of his country.

(d) Realisation of Defeat.

After the last war, the visible signs of military defeat were not apparent to the German people except in one small area in the west. This fact made it easy for the German military class to develop the legend of the “stab in the back,” and many people were genuinely brought to believe that the German army had never been beaten in the field. It is most important that this time no room should be left for the legend of German military invincibility, and that the military “caste” should be discredited in the eyes of every German.

Only total military occupation on a substantial scale can achieve this end. Such occupation, however, had best not be prolonged beyond the period needed to achieve complete disarmament, since this might check any possible development towards a healthy and pacific German State, or even encourage a swing back towards militarism and the preparation of a war of revenge.

6. There are two further considerations which suggest that total military occupation of Germany by the United Nations is desirable:— (i) Once the smaller nations of Europe are freed from the fear of Germany, they will become less amenable to pressure from the Great Powers, and they will almost inevitably march in to fill any vacuum not already filled by military forces.

(ii) Frontier adjustments will have to be carried out, e.g., East Prussia and Austria. In some cases, large-scale transfers of population may also be necessary. Although mere frontier adjustments might well be carried through by Commissions working with the ultimate sanction of forces in the background, large-scale transfers of population will be impossible unless substantial military forces are present.

Arguments against Total Occupation.

7. The chief argument which is likely to be advanced against total occupation and in support of a policy of partial occupation is that of economy. Such a partial occupation, it may be urged, would be less costly in material, and in men. It can hardly be doubted that, within a very few months of a German collapse, there will be a strong demand for the release of troops, both for the war in the Far East and to provide for the release of man-power to industry. Clearly, the smaller the army of occupation in Germany, the easier it will be to meet these other demands. Moreover, conditions have changed a great deal since 1918. Vast strides have been made in the development of air power, and the mobility of land forces has also very greatly increased. The striking power of weapons is also far greater than it was twenty years ago. It may, therefore, be argued that once Germany is thoroughly disarmed the control of a few air bases might be sufficient to ensure effective Allied control of the country.

8. Another argument which it is possible to raise against total occupation, at any rate for more than a short time, is that, whilst it is important to bring home to every German that the “Wehrmacht”69 has been utterly defeated, it would be a political error to prolong the humiliation of Germany unduly, with the risk of driving the whole German people into the Nationalist camp. In support of this argument it may be urged that the sense of injustice created in the minds of the younger generation of Germans by the Ruhr occupation of 1923 was one of the main causes of the swing of German opinion from the social democratic to the Nazi camp. It may also be argued that psychological factors of this kind were at least as important as the economic and general policy of the Allies in undermining the authority of the Liberal elements of the Weimar Republic, and preventing a cooperative German Government from striking firm roots.

The Alternative to Total Occupation.

9. The alternative to total occupation would be to exclude certain areas from the scope of the occupation. These would inevitably become breeding grounds for subversive activities, or even deliberately fomented disorders, which would, as happened after 1918, lead to a demand by the German Government for permission to maintain military forces for the preservation of order. Underground military activities are traditional in a defeated Germany, and total occupation constitutes the only means by which these activities can be effectively countered.

Moreover, should disorders break out in an unoccupied area, our lines of communication leading through that area would inevitably become imperilled, and any stoppage of traffic might seriously prejudice the security of some part of the Allied forces. Finally, if we were to begin by partial occupation, it might be difficult to pass on to total occupation at a later stage if this should prove to be necessary. It would be very much easier to begin with total occupation and then to modify the system if this should prove practicable. Thus, total occupation at the beginning may very well prove the more economical course in the long run.

Conclusion on Total or Partial Occupation.

10. On balance, the conclusion reached is that the only satisfactory solution of the problem, at any rate in the earlier stages, is total occupation.

Stages of Occupation.

11. The stages by which the military occupation and control of Germany shall proceed will now be considered. This occupation falls naturally into four stages:— (a) Stage 1. (The immediate aftermath of hostilities.)

At the moment when fighting ceases, the Allies will probably have in or near Germany very large land forces, a large proportion of which will be available, at any rate for a short period, for occupation duties. Indeed, for administrative reasons alone, it might not be possible to remove any substantial proportion of the troops involved immediately after the “cease fire,” even if this were desired.

During this stage, therefore, total occupation presents no grave manpower difficulties.

(b) Stage 2. (The first stage of disarmament.)

This stage covers the period between the date on which the work of disarmament begins and the time when, although disarmament and the destruction of war industries are not complete, yet such substantial progress has been made that Germany has been deprived of the capacity for any effective military action. Towards the end of this period, as conditions settle down, and when the disarmament and demobilisation of German forces are nearing completion, it may, perhaps, be possible to reduce the strength of the occupying army, though forces should still be stationed at the more important centres throughout the country.

It is estimated that, if proper steps are taken, the first two stages might be completed within some two years.

(c) Stage 3. (The period during which the disarmament of Germany and the destruction of her armament industry will be completed.)

During this stage air forces could probably be used to an increasing extent to reduce the number of land forces needed to support the authority of the Control Commission.

(d) Stage 4. (An indefinite period running from the moment when Germany has been totally disarmed until the time when the new German Government has become sufficiently established and the Allied Powers are convinced that its peaceful intentions are such as to render it possible to withdraw entirely the forces of occupation.)

When the disarming of Germany and the destruction of her armament industries are complete, and the problem has become one of ensuring that the work accomplished by the Control Commission is not undone by renewed attempts to create a war potential, it might be possible to provide the necessary backing for the Control Commission by the use of air forces alone, operating either from bases in Germany or, perhaps, from bases in neighbouring United Nations territory, including the United Kingdom. In any case, it may be hoped that during this last stage the number of land forces required would be small.

During the last two stages the speed with and the extent to which it will be possible to reduce the size of the forces of occupation must largely depend on the progress made in the political re-education of Germany. Only when it becomes clear that the spirits of militarism and revenge are dead, and that a sincere desire for peaceful co-operation exists, will it be wise to abandon all methods of control and, notably, some form of occupation.

Use of Air Forces.

12. The question how far air forces could replace land forces in achieving the necessary degree of control has been carefully considered. During the earlier stages a state of disorder is likely to exist which, coupled with the existence of large German forces to be disarmed and controlled, will make it essential for substantial Allied land forces to be present. No doubt air forces will be able to give great help, and their presence will make it possible effectively to occupy Germany with far fewer land forces than would otherwise be the case, but during this period control by air forces alone would almost certainly not be a completely effective substitute.

It is to be noted that considerable moral effect could be produced during this period by periodical mass formation flights of Allied aircraft over the territory. Such flights would serve to impress upon the population the fact that the German Air Force no less than the German Army has been defeated.

Use of Naval Forces.

13. Just as occupation by land forces will bring home to the Germans the defeat of their army, and flights by Allied air forces will make clear the failure of their Air Force, so also steps should be taken, at least during the earlier period of occupation, to demonstrate the failure of the German navy and of the U-boat campaign.

This could probably best be done by basing a small number of Allied warships and shore-based personnel at certain major German ports from which frequent visits should be made to the remainder.

conclusions on part ii

14. The conclusions of the memorandum on the question of total versus partial occupation may therefore be summarised as follows:— (a) Total occupation of Germany is essential if Germany is to be effectively disarmed and her military spirit broken.

(b) At first the occupying forces should be as much in evidence as possible so as to bring home to the German public the fact that their armed forces have been utterly defeated. After this object has been achieved and Germany has been disarmed the occupation should be adjusted so as to give Germany a chance of developing along peaceful lines, and so that the continued presence of foreign troops may not be used by German militarists as an argument in favour of planning a war of revenge.

At the same time, we must continue ready at any moment to use force without hesitation at the first sign of any recrudescence of military activity.

(c) A strong air striking force will be essential at all stages, but control by air forces alone would not be an effective substitute for occupation by land forces under conditions in which internal disorder is the main problem to be faced. Such conditions are likely to obtain during the earlier stages of occupation.

(d) When the disarming of Germany and the destruction of her armament industries are complete and when internal conditions are more stable, the problem will become one of ensuring that the work accomplished by the Control Commission is not undone by renewed attempts to create a war potential. It may at that stage be possible to provide the necessary sanction by the maintenance of a strong air striking force. In these circumstances the number of land forces required would be small.

Part III

Mixed Allied Forces or Occupation by Zones

The Two Possible Methods.

15. It would be theoretically possible to organise the occupation of Germany on either of two bases. On the one hand, all the troops involved, from whichever of the United Nations they came, could be “mixed up” in small units alongside each other, each district of Germany being occupied by a polyglot force consisting of soldiers of all, or substantially all, the United Nations. On the other hand, Germany might be divided into a number of zones in the occupation of each of which one or other of the Allied Powers would be predominant, although contingents of the forces of the other United Nations might be present in each case.

The Arguments for Mixed Allied Forces.

16. The main advantages which would appear to result from “mixing” the Allied troops together are:— (a) that the entire military occupation would be visibly carried out by the United Nations as a body rather than by any one State;

(b) that a single policy would presumably be applied throughout the whole of the occupied area;

(c) that the close liaison which would be necessary at all levels between all ranks of the Allied Forces concerned might be expected to favour the development of habits of co-operation between them, and it might be hoped that these habits once formed might bring about a greater mutual understanding leading to a more confident political co-operation between the peoples concerned;

(d) the removal of fears of the creation of national “Spheres of Influence.”

The Arguments against Mixed Allied Forces.

17. Against these arguments in favour of “mixing” the Allied Forces, it is necessary to take account of the following disadvantages:— (a) Complicated problems of command and liaison would inevitably arise, and considerable friction could hardly be avoided.

(b) The difficulty of administering and maintaining troops from their home bases would be greatly accentuated, more especially as the weapons, munitions and supplies of the forces concerned, generally differ.

(c) “Mixed” forces would be less efficient in dealing with any large-scale disturbances. The suppression of such disturbances is in the nature of an operation of war, and cohesion in formations, at any rate up to a certain size, is essential if forces are not to be wastefully employed. For example, it is evident that three battalions found from the armies of different nations, differently armed, equipped, disciplined and administered, do not make a brigade even if they are provided with a joint staff and ancillary services.

(d) The existence of “mixed” staffs at any but the highest level could hardly fail to lead to trouble and confusion. Not only would the Staff Officers concerned have been trained according to widely different systems, but it would be optimistic to hope that sufficient officers could be found with the necessary linguistic qualifications and knowledge of national characteristics to prevent the lack of these becoming a major obstacle to effective collaboration.

(e) The “mixing” of forces would inevitably greatly increase the danger of disorder and quarrelling breaking out between the troops of the different nations; the difference in rates of pay alone would be enough to cause discontent and envy. The resulting mutual ill-feeling between Allies, and the disturbances which would probably result, could not fail to supply first-class material for enemy propaganda, quite apart from the serious effect on the prospects of long-term internation co-operation.

(f) The decreased efficiency of the occupying forces which, for the reasons set out above, might be expected to result from a policy of “mixing” would entail an increase in the total numbers of the forces of occupation.

Conclusions in Favour of Occupation by Zones.

18. The occupation and control of Germany by the United Nations in the years immediately following the end of hostilities in Europe will, under the best possible conditions, present formidable problems, requiring for their solution very great goodwill, skill and tact on all sides. It would be a mistake to augment these difficulties by “mixing” the troops of the different Allied nations. In 1918, when British, French and Belgian troops had been fighting side by side for more than four years, it was found necessary to organise the occupation of the Rhineland on a basis of separate national zones.

After Waterloo (June 1815) about two-thirds of France was occupied in force by troops of the four principal Powers, the United Kingdom, Prussia, Austria and Russia, assisted by contingents furnished by the smaller Powers. Administrative difficulties and protests by the French Government against abuses and disorders almost immediately led to the adoption of a system of zoning similar in principle to that referred to in this paper.

19. The better part of the advantages which it might be hoped to achieve by a policy of “mixing” could be better and more surely attained under a policy of “zoning” by:— (a) control by a United Nations High Commission at the top designed to bring the military policy, actions and behaviour of the contingents of the constituent armies into line:

(b) the fostering of a spirit of “host” and “guest” between the forces of the predominant nation in each zone and the smaller self-contained Allied contingents stationed there. Experience has shown that this kind of sentiment can most easily be engendered where one party is in a heavy majority.

20. It has been suggested that the division of Germany into zones for the purposes of military occupation might give rise to political difficulties and that it might make difficult the adoption of a common policy towards Germany as a whole. The force of this argument is more apparent than real: subject to the overriding control of the High Commission, the attitude adopted towards the German population will inevitably differ from place to place according to the nationality of the senior allied officer in the area.

The main functions of the forces of occupation will be to preserve law and order, to prevent hostile action and to provide the necessary force to ensure compliance with the orders originating from the Allied Control Commission. Provided these tasks are satisfactorily accomplished, we shall have every reason to be satisfied, whether the methods adopted in different areas to secure, the same results are similar or not.

21. There is one further consideration which may be relevant in deciding whether or not to divide Germany into zones for the purposes of occupation. It is possible that, as occurred after the last war, the defeat of Germany may be the signal for the re-emergence of separatist movements in that country. Whether the United Nations decide forcibly to split Germany up into smaller States, or whether spontaneous movements towards particularism or separatism are merely encouraged by the Allies, there must be an advantage in dividing the country for purposes of occupation into areas whose boundaries approximate to the lines on which such tendencies towards division may be expected to develop.

conclusions on part iii

22. Taking into account all the arguments set out above, the following conclusions have been reached:— (a) The Allied forces of occupation should be disposed in three main zones.

(b) In each zone forces of one of the three Powers (United Kingdom, United States or Soviet Union) should predominate. Each zone should, however, contain contingents from the forces of the other two Powers and of the smaller Powers interested, so that the principle of military occupation by the United Nations may be maintained.

(c) The boundaries between the zones should, so far as possible, be drawn so as to encourage rather than to prejudice any separatist or particularist tendencies which may develop in Germany after her defeat.

Part IV

Zone Boundaries

Scope of Part IV.

23. On the assumption that, as recommended in Part III above, it is decided that the Allied forces of occupation in Germany should be disposed in three main Zones, it is proposed in this part of the memorandum to consider how these Zones should be delimited.

proposed zones of occupation

Considerations affecting the determination of Zone boundaries.

24. In delimiting the three Zones it is clearly desirable to have regard to the following considerations:— (a) That the boundaries between the Zones should, so far as possible, be drawn so as to encourage rather than to prejudice any separatist or particularist tendencies which may develop in Germany after her defeat.

(b) That the lines of communication and supply to the occupying troops from their home bases should be as convenient as possible.

(c) That the three Zones should be approximately comparable in size and population.

(d) That the boundaries between the Zones should, so far as possible, be co-terminous with Military and Civil administrative boundaries in Germany.

Geographical arrangement of the Zones.

25. The arrangement by which the main Soviet Forces would occupy Eastern Germany, the main British Forces North-West Germany, and the main American Forces South Germany would, on balance, provide the most convenient lines of communication and supply, and there do not appear to be any countervailing factors to justify another solution. Our proposals are, therefore, based on this main sub-division of the area to be occupied.

Boundaries between the Zones.

26. It is not possible to foresee what spontaneous movements (if any) may emerge in Germany tending towards a division of the Reich into separate States or towards a system of regional autonomy. Any such movements will, however, almost certainly be based on the revival of old loyalties to States or Provinces within certain natural internal boundaries dictated by geography, history and economic considerations. An example of an autonomous State which might possibly emerge is afforded by the South German Region south of the Main.

An anti-Prussian bias may well develop in certain areas, and there are strong grounds for weakening the present preponderance of Prussia.

27. The division of Germany into Zones for the purpose of occupation may not, in itself, encourage the development of separatism or particuralism. At the same time, if the boundaries between the Zones were so arranged as to cut across the natural lines of cleavage this could hardly fail to act as a check on spontaneous tendencies towards such developments. Accordingly, as far as possible, the Zone boundaries should be so drawn as not to divide areas in which local autonomous movements are likely to take place.

28. Taking all these considerations into account it is suggested that the most satisfactory Zone boundaries will be those delineated on the attached map, although, for reasons connected with operations and communications, there may be some delay in establishing the Southern Boundary of the British Zone so far South. These boundaries are drawn, as far as possible, in such a way as to follow the former boundaries of German States or Provinces. An exception to the general rule is that Prussia has been divided between two Zones. This has been done intentionally, since the undue preponderance of Prussia in the past has been one of the chief causes of the growth of the aggressive spirit in Germany, and we feel that the division of this State into two halves during the period of occupation is likely to discourage the rebirth of the Prussian military spirit.

In drawing the Zone boundaries shown on the attached map70 it has been found necessary to cut across the boundaries of certain Wehrkreise (military districts) but, with one exception, the boundaries coincide with those of the administrative areas known as Gaue into which Germany has been divided for certain administrative purposes during the period of the Nazi Régime. We consider that the relatively minor and temporary disadvantages which may result from the discrepancy between the Zone boundaries and the Wehrkreis boundaries are outweighed by the advantages of making the Zone boundaries coincide with the old State or Provincial frontiers.

Size of Zones.

29. The Areas and populations of the three Zones proposed are as follows:— Area, square miles. Population, millions.

Zone I (North-West Germany)—Mainly British 57,450 22.5

Zone II (Eastern)—Mainly Soviet 76,600 22.3

Zone III (Southern)—Mainly United States 47,100 15.7

These population figures are approximate only, being based on the figures of the census of 1933. The present population figures are not precisely known, and these figures must be regarded as providing only a rough guide to the present position.

30. It will be noticed that under the arrangements proposed the predominantly American Zone is smaller in both area and population than either of the other two Zones. For this reason it is suggested below that the United States might be invited, if they so desire, to assume the preponderant rôle in the occupation of Austria.

The Zone which it is proposed should be predominantly Soviet is the largest in area. The extent of this Zone will, however, be subject to reduction if it is decided to alter the Eastern boundaries of Germany to the benefit of Poland.

Combined Zone.

31. It is considered that, the Berlin area should be a separate Combined Zone occupied by selected troops representing, in due proportions, all the Allied forces of occupation. The principal role of this mixed force would be to support the authority of any Allied Military Government, the Control Commission and other Allied bodies and also to ensure the maintenance of order in the Capital.

East Prussia and Danzig.

32. In view of its special position East Prussia has not been included in the main Zoning system. If it is intended ultimately to hand over

this territory to Poland, the most satisfactory course would be for the Poles to undertake its occupation from the start. If, however, the Polish Armed Forces available prove inadequate to undertake this commitment, the next best solution would be for East Prussia to be occupied by a mixed inter-Allied force.

It is most desirable that an agreement should be arrived at beforehand as to the occupation and ultimate disposal of East Prussia and other territories in a similar position, such as Danzig and Upper Silesia.

Austria.

33. The three Governments have declared it to be their purpose to restore the independence of Austria. It will accordingly be desirable from the start to make separate arrangements for the occupation of that country.

Having regard to the way in which the Allied forces are disposed under the main Zoning proposals for Germany, and to the fact that the suggested American Zone is considerably smaller than the other two, the United States Government might conveniently be invited, if they so wish, to undertake the main responsibility for the occupation of Austria. The area involved is of some 32,300 square miles and the population (according to the 1938 census) is of some 6.7 millions. The total area of predominantly American occupation would thus amount to some 79,400 square miles, and include a population of some 22.4 millions. This would have the effect of making the American Zones together approximately equal in both territory and population to the proposed Soviet Zone.

In order to establish the fact of United Nations occupation in the minds of the Austrians, it might be desirable to station a British Division in that country, even if the principle is accepted that it is to be a predominantly American Zone.

Part V

Summary of Conclusions

34. To facilitate reference, the main conclusions reached in this memorandum are recapitulated below:— (a) Total occupation of Germany by Allied Forces is essential if Germany is to be effectively disarmed and her military spirit broken.

(b) At first the occupying forces should be as much in evidence as possible, so as to bring home to the German public the fact that their armed forces have been utterly defeated. After this object has been achieved and Germany has been disarmed, the occupation should be adjusted so as to give Germany a chance of developing along peaceful lines, and so that the continued presence of foreign troops may not be used by German militarists as an argument in favour of planning a war of revenge.

At the same time we must continue ready at any moment to use force without hesitation at the first sign of any recrudescence of military activity.

(c) A strong air striking force will be essential at all stages, but control by air forces alone would not be an effective substitute for occupation by land forces under conditions in which internal disorder is the main problem to be faced. Such conditions are likely to obtain during the earlier stages of occupation.

(d) When the disarming of Germany and the destruction of her armament industries are complete and when internal conditions are more stable, the problem will become one of ensuring that the work accomplished by the Control Commission is not undone by renewed attempts to create a war potential. It may at that stage be possible to provide the necessary sanction by the maintenance of a strong air striking force. In these circumstances the number of land forces required would be small.

(e) The Allied Forces of Occupation should be disposed in three main Zones, with a combined Zone round Berlin.

(f) In each Zone forces of one of the three Powers (United Kingdom, United States or Russia) should predominate. Each Zone should, however, contain contingents from the forces of the other two Powers, and of the smaller Powers interested.

(g) The boundaries of the three Zones should be those drawn on the attached map, for the reasons given in paras. 24 to 33 above.

London, 15 January, 1944.

62 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 13325, January 15; received January 20. For background on this British proposal, see William M. Franklin, “Zonal Boundaries and Access to Berlin”, World Politics, vol. xvi, No. 1, October 1963, pp. 7–12.

63 For a summary of the Seventh Regular Session of the Tripartite Conference at Moscow, October 25, 1943, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 629.

64 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

65 Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov, Soviet People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs.

66 Cordell Hull.

67 German Army.

68 For the text of the Treaty of Peace between the Allied and Associated Powers and Germany, signed at Versailles, June 28, 1919, see Foreign Relations, The Paris Peace Conference, 1919, vol. xii, p. 57.

69 German military forces.

70 See facing page.

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang) 740.00119 EAC/53

[Document 81]

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)71

E.A.C. (44) 3 London, 15 January, 1944.

Allied Control Machinery in Germany during the period of Occupation

In compliance with the invitation issued to Delegations by the European Advisory Commission at its first meeting on January 14th, I circulate to my colleagues, for the consideration of the Commission, some proposals on the Allied control machinery which would operate in Germany during the period of occupation.

W[illiam] S[trang]

[Annex]

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Delegation to the European Advisory Commission

MACHINERY IN GERMANY DURING THE PERIOD OF OCCUPATION

[Note.—For the purpose of this Memorandum the following definitions have been used:— Three Powers=United Kingdom, United States and U.S.S.R.

Allied=United Kingdom, United States, U.S.S.R, plus those Allied countries, including the Dominions, directly concerned with the European settlement.

United Nations=All members of the United Nations.

Control Commission=The body charged with supervising the execution of the terms of surrender or of the appropriate sections of any unilateral proclamations or declarations issued by the Commanders-in-Chief.]71a

I.—Introductory

1. The European Advisory Commission set up at the Moscow Conference has been instructed to take into account as material for its work the Memorandum of which a copy is set out in Appendix “A” to this paper.72

2. Taking that Memorandum as a basis, the machinery required for Germany during the period of occupation will now be considered in detail.

3. Germany will be entered by more than one army each with a separate Commander-in-Chief and distinct administrative organisations. The country will be divided, for the purposes of occupation, first into two and subsequently into three zones. Some central machinery will, therefore, be needed to introduce an element of uniformity in the systems of occupation carried out by the three armies in the three zones, and to handle any subjects which must be dealt with centrally.

II.—Possible Central Organisation for Europe

4. German problems can only be solved in relation to wider European problems. Once hostilities have ceased and the period of disorder following on the cessation of hostilities has passed, some Central Body dealing with European affairs will, it is hoped, be set up for the purpose of directing the activities of the Allied authorities, military and civil. This body will need to be furnished with subordinate organs designed to ensure that it has accurate knowledge of the problems of Europe.

III.—High Commission for Germany

5. It will, however, in any case be necessary to set up under any Central Body some further machinery to handle German problems on the spot. What seems to be required is an Allied High Commission for Germany, sitting in Berlin and acting as the representative of the Central Body, which can work out and direct the application to Germany as a whole of the approved policy.

6. If Allied action in Germany is to proceed from the start on the right lines, and if the necessary preliminary planning is to take place, it is necessary that a framework from which this High Commission for Germany might eventually develop should be established as soon as possible, even though it will probably not be possible for this body to enter fully on its functions until the immediate post-hostilities period has passed, and some measure of order has been restored.

A. Organisation During the Period of Active Hostilities.

7. The High Commission for Germany cannot operate fully until hostilities end, but it is necessary, nevertheless, to consider how its constitution will be affected by earlier events. As we see the position either of the following conditions may exist:— (a) parts of Germany may be occupied, while in other parts active hostilities continue; or

(b) the surrender of Germany may occur before any allied troops have set foot on German soil.

8. Whichever condition exists the primary tasks of the Allied armed forces will be:— (a) to extinguish any remaining resistance;

(b) to restore law and order; and

(c) to effect the initial disarmament of the German armed forces.

9. As long as fighting continues, and until these three primary tasks have been performed, the authority of Commanders-in-Chief must be supreme. It will, nevertheless, be important that an embryo High Commission shall be in existence to help Commanders-in-Chief by providing guidance to them on economic and political masters (including the purge of the German administration).

This body should, therefore, be established before the final collapse, so as to be in a position to provide the necessary guidance for communication through the appropriate channels to the Commanders-in-Chief as soon as they are in a position to make use of it.

B. Organisation during the “Middle Period,” i.e., the Aftermath of Hostilities.

10. During this transitional period, the ultimate responsibility must, as in the period of active hostilities, rest with the respective Commanders-in-Chief, although it may be hoped that the field covered by the advisory functions of the embryo High Commission will be progressively extended throughout the period. The questions how long this period will last and how soon it will be possible to hand over direction to the High Commission must largely depend on the internal state of Germany, and on the progress achieved in organising the occupying forces.

During this period control of the German Central Government (if it exists) and of the central German administrative machine would be exercised by representatives of the three Commanders-in-Chief. These representatives would sit together as a body and would have such subordinate political, military, economic and administrative staffs as might be found convenient. Together with their staffs they would, no doubt, be absorbed later into the High Commission: see paragraph 16(c) below.

C. Organisation during the Period of Effective Allied Control.

11. As soon as conditions have been established which make it possible to set up an effective central Allied authority in Germany, the way will have been paved for the High Commission to take charge; and it should do so at the earliest possible moment, at a time to be decided by the Governments of the Three Powers on the recommendation of their Commanders-in-Chief.

12. The High Commission will then become the supreme Allied authority in Germany, and its task will be to control the German administration, to see that the terms of surrender are carried out, to supervise political and economic developments in that country, and to attempt to mould them in directions favourable to the fulfilment of the aims of the United Nations.

13. If an acceptable central German Government exists, the High Commission will act as the channel through which the policy of the United Nations will be imposed on that Government. In the absence of such a German Government, it may be necessary for the High Commission to assume considerable administrative responsibilities. Even so, it will have to use existing German machinery and personnel as far as possible.

14. The High Commission would consequently direct, in accordance with the policy of the Allied Governments— (a) The Forces of Occupation, charged with— (i) the maintenance of order throughout Germany;

(ii) protection of the High Commission and other United Nations authorities;

(iii) the provision of the necessary force to ensure that the requirements of the United Nations are met; and

(iv) in any areas where it may become necessary to exercise military government for a time, the supervision and, where necessary, the actual conduct of local administration through Civil Affairs staffs.

(b) The Control Commission, charged with supervising the execution of the terms of any Instrument concluded with the German Government or High Command, or, in the absence of such an Instrument, of the appropriate sections of any unilateral Proclamations or Declarations issued by the respective Commanders-in-Chief on behalf of the United Nations.

(c) Any United Nations Agencies charged, in Germany, with the problems of relief, repatriation, transport, &c.

(d) The Central Civil Administration, if it should be decided to keep this distinct from the Control Commission.

15. The Commanders-in-Chief should continue to have the right— (a) to appeal direct to their respective Governments; and

(b) to declare a state of martial law in any area in their respective zones, should they consider this necessary.

IV.—Composition of the High Commission

16. The composition of the High Commission and its staffs would be as follows:— (a) The High Commission itself.—This would initially consist of one representative each of the United Kingdom, United States and U.S.S.R. The Presidency of the Commission might be held by each of the three representatives in turn.

(b) Political, Economic and Administrative Staffs.—The personnel would be drawn mainly, though not exclusively, from the Three Powers.

(c) Military Staff.—This Staff would, at any rate at the outset, consist of representatives of the Three Powers only, who would advise the High Commission on military questions and act as a link between the High Commission and the three Commanders-in-Chief.

The question of the association of France and of the other Allies with the High Commission will require separate study.

V.—Conclusions

17. The following conclusions have therefore been reached:— (a) During the period of active hostilities and their immediate aftermath:— (i) Each Commander-in-Chief would exercise supreme authority in the areas controlled by his own forces.

(ii) An Allied High Commission for Germany would coordinate policy on economic and political matters (including the purge of the German administration) by providing guidance to the Commanders-in-Chief through the appropriate channels.

(iii) Control of the central German Government (if any) or the central German administrative machine would be exercised by the representatives of the three Commanders-in-Chief, sitting together as a body.

(b) During the period of effective Allied control:— (i) As soon as the military situation permits, the High Commission would become the supreme Allied authority in Germany.

(ii) The High Commission would initially consist of representatives of the United Kingdom, the United States and the U.S.S.R., and would have political, military, economic and administrative staffs.

(iii) The High Commission would direct:— (a) The Armies of Occupation;

(b) A Control Commission;

(c) Any Agencies dealing with relief, repatriation, transport, &c.

(d) The Central Civil Administration, if it should be decided to keep this distinct from the Control Commission.

(iv) The three Commanders-in-Chief would retain the right: (a) To appeal direct to their respective Governments; and

(b) To declare a state of martial law in any area in their respective zones should they consider this necessary.

Two Charts illustrating respectively the proposals for the machinery required during the immediate aftermath of hostilities and during the period of effective Allied control will be found in Appendices “B” and “C” to this paper.73

London, 15 January, 1944.

71 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 13325, January 15; received January 20.

71a Brackets appear in the original.

72 Appendix “A”, a copy of the British memorandum of July 1, 1943, regarding the treatment of Germany, not printed. A British memorandum of essentially the same content was circulated at the Moscow Conference as Conference Document No. 7, printed in Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 708.

73 Neither printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/52: Telegram

[Document 82]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 19, 1944—11 p.m.

475. Personal for the Ambassador. Your 427, January 18, 8 p.m.74

1. A comprehensive set of documents respecting surrender terms for Germany and Rumania which were prepared in the Department are being sent informally to you, and will be brought by Lieutenant-Commander Sargent75 who is assigned to Admiral Stark76 and who has already departed from Washington. These documents are arranged according to the state of their clearance which Sargent, who has represented the Navy on the Working Security Committee, can explain. You will note that certain of them are preliminary even in this Department, while others have received our approval as explained below. I understand that another set of this documentation is being brought by Brigadier-General C. W. Wickersham,77 likewise assigned to London and who has departed by air.

2. With respect to documents on Germany, WS–10–A entitled “Provisions for Imposition upon Germany at Time of Surrender”78 and WS–12,79 which is comment thereon, have been approved by State Department, by Working Security Committee, and are now before the Joint Chiefs of Staff.80 We envisaged that WS–10–A would be placed before the Commission as an American document, and presented as a basis for discussion. The commentary in WS–12 is designed for your background information and for guidance in the Commission’s discussions. WS–481 comprising a letter of December 20, 1943 from the Joint Chiefs of Staff commenting upon the memorandum (WS–1) entitled “Treatment of Germany” presented by the American Delegation at Moscow, October 25, 1943,82 is likewise for your information and guidance. Other papers on Germany have not yet received clearance either in State or War and Navy Departments.

3. With respect to documents on Rumania, WS–16–A entitled “Provisions for Imposition on Rumania at Time of Surrender” and WS–1783 consisting of commentary thereon, have been approved by State Department, by Working Security Committee, and are before the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Please note carefully that the commentary set forth in WS–17 is for your information and guidance only, and should not be submitted to the Commission.

4. It is believed that this documentation will enable you to commence work on the problem, albeit tentatively, with information on the Department’s line of thought at least. The British drafts on Germany have been received, and are now under consideration by the Working Security Committee, and we shall transmit any pertinent comment as soon as possible. You will no doubt find, however, that the American documents described in paragraphs 2 and 3 preceding will, as they cover much the same ground, provide you with material for comment upon the British drafts.

5. Department is taking further steps to expedite clearance of documents.

Hull

74 Not printed; it requested the Department to provide material for submission to the European Advisory Commission so that the Commission could begin its work (740.00119 EAC/52).

75 Lt. Comdr. Willis Sargent, Assistant Naval Adviser to the United States Representative on the European Advisory Commission.

76 Adm. Harold R. Stark, Commander, United States Naval Forces in Europe and Chief Naval Adviser to the United States Representative on the European Advisory Commission.

77 Brig. Gen. Cornelius W. Wickersham, Military Adviser to the United States Representative on the European Advisory Commission.

78  Ante, p. 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76].

79  Ante, p. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75].

80 Telegram 578, Eacom 1, dated January 24, to London, reported that WS–10a and WS–12 had been approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff (740.00119 EAC/52).

81 Not printed.

82 Printed as Moscow Conference Document No. 20, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 720.

83  Vol. iv, pp. 136 and 142, respectively.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/57: Telegram

[Document 83]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 20, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 8 p.m.]

530. Comea84 14. The Department will recall that in the document relating to the treatment of Germany which was produced at the Moscow Conference by our Delegation, reference was made to the question of decentralization, or even dismemberment, of Germany. The British record of the Conference indicates that this question was discussed by the three Foreign Ministers, but that no definite conclusions were reached and that this question, like the other matters treated in the above-mentioned paper, was left for further study in the Commission.

The British records also indicate that this question again came under discussion at the Tehran Conference,85 where the suggestion was made that either a special Three-Power Committee be established to study this question, or that it be submitted to a sub-committee of the European Advisory Commission, which would presumably work out a joint study and set of recommendations for the consideration of the three Governments.

Strang rang me up yesterday to say that his Government intended to ask Washington and Moscow when and how they desired to undertake further study and discussion of this subject, which has a definite bearing on the question of surrender terms. I have asked that, instead of approaching simultaneously Washington and Moscow, the British first consult the Department in Washington. Both Strang and Eden agreed to this. The Russian position is an unknown quantity to me.

Winant

84 Series designation for telegrams from London dealing with the work of the European Advisory Commission.

85 President Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill, and Premier Stalin met in conference at Tehran, November 27–December 1, 1943. For the record of the discussions regarding the partition of Germany, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehran, 1943, pp. 602–603. For additional documentation regarding this subject, see ibid., index, p. 907, entry on “Germany: Partition of, postwar”.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/72

[Document 84]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

At the Tehran Conference the question of the dismemberment of Germany, that is to say splitting-up of Germany into a number of separate states, was discussed between the three heads of the delegations.

According to the records of the Conference made by the United Kingdom delegation, the three heads of the delegations agreed to a suggestion that a special committee under the London Commission should make a study of this question, keeping in close contact with Washington and Moscow and reporting its findings, which would facilitate study of the problem in the three capitals.

The question of the dismemberment of Germany was also discussed at the Moscow Conference under item seven of its agenda in connexion with the general memorandum on Germany submitted to the Conference by the United States Delegation. The dismemberment question is thus included in the items on the treatment of Germany which were referred by the Moscow Conference to the European Advisory Commission for detailed study.

The question of the dismemberment of Germany is one of great complexity and is of fundamental importance for the planning for post-hostilities. His Majesty’s Government therefore suggest that the European Advisory Commission should take it up at once, and hope that the United States Government will send the necessary authority to their representative on the Commission so that examination of this question may be started at an early date.

Washington , January 21, 1944.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/58a: Telegram

[Document 85]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 21, 1944—5 p.m.

517. British Embassy informs us that based upon discussions at Moscow and Tehran, British Government desires to propose that the European Advisory Commission set up a special body to study question of dismemberment of Germany. You are authorized to accept the subject of dismemberment for discussion in the European Advisory Commission in any form the Commissioners may decide.

We consider that this subject is already before the Commission under penultimate paragraph, Section B, of U. S. paper on treatment of Germany, referred to the Commission by the Moscow Conference.

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/64: Telegram

[Document 86]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 27, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received January 27—3:15 p.m.]

725. Comea 18. The second formal meeting of the Advisory Commission took place yesterday.

Just prior to the meeting I had circulated to the Commission as a basis of discussion document WS 10a,86 explaining that it was not meant to be the limit of our proposals and that other and more detailed proposals might follow. In view of the short space of time which elapsed between the circulation of that document and the convening of the meeting, I did not consider it possible to invite a general discussion of the contents of the British and American documents, and we agreed to postpone that until next week. The Soviet delegation still has no material, and apparently no instructions on this subject.

Meanwhile, the Commission is making a compilation of the material in our document and the British draft, which can be used for a detailed study and comparison of the various proposals.

After the above matters had been discussed, I referred to paragraph 10c of the British memorandum of January 1587 enclosing their draft of the surrender terms, dealing with the question of the participation of other governments in the work of the Commission, and we discussed this matter in a preliminary fashion. A separate message will follow reporting some of the details of this discussion.

Strang then introduced the subject of dismemberment and proposed the establishment of a sub-committee to study this subject. He referred to the British minutes of the Tehran Conference and said that it had been indicated there that the Commission should make a study of this question, keeping in close contact with Washington and Moscow, and should make recommendations which would facilitate decisions on the part of the respective governments. As explained in my 529 January 20, 5 p.m., Comea 13,88 I can only accept the British statement on this subject. Strang also proposed a set of terms of reference for the sub-committee.

Both Gousev and myself accepted the proposal that the subject be considered by the Commission and agreed to the appointment of a sub-committee; but neither of us was prepared to accept offhand the terms of reference which Strang proposed until we had had a chance to study them further. A separate message will follow on the subject of these terms of reference.

It has been informally agreed that the next meeting will take place on February 2.

Winant

86  Ante, p. 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76].

87  Ante, p. 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79].

88 This telegram mentioned that the Embassy at London had not yet received a copy of the proceedings of the Moscow and Tehran Conferences (740.00119 EAC/54).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/68: Telegram

[Document 87]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 29, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received 6:13 p.m.]

818. Comea 20. In my Comea 18,89 it was stated that a separate message would follow on “dismemberment”.

The terms of reference proposed by Strang at Wednesday’s meeting of the Commission are as follows: “1. Assuming a decision to dismember Germany—to consider (a) into what units the country would best be divided; (b) at what stage dismemberment would best be effected; (c) what measures would be required to prevent the new states from reuniting; (d) what would be the relative advantages and disadvantages to the United Nations of such dismemberment.

2. These problems to be examined from the political, military and economic aspects.”

I have examined these terms carefully, and assuming that they correspond to the ideas advanced at Tehran (I do not have before me the records of that Conference) I propose to accept them with the proviso that nothing in them should be interpreted in such a way as to imply any a priori opinion of the Commission as to the merits or disadvantages of the general idea of dismemberment.

I hope that it will be possible for the sub-committee to begin its work at an early date. I propose to designate Kennan90 and General Wickersham to serve on it.

We have at present only limited material on this question; and I do not know whether any has been prepared in our Government. I hope that the Working Security Committee will take steps to see that we are supplied soon with whatever materials the various research agencies of our Government can produce on these questions, together with any similar materials from outside sources which might be of use to us.91

Winant

89 Telegram 725, January 27, supra.

90 George F. Kennan, Counselor of the United States delegation to the European Advisory Commission.

91 Telegram 854, February 3, midnight, to London, stated that the Department fully concurred in the establishment of the sub-committee on dismemberment and on its terms of reference; it also stated that a considerable documentation on the question of the partition of Germany had been prepared in the Department and was being sent to the Ambassador for his background information (740.00119 EAC/68).

The Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn) to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/68

[Document 88]

The Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn) to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 2, 1944.

[Extract]92

My Dear Mr. Ambassador: In response to the request set forth in the final paragraph of your telegram no. 818 of January 29 (Comea no. 20) for material to be used in the sub-committee of the European Advisory Commission on “Dismemberment”, I take pleasure in sending you herewith a set of documents which have been drafted in the Department, and which, I believe, will be most useful to you and your associates in this work.

As you may recall, the question of our attitude with respect to the partition of Germany is still open, and the Department’s position thereon has not as yet been revealed in any definitive manner. You will observe that in the enclosed documentation,93 the weight of the arguments seems to be against partition, but this does not imply that our final position will incline in that direction. I personally feel that this Government will probably not clearly define its attitude until we have had the benefit of discussions in the Commission in London and your comment thereon.

The enclosed documents are not, in these circumstances, intended for presentation either to the sub-committee or to the European Advisory Commission as an American proposal or an American policy. It is, indeed, possible that no such statement of policy will be forthcoming until this question has been thoroughly canvassed in London, and has been referred to the President with the various arguments for and against. In the meantime, we shall look forward with the utmost interest to your reports on this matter, and shall keep you advised of any decisions or developments here.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Sincerely yours,

James Clement Dunn

92 The remainder of this letter is printed in vol. iv, p. 136.

93 The documentation referred to here was not found attached to the file copy nor to the original letter received by Ambassador Winant in London. It has not been possible to identify the documentation in question, but it may have included two memoranda regarding the dismemberment of Germany, dated October 22 and November 12, 1943, which are filed in the EAC files, Lot 52 M 64, Box 9602, file 136.

President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill) [Document 89]

President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill)94

[Washington,] 7 February 1944.

457. For the Former Naval Person.94a Combined Chiefs of Staff have reached an impasse on the subject of countries and areas to be occupied by British and United States forces in Rankin 95 or following Overlord.96 U.S. Chiefs of Staff have pointed out that a change-over from spheres of responsibility connection Overlord to spheres of later occupational responsibility desired by U.S. is militarily feasible and no vital objection can be made on that score. Matter now appears necessary for study by you and me in order to have decision before Overlord and to proceed with plans. United States proposals are set out in C.C.S. 426/1 paragraph 18. (Report to President and Prime Minister, Sextant Conference.)97

I am absolutely unwilling to police France and possibly Italy and the Balkans as well. After all, France is your baby and will take a lot of nursing in order to bring it to the point of walking alone. It would be very difficult for me to keep in France my military force or management for any length of time.

Roosevelt

94 Copy of telegram obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.

94a Code name for Winston Churchill.

95 Code name for the return of Allied forces to Continental Europe in the event of a sudden weakening of German resistance. For discussions of Rankin planning, see Gordon A. Harrison, Cross-Channel Attack, in the official Army history United States Army in World War II: The European Theater of Operations (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1951), pp. 79–82, and, in the same series, Forrest C. Pogue, The Supreme Command (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1954), pp. 104–106.

96 Code name for the Allied plan for the invasion of northwest Europe, spring 1944. The above-cited works contain extensive discussions of the planning for Overlord.

97 For the Report of the Combined Chiefs of Staff to President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill, designated C.C.S. 426/1, dated December 6, 1943, presenting the agreed summary of the conclusions reached at the Sextant Conference (The Cairo Conferences of November 22–26 and December 2–7, 1943), see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehran, 1943, p. 810. For additional documentation regarding the allocation of zones of occupation in Germany and throughout northwest Europe, see ibid., index, p. 907, entry on “Germany: Occupation zones in, allocation of”.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/142

[Document 90]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

No. 3735 Washington, February 12, 1944.

Sir: I transmit herewith a copy of a letter of February 5, 1944 from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, together with its enclosures, relative to surrender terms for Germany. After further deliberation, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have had prepared and approved an “Instrument and Acknowledgment of Unconditional Surrender of Germany” and a “Memorandum in Support of United States Views” for presentation to the European Advisory Commission. These documents are attached as enclosures to the letter of February 5.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that this draft instrument of surrender is in conformity with the general principles set forth in documents WS–10a and WS–12, previously transmitted to you, and has the additional advantage of brevity. You are accordingly requested to submit these two documents to the Commission for its consideration.

You will observe from paragraph six of the “Memorandum in Support of United States Views” that the Joint Chiefs of Staff would prefer that the comprehensive provisions set forth in the British draft of surrender terms be issued subsequent to surrender as directives to the German authorities.

Very truly yours,

Edward R. Stettinius, Jr.

[Enclosure]

The Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of State

Washington, February 5, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: The Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered the “Draft German Armistice” received from the Representatives of the British Chiefs of Staff. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have reached the following conclusions with respect to this British document which it is understood is now before the European Advisory Commission for consideration: a. That there is a wide difference of opinion between the views expressed in the “Draft German Armistice” and accompanying memoranda submitted by the Representatives of the British Chiefs of Staff and the views contained in the documents WS–10a and WS–12 prepared by the Working Security Committee.

b. That a U.S. draft instrument of surrender in conformity with the general principles outlined in the documents WS–10a and WS–12 should be transmitted to the U.S. member of the European Advisory Commission for submission to the Commission.

c. That the “Instrument and Acknowledgment of Unconditional Surrender of Germany” should be brief.

In furtherance of the aforementioned conclusions, there have been prepared for the Joint Chiefs of Staff and approved by them, two documents entitled “Memorandum in Support of U.S. Views” and “Instrument and Acknowledgment of Unconditional Surrender of Germany.” The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that these two documents, copies of which are enclosed, be transmitted to the U.S. member of the European Advisory Commission for submission by him to the Commission.

Sincerely yours,

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
William D. Leahy ,
Admiral, U.S. Navy,
Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy

[Subenclosure 1]

Instrument and Acknowledgment of Unconditional Surrender of Germany 98

I. The German land, sea and air forces and all forces of any other nationality serving under their commands, wherever located, acknowledge their total defeat, and hereby surrender unconditionally to the Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces and the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, acting by authority of the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and in the interests of the United Nations.

II. The German High Command will, immediately upon the acceptance of this unconditional surrender, order the immediate cessation of hostilities of any kind against forces of the United Nations, and will direct German military, naval and air authorities in all theaters to issue forthwith appropriate instructions to those under their command.

III. The German High Command will forthwith order all persons and individuals within Germany and German-controlled territories to refrain from the destruction of or damage to military, naval and air property, installations and equipment, and all other property of whatever kind, real or personal, public or private.

IV. The German High Command will order immediate compliance on the part of all residents of Germany and German-controlled territories with the provisions of the annexed proclamation and orders and of all future proclamations, orders, ordinances, and instructions as may be issued by or under the authority of the Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces and the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics or the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

V. All of the resources and facilities of Germany and of the German people, including all rights, powers and privileges of any and all character whatsoever will be placed undamaged at the disposal of the Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces and the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, acting in the interests of the United Nations.

VI. The Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces and the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, acting in the interest of the United Nations, will take such measures and issue such orders and instructions for the occupation and governing of Germany and German-controlled territories as may be deemed by them to be appropriate.

VII. All German authorities, civil and military, and the German people, will comply with and faithfully execute such duties and conditions as may be imposed by the occupation authorities. The German authorities and people will in particular, and in addition to such other duties and conditions as may be imposed, extend full cooperation to the occupation authorities and to all of the United Nations in apprehending and making available for trial by the United Nations as they may determine, all persons of German nationality and other persons within Germany or subject to German jurisdiction who are or may be charged with having committed war crimes.

VIII. Prisoners of war belonging to the forces of the United Nations, and all other nationals of those countries, or of neutral countries, who are confined, interned or otherwise under restraint and German nationals who may be similarly confined, interned or otherwise under restraint of political reasons or as a result of Nazi action, law or regulation which discriminates on the ground of race, creed, color or political belief, will be protected in their persons and property by the German authorities and people pending further instructions. Similar steps will be taken by the German authorities and people to safeguard all property, records and archives, public and private, pending further instructions.

IX. The rights, powers and privileges of the Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces and the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, arising as a result of the complete conquest and unconditional surrender of Germany, shall be without limitation of any character whatsoever.

X. The term “occupation authorities” as used herein includes the Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces and the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and any other agency or individual designated by them and acting under their authority.

XI. The present instrument may be denounced by the Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces and the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, or by the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, with immediate effect, if German obligations thereunder are not promptly and completely fulfilled. In such event, said Commanders in Chief and their respective governments will take whatever action may be deemed by them to be appropriate under the circumstances.

XII. This instrument of unconditional surrender will enter into force and effect immediately upon its acceptance by the Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces and the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

XIII. These provisions are drawn up in the English, Russian and German languages. The English and Russian texts are authoritative.

Signed at___(place)_____, this ___ day of ___(month)___, at ___(hour)___.
____________________________
(Name) (Title)
(Highest German Military Authority)
____________________________
(Name) (Title)
(Highest German Civil Authority)

The foregoing terms of unconditional surrender are accepted by:

____________________________

General, Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Forces

____________________________

General, Commander in Chief, Forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

[Subenclosure 2]

Memorandum in Support of U.S. Views

1. The United States and the United Kingdom are each committed to the principle that an “unconditional surrender” will be exacted from Germany. With this in mind, it becomes important to define the term unconditional surrender before determining the type of document best adapted to express all that the term implies.

2. It is submitted that an unconditional surrender is an acknowledgment on the part of Germany that: a. Its military forces are totally defeated and incapable of resisting the accomplishment of the military objectives of the adversary.

b. Its resources and peoples are expended to the point where further resistance is futile.

c. It is ready to submit without question to any terms of military, political, economic and territorial nature which may be imposed upon it by the victor.

3. When such an acknowledgment is made, few words are needed to constitute the unconditional surrender of Germany.

4. Such brief document would be implemented by proclamations, orders, and directives issued to the German military and civil authorities from time to time by the appropriate Allied Commanders. The detailed military directives necessary to implement a short surrender document bear a somewhat similar relationship to such a document as the by-laws of a corporation bear to the corporate charter or the statutory laws of a state bear to its constitution.

5. The advantages of having a short instrument are as follows: a. It indicates affirmatively that the war has ended.

b. It leaves no room for the insinuation, as might be implied from a lengthy armistice document, that only a temporary suspension of hostilities has occurred.

c. Each covenant of a document necessarily creates a condition of surrender binding in law upon the conquered and the conqueror alike. Each covenant constitutes a subtraction from the powers bestowed upon the victor by the unconditional surrender of the enemy state. There is little room for legal quibbling over a short instrument and the victor cannot be accused of bad faith or a violation of its agreement.

d. No document can be all-embracing or all-inclusive as to foresee every possible contingency. Under a brief document containing broad general provisions there will be no legal obstacles to effect such matters as transfer of population, the immediate creation of a “separate” Austria, the giving of the Czech Government immediate control of Czechoslovakia and similar questions that are bound to arise.

e. A brief instrument will not be an obstacle in the procuring of a new central government, other than the surrender administration, if that be desirable. A brief instrument eases the burden of dealing with a new German central authority in the event there be a change of the central government.

f. A brief instrument eliminates the disadvantages, pitfalls, and embarrassments of a comprehensive document in order to meet unanticipated changing conditions. Experience in Italy should serve as a warning that it is impossible to comprehend in a single detailed document all of the situations which will arise out of the military occupation of an enemy country. The Italian comprehensive document has proved to be insufficient in its scope, limiting the authority of the Allies.

g. The German people, under the Nazi regime, have become accustomed and amenable to order emanating from military or semi-military sources. The position of the Commanders of the Allied forces would be materially weakened if their directives were subjected to legal scrutiny and debate prior to popular acceptance.

6. At the time the instrument is signed by the Germans, it is contemplated that directives will be handed to the German authorities which will have as a basis the provisions presently in the draft comprehensive instrument submitted by the United Kingdom.

98 This document was later circulated in the European Advisory Commission by the United States Representative as an annex to memorandum E.A.C. (44) 8 of February 15, and a copy was transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 13980, February 18; received February 26.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/89: Telegram

[Document 91]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, February 16, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received February 16—5:58 p.m.]

1310. Comea 29. We have just received the Russian text of a draft surrender document99 which the Russians have circulated to the Commission. This is a relatively brief instrument of 20 paragraphs, to be signed by representatives of the German High Command and Government, as well as by the Allied Commanders. It is based on an acknowledgment of complete defeat and unconditional surrender. It is a strictly military document, evidently designed to assure first and foremost that German armed forces are immediately and effectively rendered powerless to resume hostilities. However, it binds the Germans, in its last paragraph, to comply unconditionally with supplementary demands, political, economic, military or otherwise, which may follow.

The instrument refers to zones of occupation as being established for the purpose of disarming Germany. It contains, in contrast to the British document and ours, the geographic description of these zones. These zones appear to be the same as those set forth in the British document on military occupation circulated to the Commission on January 15. Joint occupation is specified for Austria and for the Berlin district.

The document presumes throughout unified action by “representatives of the Allied Supreme Command” in the issuance of directives to German authorities.

Our first general impression is that this document, which is brief, business-like and broad in scope, is encouragingly close to our own ideas.

As soon as the official English translation of the document is received, which will probably be tomorrow, it will be telegraphed to the Department, and further details can be treated when the Department has received this text.

I should like to point out at once, however, that since the Russians and the British have now advanced similar proposals for zones of occupation, and since this point is of wide importance, the United States delegation will certainly be expected to express views on this subject at an early date. The President spoke to me on this subject when I was in Cairo and I want to follow his wishes; but would appreciate being informed as to our present position on this question.

Winant

99  Post, p. 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 93].

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/126

[Document 92]

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Acting Secretary of State

Washington, February 18, 1944.

What are the zones in the British and Russian drafts and what is the zone we are proposing? I must know this in order that it conform with what I decided on months ago.

F[ranklin] D. R[oosevelt]

Memorandum by the Representative of the Soviet Union to the European Advisory Commission (Gousev) 740.00119 EAC/97

[Document 93]

Memorandum by the Representative of the Soviet Union to the European Advisory Commission (Gousev)1

E.A.C. (44) 9 (Revise) London, 18 February, 1944.

Terms of Surrender for Germany

In accordance with the decision of the European Advisory Commission of the 14th January, 1944, I submit the attached document “Terms of Surrender for Germany” for the consideration of the Commission.

F[edor] G[ousev]

[Annex]

Draft Terms of Surrender for Germany, Submitted to the Commission by the Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

The German Government and the Supreme Command of the German Armed Forces, recognising the complete defeat of Germany in the war criminally begun by her against the United Nations, announce the unconditional surrender of Germany, and request the cessation of hostilities against her.

On this basis the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, of the United Kingdom, and of the United States of America, hereinafter called “The Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies”, call upon the German Government and the Supreme Command of the German Armed Forces to sign the following terms of unconditional surrender:—

1. The Government and Supreme Command of Germany, at . . . . . . hours Central European time shall cease hostilities against the United Nations on land, at sea, and in the air in all theatres of war.

2. The land, air, anti-aircraft and naval forces of Germany, and formations and units of the S.S., S.A. and Gestapo,2 stationed at the front inside the frontiers of Germany as they were on the 1st January, 1938, shall immediately and completely disarm, handing over their arms and all equipment to the local command of the Allied forces, and the personnel of all these formations and units shall be declared prisoners of war, pending further decisions.

In the same manner the armed forces of Germany which are outside her territories, shall be disarmed and declared prisoners of war.

For the maintenance of internal order in Germany, at the discretion of the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies, a certain number of detachments of the civil police may be retained temporarily, armed with small arms.

3. The Government and Supreme Command of Germany shall forthwith:— a). Hand over to the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies, without exception, all prisoners of war belonging to the armed forces of the United Nations at present in their power, with full lists of these persons and with notification of the places of detention of all prisoners of war both in Germany itself and in territories occupied by her, so that they may be repatriated to their own countries.

b). Provide the prisoners of war handed over, pending their repatriation to their own countries, with adequate food, clothing and money in accordance with their rank or the official positions they held, and provide sick and wounded prisoners of war with the necessary medical care.

c). Hand over camps and places of detention of the above mentioned prisoners of war to the control of the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies.

4. The Government and Supreme Command of Germany shall immediately hand over to the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies, in the manner determined by them, all interned or forcibly removed nationals of the United Nations, with full lists of these persons and details of the places where they are detained both in Germany itself and in the territories occupied by her; provide the persons handed over, pending their repatriation to their own countries, with sufficient food, clothing, accommodation and medical care, and also carry out all requirements which the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies may present in the future in connection with the fulfilment of the above-mentioned obligations of Germany.

5. From the moment when hostilities cease it is prohibited for German military or civil aircraft of all types and descriptions, wherever they may be, and likewise aircraft of the Allies of Germany in Germany itself or in territories temporarily occupied by her, to leave the ground without special permission of the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies.

All aircraft and aviation repair shops to be handed over with all their equipment to the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies in accordance with the procedure and at the times laid down by them.

The transfer of aircraft to the flag of any other Power whatsoever is forbidden.

6. The Supreme Command of Germany shall hand over to the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies, in accordance with the procedure and at the times determined by the latter, all permanent and temporary aerodromes (on land or sea) wherever they may be, with all their equipment, stores of all kinds, all transport vehicles and means of communication.

7. The Government and Supreme Command of Germany shall hand over in the manner and at the times determined by the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies all plans of anti-aircraft defence, all anti-aircraft artillery and machine guns, all their aircraft, barrage balloons, means of communication, appliances and means of location of aircraft, appliances for direction of fighters, etc.

8. The Government and Supreme Command of Germany immediately after the signature of the present Instrument, shall issue orders to all warships (surface or submarine), auxiliary naval craft, vessels of the mercantile marine, and also to aircraft of the German Naval Air Service, wherever these ships, vessels or aircraft may be at the time of signature of the present Instrument, to return immediately to ports and bases to be specified by the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies.

9. All warships of all classes, auxiliary craft, and vessels for special purposes, and also vessels of the mercantile marine designated by the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies, afloat, under repair, or under construction, and also aircraft of the Naval Air Service which are in German ports or bases at the time of signature of the present Instrument or in ports and bases of countries occupied by Germany, shall be disarmed, deprived of all means of radio communication and handed over to the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies in the manner, and at the times and places, indicated by them.

The transfer of German ships and vessels, and also the transfer of ships and vessels seized by Germany, to the flag of any other Power is prohibited.

10. All ships and vessels of the United Nations which are at the disposal of Germany at the time of signature of the present Instrument are to be returned at the dates, and to the ports or bases, specified by the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies.

11. The German Supreme Command, within a period of 24 hours from the time of signature of the present Instrument, shall present to the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies full information regarding its armed forces, regarding formations and units of the S.S., S.A. and Gestapo and particulars of all fortresses, fortified areas and minefields wherever they are situated, and of the safety lanes through them.

12. The Supreme Command of Germany shall carry out, at the times fixed by the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies, the work of sweeping all navigational channels rendered dangerous by mines and areas of safe navigation together with the reinstatement of all aids to navigation.

13. The personnel of the German Armed Forces, and of the formations and units of the S.S., S.A. and Gestapo which are at the fronts at the time of the signature of the present Instrument, and are declared prisoners of war after disarmament, shall be stationed at such places and in such manner as may be determined by each Allied Commander-in-Chief on his own front.

The remaining personnel of the German Armed Forces, and of formations and units of the S.S., S.A. and Gestapo which are in countries allied to Germany, occupied by Germany, or in the interior of Germany itself, shall remain at their present stations and shall be maintained in the manner prescribed by the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies.

14. The Government and Supreme Command of Germany shall, at the demand of the representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies, provide all facilities for the movement of allied troops on the railways, roads and other land communications, or by sea, river or air.

15. In order to carry out the disarmament of the German Armed Forces, and of formations and units of the S.S., S.A. and Gestapo, the following zones of occupation are hereby established between the armed forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom and the United States of America. a). The territory of Germany, including East Prussia, situated to the east of a line drawn through the town of Heiligenhafen (Exclusive) along the western shore of the Mecklenburg Bay to the town of Lübeck (Exclusive); thence along the western administrative frontier of Mecklenburg to the River Elbe; thence upstream along this river to the administrative frontier of the Prussian province of Altmark; thence along the eastern frontier of the province of Brunswick; thence to the western administrative frontier of Anhalt; thence along the western administrative frontier of the Prussian province of Saxony and of the province of Thuringia to where it meets the Bavarian frontier; thence eastwards along the northern frontier of Bavaria to the Czechoslovak frontier at the town of Hoff; shall be occupied by the armed forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, with the exception of the special system of occupation for the territory mentioned under sub-paragraph (d) below.

b). The territory of Germany situated to the west of the line defined in sub-paragraph (a) above, bounded on the south by a line drawn from the point where the western administrative frontier of the province of Thuringia meets the administrative frontiers of Bavaria; thence westwards along the northern administrative frontier of Bavaria to the river Main; thence along this river to the point where it joins the river Rhine; thence along the northern frontier to the province of Westmark; shall be occupied by the armed forces of the United Kingdom.

c). All the remaining territory of Western Germany situated to the south of the line defined in subparagraph (b) above shall be occupied by the armed forces of the United States of America.

d). There shall be established around Berlin a 10/15 kilometer zone which shall be occupied jointly by the armed forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom and the United States of America.

e). The territories of Austria shall be occupied jointly by the armed forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America.

16. The Supreme Command of Germany shall hand over to the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies, in the manner and at the times determined by these Representatives, all such storage depots (whether fixed, mobile or in transit), arms, munitions, fuel, other war material, foodstuffs, clothing and other equipment, repair shops of all kinds, naval ports and bases as are at the disposal of the German Armed Forces.

17. The Supreme Command of Germany shall hand over to the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies, in the manner and at the times determined by these Representatives, all research institutions, drawing and planning offices, laboratories, testing stations, and ranges, factories and industrial undertakings, together with all records, technical data, patents, plans and inventions belonging to the military, naval or air Departments.

18. All permanent and temporary land and coast fortifications, fortresses, fortified areas and lines in good order, together with all their equipment, arms, means of communication, munitions of all kinds, explosives, stores of all kinds, installations, repair equipment, plans and drawings of the said fortifications, shall be handed over to the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies, in the manner and at the times determined by these Representatives. In order to ensure unobstructed and safe approach to these fortifications, the Supreme Command of Germany shall place detachments of unarmed technical troops at the disposal of the above mentioned Representatives.

19. From the time of signature of the present Instrument, all German radio transmission, telegraph and telephone communications both inside Germany and in the districts temporarily occupied by her, shall cease pending the institution of control by the Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies over all means of communication in Germany, and over censorship of broadcasting, the Press and public performances of all kinds.

20. The Representatives of the Supreme Command of the Allies will present additional requirements on political, economic, military and all other questions connected with the surrender of Germany; and the German Government and the German Supreme Command undertake to carry out these requirements unconditionally.

Data and year . . . . . town . . . . . . . . . . . . hours (Central European Time).
By authority of the Government of the U.S.S.R.,
Representative of the Supreme Command of the U.S.S.R.
(Signature)
By authority of the German Government,
(Signature)
By authority of H. M. Government in the United Kingdom,
Representative of the Supreme Command of the United Kingdom.
(Signature)
By authority of the German Supreme Command,
(Signature)
By authority of the Government of the United States of America,
Representative of the Supreme Command of the United States of America.
(Signature)

1 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 14015, February 21. The memorandum was originally circulated in the European Advisory Commission by the Soviet Representative on February 15, The English text was designated as E.A.C. (44) 9, dated February 16, before undergoing minor revisions and being circulated in the final form printed here. Copy of E.A.C. (44) 9 was transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 13945. February 17.

2 Geheime Staatspolizei (Secret State Police).

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.00119 EAC/126

[Document 94]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] February 19, 1944.

1. The British proposal presented to the European Advisory Commission on January 15 envisages three occupation zones in which the main Soviet forces would occupy eastern Germany, the main British forces northwestern Germany, and the main American forces southern Germany. The zones are delineated on the map accompanying the British document attached hereto.2a

2. The Soviet proposal3 presented to the European Advisory Commission on February 16 likewise envisages three zones, which Ambassador Winant states appear to be the same as those set forth in the British proposal. The text of the Soviet document with its geographical description of the zones is now en route to the United States by air pouch. It specifies joint occupation for Austria and the Berlin district.

3. No American proposal for zones of occupation has been made to date. A report on the occupation machinery for Germany is now awaiting action by the Joint Chiefs of Staff before being transmitted to Ambassador Winant for presentation to the European Advisory Commission. It is based on the premise of zonal occupation of Germany, but does not make any proposals respecting the geographical demarcation of the zones or the distribution of the occupying forces.

You will recall in a recent discussion relative to the importance of the State Department having available for its guidance a record of the Teheran discussions your agreement that on Harry’s4 return he would edit a set of the minutes which would be presented to Mr. Hull. Owing to Harry’s absence from Washington this has not yet been possible, so as a result we are not sure as to what understanding will have to be reached on this subject until we know what your thinking on the subject has been. Therefore we have been unable to give instructions to Ambassador Winant relative to the American position.

Perhaps you would care to give me a note outlining your views in order that we may send Ambassador Winant instructions at an early date.

E. R. Stettinius, Jr.

2a See document EAC (44) 2, p. 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], and map facing p. 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 80].

3  Supra.

4 Harry Hopkins, Special Assistant to President Roosevelt.

The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt 740.00119 EW/6–244: Telegram

[Document 95]

The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt

London, February 23, 1944.

589. Para 1. Reference your telegram number 4575 on the question of countries and areas to be occupied by British and US forces in Rankin, or after Overlord, the position seems to me to be as follows.

Para 2. COSSAC’s6 original plan suggested three zones to be occupied by our forces, your forces and the Russians, respectively. Our sphere included NW Germany, Norway, Belgium, Luxembourg, Holland and Denmark; your sphere southern Germany, France and possibly Austria. The Russian sphere lay to the east of the British area.

Para 3. On the basis of this allocation which was approved in principle at Quadrant,7 planning proceeded both for Overlord and Rankin. At Sextant when plans were already far advanced, your Chiefs of Staff proposed that the allocation should be virtually reversed, but gave no reason.8

Para 4. I agree that your proposals might be military feasible for the true Rankin case “C” (i.e. the collapse of Germany before the launching of Overlord.[)] But even then there would, from our point of view, be the following serious objections: 1. The whole of the German coastline in the North Sea and a large part of their coastline in the Baltic, and therefore all the German naval establishments of any importance and the majority of the naval and shipbuilding yards, would be included in the United States area. The naval disarmament of Germany is a matter of peculiar interest to us and we are better equipped and situated than any other power to ensure that this process is carried out with the maximum thoroughness.

2. There is close liaison between the Royal Air Force and the Norwegian and Netherlands Air Force which we have trained and organized, and it is desirable that this should be continued after the war. It will be extremely difficult to maintain this association if these countries are outside our zone of responsibility. On the other hand, you have had the major responsibility for re-equipping the French land and air forces.

Para. 5. If, however, the collapse of Germany occurs after Allied Forces have been committed to the continent in Overlord, which seems almost certain, most serious practical objections must be added to those in 4 sub para 1 and sub para 2 above. Our forces would be operating on the left flank of Overlord with their overseas bases in the Havre–Cherbourg area, whilst the United States forces, on the right flank, would have their overseas bases in the Brittany ports.

Para 6. Your proposals therefore would involve either the crossing of the land lines of communication of the two parts of the Allied force advancing on Germany, or the withdrawal and re-embarkation of the US forces. Both these would cause severe administrative difficulties and delays. It is obviously too late to replan Overlord with British forces on the right and US forces on the left.

Para 7. In view of the serious objections which I have described and the fact that at this late stage all our thoughts and energies must be given to making a success of Overlord, I consider that only reasons of overriding importance could justify such a fundamental change of plan as that proposed.

Para 8. As I understand it your proposal arises from an version [aversion?] to undertaking police work in France and a fear that this might involve the stationing of US forces in France over a long period. I rather think, however, that I can put a different complexion on this matter.

Para 9. I agree that our connection with France will be closer than yours and that it will be primarily our concern to see that she is if possible restored as a strong power, without whose cooperation the controlling of Germany is going to be much more difficult. But surely the question of policing does not arise? Under the new directive (which I hope is now agreed) we are, I think, going to recognize some provisional government as soon as we can, and we must hope that such a government will be able to establish its authority over the whole country.

Para 10. I recognize that you must protect your communications, but I hardly think that the mere fact that your communications pass through France would involve you generally in the policing of France against your will.

Para 11. I believe indeed that if you have the southern zone, the French, so far from holding more of your men in Europe for longer than you wish, may prove the means for releasing some of your men more quickly than you had hoped. If a satisfactory regime were set up in France and you were anxious to withdraw some of your troops from Germany there would probably be little difficulty in French troops being moved into the southern German zone to take over from your men; the French would in those circumstances be only too anxious to assume this responsibility.

Para 12. All these reasons make it most undesirable to make a change which would alter the whole basis of our work and planning over the last 6 to 9 months and which must lead to serious complications in the future.

5 Dated February 7, p. 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89].

6 Chief of Staff to the Supreme Allied Commander.

7 First Quebec Conference, August 17–24, 1943. The records of this Conference are scheduled for publication in a subsequent volume of Foreign Relations.

8 See the record of the discussion of this subject at the meeting of the Combined Chiefs of Staff, Cairo, December 4, 1943, Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehran, 1943, p. 688.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/142: Telegram

[Document 96]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)9

Washington, February 25, 1944—2 p.m.

1395. Eacom 6. Certain modifications of the “Instrument and Acknowledgment of Unconditional Surrender of Germany” transmitted by Department’s instruction no. 3735 of February 12 have been approved. Please incorporate the following changes in the document and notify the Commission accordingly:

In paragraph II after the words “United Nations” insert “and those associated with them”.

In paragraph III after the words “German High Command” insert “and German Government”.

In paragraph IV after the words “German High Command” insert “and German Government will immediately order the compliance”.

The revised wording of paragraph V is as follows: “All of the resources and facilities of Germany and of the German people wherever located, including all rights, powers and privileges of any and all character whatsoever are hereby placed undamaged free of all claims at the disposal of the Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces and the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, acting in the interests of the United Nations”.

In paragraph VII after the words “all of the United Nations” insert “and those associated with them”.

In paragraph VIII after the words “United Nations” insert “and those associated with them”; after the words “and German nationals” insert “and persons deprived of German citizenship”.

The revised text of paragraph XI is as follows: “The Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces and the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, or the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, shall have full freedom of action, if German obligations hereunder are not promptly and completely fulfilled. In such event, said Commanders-in-Chief and their respective governments will take whatever action may be deemed by them to be appropriate under the circumstances”.

Stettinius

9 The changes set forth in this telegram were incorporated in a revised version of the document “Terms of Surrender for Germany” circulated in the European Advisory Commission as an annex to a memorandum by the United States Representative, numbered E.A.C. (44) 12, dated March 6, copy of which was transmitted to the Department in despatch 14297, March 7, from London; received March 14.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/89: Telegram

[Document 97]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 26, 1944—5 p.m.

1435. Eacom 7. The document which you requested in your telegram 1267, February 15, 6 p.m., Comea 27,10 and which is entitled “Germany: Occupation Period: Proposed Control Machinery for the Administration of Military Government in Germany” (WS–15c), has now been cleared by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and is being forwarded to you tonight by air pouch. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend, however, that in view of the military importance of this document you obtain through your Military Adviser the concurrence of the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force,11 prior to submitting it to the Commission for consideration.

With reference to your telegram no. 1310, February 16, 7 p.m., Comea 29, the President has directed me to present to you his views as follows for your guidance in outlining the American position in the discussion of the question of zones in the European Advisory Commission:12

The United States does not agree with the British proposal regarding the demarcation of the zones of occupation to go into effect after German surrender for the following reasons: (1) In as much as the United States is approximately 3,500 miles removed from Europe, it is not its natural task to bear the post-war burden of reconstituting France, Italy and the Balkans. This is properly the task of Great Britain which is far more vitally interested than is the United States.

(2) It is not the principal object of the United States to participate in internal problems in Southern Europe but it is rather to take part in eliminating Germany as a possible and even probable cause of a third world war.

(3) The objections which have been raised with regard to the difficulties to be encountered in transferring American troops from a French front to Northern Germany are not sound. No matter where American or British troops are on the day of Germany’s surrender, it would be physically easy for them to move in any direction—north, south, or east.

(4) The ease with which American troops can be maintained in any specified part of Germany must always be considered. Bearing in mind all the pertinent factors and remembering in particular the distance which all supplies will have to be transported by sea, the United States requires the use of the North German ports, principally Hamburg and Bremen and the ports of the Netherlands for such a long-range operation.

(5) For these reasons American policy envisages the occupation by American troops of northwestern Germany, with the British troops occupying the southern area and also bearing responsibility for the policing of Italy and France, if this be required.

(6) The question of the long-range security of Great Britain against Germany does not arise with respect to the first occupation. There will be ample time for the British to work out a suitable program, with reference, for instance, to Helgoland, air fields, et cetera. The United States will be only too glad to retire all its military forces from Europe as soon as this is feasible.

(7) In addition to the foregoing points, political considerations in the United States make essential the occupation of Northwestern Germany by American troops.

Stettinius

10 Not printed; it reported that the British desired to begin discussions on the German surrender document, and it expressed the hope that the Department would soon provide the Ambassador with material enabling him to participate in the discussion (740.00119 EAC/87).

11 Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower.

12 The following statement of the views of President Roosevelt is a slight rewording of a memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Acting Secretary of State dated February 21, 1944, not printed (740.00119 Control (Germany)/2–2144).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 European War 1939/2109

[Document 98]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

No. 3784 Washington, February 26, 1944.

There are enclosed herewith copies of a document entitled “Germany: Occupation Period: Proposed Control Machinery for the Administration of Military Government in Germany” (WS–15C) dated January 27, 1944.

This document has been cleared by the Department of State and the Joint Chiefs of Staff for presentation to the European Advisory Commission. In their letter informing the Department of State of their approval, the Joint Chiefs of Staff make the following recommendation: “In view of the military importance of this document, however, it is recommended that the United States representative on the European Advisory Commission be requested to obtain, through his Military Adviser, the concurrence of the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force, prior to submission of the document to the Commission for consideration.”13

[Enclosure]14

Memorandum by the Working Security Committee

WS 15–c [Washington,] January 27, 1944.

Germany: Occupation Period: Proposed Control Machinery for the Administration of Military Government in Germany

I. Necessity for a Period of Military Government

It seems reasonable to anticipate that upon the conclusion of hostilities with Germany, whether capitulation occurs before or after the actual invasion, conditions in Germany will be such as to require an initial period of military government established by the occupation forces of the U.S., U.K., and U.S.S.R. This study is intended to present a plan under which the organs of military government of the three powers may be established at the outset in a manner which will provide the framework for such other occupation agencies and supervisory bodies as may subsequently be established once the necessity for a strict military government has ceased. It is of course impossible to forecast at this time with exactitude the length of time during which it will be necessary to impose a strict form of military government. It is quite conceivable, however, that the necessity for this form of government might continue for a considerable period of time.

II. Necessity for a Coordinated Administration of Military Government

1. The successful establishment of any form of military government in Germany is dependent upon an agreement, prior to actual occupation, among the Governments of the United Kingdom, the United States and the Soviet Union as to the extent and form of such military government and the major policies to be pursued by it. A combined military government along the AMG15 pattern used in Italy does not appear feasible. The necessity of a combined or coordinated form of military government of some character, however, is apparent.

2. In order to provide an effective means not only of maintaining uniform security controls but of administering the highly integrated political and economic structure of Germany, it will be necessary that the plans agreed upon by the three Governments provide for the control of central governmental functions as well as for the coordination of the policies and procedures to be followed by the occupation forces of the three powers. Were all controls and services of the central government of the Reich suddenly broken at the time of military capitulation, there would arise a grave possibility of an economic and social collapse which would be deleterious to the prospects of European recuperation. Coordinated military government, if carefully planned in advance, would serve to prevent the last mentioned contingency and would circumscribe the possibility of discord among the forces of the three Governments during the occupation period.

3. The European Advisory Commission will, it is anticipated, recommend the general program of occupation procedures in advance of German surrender. Coordinated military government would operate upon the basis of the recommendations of the Commission as accepted by the three Governments. Instructions from the three Governments would presumably give the occupation authorities sufficient latitude of discretion to meet emergency situations but would reserve to the three Governments the authority to introduce fundamental changes of policy.

III. The Proposed Plan

1. A zonal system of administration appears perhaps to be the most practical solution. This proposal would divide Germany into American, British and Soviet zones of administration. Each zone would be administered separately but arrangements would be made for representation of each Government in each zone for the purpose of liaison. The only exception to this separation would be in the Berlin area where direct local administration would be in the hands of a combined administrative authority.

2. The combined administrative authority or Control Council, would, in addition to exercising direct local administration over the Berlin area, supervise those governmental and economic activities which the occupation authorities may determine should continue to function on a national basis in the interest of stable and orderly life in Germany. The Control Council would most appropriately be composed of the ranking commanding generals of the three occupying powers and their designated representatives in equal numbers from each Government. The detailed planning necessary to implement broad directives received from the three Governments would be coordinated in this body. Sub-agencies dealing with major political, military and economic problems, such as, for example, commerce and industry, relief, money and banking, public safety, displaced persons, communications, transportation, disarmament, demobilization, public welfare, etc., would probably be desirable. Each sub-agency would in turn be headed by representatives of each of the three Governments. Neither members of the armed forces nor civilians accompanying such forces would be subject to disciplinary action by other than military commanders of their own forces.

3. Under this proposal the separate British, American and Soviet civil affairs administrations would retain their identity and operate separately in their respective zones. The policies pursued in the separate zones would be coordinated in the Control Council in Berlin, and recommendations as to major policy changes would be formulated in the Council and transmitted to the three Governments for consideration. The essential problems of such a plan would be (1) the determination of the activities to be assigned to the Control Council and of the area to be controlled by it, and (2) the allocation of zones to the separate administrations. The situation as here indicated would leave to the separate civil affairs administrations exclusive jurisdiction over essentially local functions. In so far as national policies previously agreed upon by the three Governments were concerned, the separate zonal administrations would be primarily enforcement agencies.

4. In order to effectively operate the proposed plan, it would be essential that all instructions emanate from the Chiefs of Staff of the respective Governments (or from the Combined Chiefs of Staff and the Soviet Chief of Staff) to their respective Commanding Generals in the theater, and that the channel of instructions to the chief civil affairs officers of each of the three administrative zones be from their respective theater commanders. The Control Council in Berlin would have no command functions outside of the Berlin area. Any important change of policy with respect to civil affairs in Germany would be contained in instructions from the three Governments.

5. Annexed hereto is a chart16 suggestive of the form which military government in Germany would take under the plan herein proposed.

13 Telegram 2167, Eacom 14, dated March 22, 8 p.m., to London, stated: “Sufficient compliance with the recommendations of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as set forth in instruction no. 3784, has been obtained, and you may submit WS 15–C to the Commission.” (740.00119 European War/2109)

14 Filed separately under Lot 55 D 375, Cabinet 85, Drawer 3. This memorandum was formally introduced in the European Advisory Commission on March 25, 1944, as document E.A.C. (44) 16, Memorandum by the United States Representative to the European Advisory Commission: “Proposal for Control Machinery for the Administration of Military Government in Germany during the Occupation”; copy transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 14713, March 28.

15 Allied Military Government.

16 Not printed.

President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill) [Document 99]

President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill)17

Washington, February 29, 1944.

Dear Winston:—I have been worrying a good deal of late on account of the tendency of all of us to prepare for future events in such detail that we may be letting ourselves in for trouble when the time arrives.

As you doubtless remember, at Quebec last Summer the Staff people took a shot at drawing up terms of surrender for Italy. The American draft was short and to the point and was finally adopted and presented.

But later on the long and comprehensive terms, which were drawn up by your people, were presented to Badoglio.18

I did not like them because they attempted to foresee every possibility in one document. But, as so often happens, when such an attempt is made, certain points were omitted and additional protocols with respect to naval and other questions had to be later presented.

That is a good deal the way I feel about all this detailed planning that we are jointly and severally making in regard to what we do when we get into France. I have been handed pages and pages with detailed instructions and appendices. I regard them as prophecies by prophets who cannot be infallible.

Therefore, I re-drew them with the thought of making the Commander-in-Chief solely responsible for Overlord and for the maintenance of law, order and reasonable justice for the first few months after we get into France. I have suggested that he get in touch with local persons and with representatives of the French National Committee in such places as they have military status, but that he and his staff bear the sole responsibility.

Now comes this business of what to do when we get into Germany. I understand that your Staff presented a long and comprehensive document—with every known kind of terms—to the European Advisory Commission, and that the Russians have done somewhat the same.

My people over here believe that a short document of surrender terms should be adopted. This, of course, has nothing to do with the locality of the occupying forces after they get into Germany, but it is an instrument of surrender which is in conformity with the general principles.

I am enclosing (a) an argument—facts bearing on the problem and (b) a proposed acknowledgment of unconditional surrender by Germany.19

I hope much that you will read the argument. I think it is very cogent.

I am trying as hard as I can to simplify things—and sometimes I shudder at the thought of appointing as many new Committees and Commissions in the future as we have in the past!

I note that in the British proposal the territory of Germany is divided up in accordance with British plan. “Do please don’t” ask me to keep any American forces in France. I just cannot do it! I would have to bring them all back home. As I suggested before, I denounce and protest the paternity of Belgium, France and Italy. You really ought to bring up and discipline your own children. In view of the fact that they may be your bulwark in future days, you should at least pay for their schooling now!

With my warm regards,

As ever yours,

[File copy not signed]

17 Copy obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.

18 Marshal Pietro Badoglio, Head of the Italian State. For text of Additional Conditions of the Armistice with Italy, signed September 29, 1943, see Department of State, Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS) No. 1604; 61 Stat. (pt. 3) 2742; or Department of State publication No. 2669: United States and Italy, 1936–1946, Documentary Record, p. 55.

19 Pencilled note on margin opposite this paragraph reads: “No copy rec’d for file.”

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/103: Telegram

[Document 100]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, March 2, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received 10:32 p.m.]

1727. Personal for the Acting Secretary and Mr. Dunn. In my 1699 March 2, 6 p.m., Comea 33,20 I dealt with some of the details regarding the wording of our draft Instrument and Acknowledgment of Unconditional Surrender of Germany. I now wish to say a word about the general position in which I find myself in respect to the treatment of this document in the Commission.

Neither I nor the members of my delegation are familiar with the evolution of the document. We have very little to go on in trying to arrive at the exact reasoning which lay behind its drafting.

We have given careful study and thought to the text and the supporting memorandum and to all the other material now before the Commission on this subject. As a result of this study, neither I nor my political advisers are able to see that it makes any great practical difference which of these three proposed sets of surrender terms is finally chosen for imposition upon Germany. Each of them provides for an acknowledgment on the part of Germany that its military forces are defeated. Each binds Germany to submit without question to any terms of a military, political and economic nature which may be imposed upon it by the victors. The British would prefer a longer and more comprehensive document, comprising numbers of detailed desiderata; the Russians would like a brief document containing only military provisions; we would like a brief document containing general provisions, with the detailed desiderata appended in the form of general proclamations and orders. I do not see that any principle of major importance is involved in the choice between these alternatives.

Quite naturally, General Wickersham accepts the recommendation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as an order to be complied with. If I am also to treat the Joint Chiefs of Staff surrender instrument as a directive, there is little opportunity for bringing together the different views of three delegations.

I want of course to do everything possible to see that the wishes of the Joint Chiefs are reflected in the recommendations of the Commission; and I shall spare no effort to support this document and to persuade the other delegations to accept it in preference to their own as the basis of discussion. On the other hand I can not myself feel that this is the vital issue, and meanwhile the work of the Commission on other important questions connected with the detailed drafting of the surrender terms and the machinery for their execution is being held up. I think that there is a limit to the time that we can allow to pass before proceeding to these other matters; and it would therefore be my judgment that if we are not able to obtain agreement to the exact form of our draft instrument in the very near future, we may have to make some concessions in order to get on with the discussion of these other matters.

If I am obliged to adopt this course, our military authorities may depend on it that I shall not agree, even tentatively, to the recommendation of any form of surrender document which does not satisfy basically the requirements outlined in the comment on the draft instrument which we have received from them.

Winant

20 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/104: Telegram

[Document 101]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 3, 1944—10 p.m.

1623. Eacom 8. The review of the situation as set forth in your Comea messages 31, 32, and 3421 has been considered by the Working Security Committee.

Our general objection to the Soviet document is that, like the British draft, it limits our authority by being too specific. In our view, many of its provisions could better be issued to the Germans in the form of orders and instructions. The Soviet draft contains two provisions which are questioned here. These provisions are (1) that members of the German armed forces, as referred to in Article 2 and elsewhere, shall be declared prisoners of war, and (2) the delimitation of zones in paragraph 15. With regard to the first, it is observed that the United States and United Kingdom are parties to Geneva Convention respecting prisoners of war,22 whereas Soviet Union is not. It would be of interest in this connection to ascertain whether the Soviets propose to accord German prisoners of war the treatment provided by Geneva Convention, and if not, just what character of treatment they have in mind for them. The second is objectionable in that the delimitation of zones is a matter for agreement among the Governments of the United States, United Kingdom, and Soviet Union, and is not, in our opinion, one which should be included in any document to which the Germans are a party. One additional comment is that the Department sees no advantage to be gained from writing war guilt into the surrender text and has doubt as to the wisdom of providing the Germans with a new version of an issue which was so adeptly exploited in the past.

We are not particularly impressed by the British fears respecting the comprehensive nature of certain paragraphs of our surrender instrument. Our principle objective is to draft surrender terms broad enough to give us complete and unlimited authority, leaving to agreement among the three governments questions as to how that authority will be exercised. This objective is generally consistent with the views expressed by the President, and views of the Prime Minister expressed in his speech 22 February23 to the effect that unconditional surrender means that the victors have a free hand and will not be bound at the time of surrender by any pact or obligation with Germany.

Our document, which we suggest you recommend for adoption, contemplates that it will be signed by and be binding upon the German Government and the German High Command. The insertion of “German Government” at several points in our proposed instrument, as suggested in Eacom 6,24 covers this point, and we see no need for alternate drafts.

In view of the nature of American and British military command, our surrender instrument provided for signature by the Supreme Allied Commander on behalf of both the United States and United Kingdom. Whether or not the instrument should be signed by both the United States and United Kingdom commanding generals would depend in final analysis upon directive from Combined Chiefs of Staff at time of surrender. We see no objection, however, at this time to making tentative provision for signature by all three Commanders.

With the transmission of documents WS–10a and WS–12,25 and the Joint Chiefs of Staff draft instrument of German surrender together with the submission by the British and Soviet delegations of texts of surrender instruments proposed by them, the Department assumes that the European Advisory Commission will now begin intensive negotiations with a view to arriving at its recommendations. While the American delegation will be supplied from time to time with subsidiary documentation, the Department believes that you have received sufficient basic papers to guide you in your discussions in the Commission. This is particularly true as we have sent you the document on military occupation cleared through the Joint Chiefs of Staff (WS–15c).26 Consequently, the Department will not at this time attempt to comment in detail upon the various provisions of the Soviet and British proposals, but will rather await your report on those points on which there is fundamental agreement and those matters which will require further negotiations, together with any texts that may be drafted.

Stettinius

21 None printed.

22 International Convention Relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War, signed at Geneva July 27, 1929; for text, see Foreign Relations, 1929, vol. i, p. 336, or Department of State Treaty Series No. 846.

23  Parliamentary Debates, House of Commons, 5th series, vol. 397, cols. 698–699.

24 Telegram 1395, February 25, p. 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96].

25  Ante, pp. 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76] and 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], respectively.

26  Ante, p. 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 98].

Memorandum by the United States Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/3–444

[Document 102]

Memorandum by the United States Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Winant)27

E.A.C. (44) 11 London, March 3, 1944.

Terms of Surrender for Germany

1. At the last meeting of the Commission on 18 February, Mr. Gousev suggested that discussions be commenced as to the form of the surrender document to be used in the case of Germany. In connection with this suggestion, the U.S. Delegation would like to propose a solution which, if agreed to, would serve to meet and reconcile the essential points put forward by the respective delegates in E.A.C. (44) 1,28 (44) 4,29 (44) 8,30 and (44) 9 (revise),31 and would constitute a satisfactory single recommendation which could be submitted by the Commission to the three Governments recommending approval.

2. It is recommended that the surrender of Germany be accomplished by: An Instrument of Unconditional Surrender of Germany

A Proclamation to the people of Germany

Initial General Orders

3. It is proposed that the instrument of Unconditional Surrender should be brief but comprehensive in scope, and should be primarily but not exclusively military. The reasons are set forth in our supporting memorandum filed with the U.S. draft, (E.A.C. (44) 8). It should be executed by the Highest German Military Authority, and, if possible, by the Highest German Civil Authority. The completed Instrument should be published. The United States draft Instrument and Acknowledgment of Unconditional Surrender of Germany (E.A.C. (44) 8, Annex A) is recommended as a suitable instrument of unconditional surrender.

4. The Proclamation to the people of Germany should be issued by the Supreme Commanders of the Allied Expeditionary Forces and the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and should contain a concise general announcement that the Instrument of Unconditional Surrender has been executed by the German authorities. The Proclamation should also call upon all Germans to comply with the provisions of the Proclamation and of the General Orders, and of all future proclamations, orders, ordinances, and instructions issued by authority of the Supreme Commanders of the Allies.

The Proclamation should be shown to the Germans before they sign the Instrument of Unconditional Surrender and should be published simultaneously with the Instrument.

5. As to the General Orders, there are three broad subjects into which the detailed terms of surrender divide themselves, and it may be convenient to discuss them as part of three General Orders, although a different number may be ultimately required.

General Order No. 1 should contain the military and naval terms.

General Order No. 2 should contain the political terms.

General Order No. 3 should contain the economic terms.

The three General Orders should be shown to the Germans before they sign the Instrument of Unconditional Surrender and should then be published throughout Germany simultaneously with the Instrument and the Proclamation.

6. The U.S. Delegation recommends that the Three Powers, U.S., U.K., and U.S.S.R., should agree in advance to the contents of the Instrument of Unconditional Surrender, the Proclamation, General Orders No. 1, 2, and 3, and such further directives as may be deemed necessary or advisable to implement the surrender terms.

J[ohn] G. W[inant]

27 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 14271, March 4; received March 7.

28 Memorandum dated January 15, p. 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79].

29 See footnote 40, p. 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76].

30 See footnote 98, p. 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 90].

31 Memorandum dated February 18, p. 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/103: Telegram

[Document 103]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 6, 1944—10 p.m.

1703. Personal for the Ambassador. Your 1727, March 2, 8 p.m. reference telegram no. 1623, March 3, 10 p.m., Eacom 8, which proposed that you recommend for adoption our short instrument of surrender.

This position has been taken after careful consideration of the matter by the President, Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Department, and it is the desire of this Government that you make every effort to have our form of instrument of surrender adopted.

The foregoing does not mean that you are barred from negotiating on the basis of our document, which, like our other documents, has been transmitted for your guidance in presenting the American position. It has been assumed from the outset between the Department and the Joint Chiefs of Staff that divergencies of views would be resolved within the Commission, and that its tentative recommendations would be referred to the three Governments.

We have now transmitted to you our comment on both the British and Soviet proposals. It would be helpful if we could receive the Soviet reaction to our document.

We are not inclined to agree with your view that no fundamental difference is involved in the three documents. The United States and Soviet documents are instruments of unconditional surrender. The British document, on the other hand sets forth the detailed conditions under which hostilities will be suspended. While admittedly the British instrument, by its terms, reserves the right to impose conditions other than those specified, we feel that there may be legal question as to whether this reservation would be completely effective, and that, in any event, the Germans would attempt to urge that agreement was limited to the matters specified. The Italian experience has impressed our military authorities with the advisability of the short type of document. As stated in Eacom 8, our principal objective is to impose surrender terms broad enough to give us complete and unlimited authority, leaving to agreement among the three Governments, without German participation, questions as to how that authority will be exercised. If you succeed in obtaining Commission’s agreement to the adoption of a short form of surrender instrument, we would then expect Commission to proceed to draw up further directives and proclamations required to implement that instrument.

The difficulty of your position is well understood here, and we are anxious to provide every means we can for facilitating your task.

Stettinius

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 800.0146/298

[Document 104]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

No. 3831 Washington, March 8, 1944.

Sir: I transmit herewith a copy of a letter32 from General Hilldring33 and a copy of the enclosure thereto which it is believed are self-explanatory. It will be observed that the memorandum from the Joint Chiefs of Staff delineates the zones to be occupied in Germany by American, British, and Soviet forces and that it was prepared on December 4, 1943. This document is transmitted to you for your consideration and for your recommendations with regard to it.

There are also enclosed herewith (1) a map setting forth the Soviet proposal concerning zones; (2) a map setting forth the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff proposal; and (3) a cartogram comparing maps one and two.34 These maps were prepared in the Department as of possible assistance to you.

Very truly yours,

Edward R. Stettinius, Jr.

[Enclosure]

Memorandum by the United States Chiefs of Staff to the Combined Chiefs of Staff 35

C.C.S. 320/4 (Revised) [Cairo,] 4 December, 1943.

1. In developing his plans for Rankin, COSSAC has submitted a recommendation (paragraph 11, C.C.S. 320/2)36 that under the general direction of the Supreme Allied Commander the territories to be occupied should be divided into two spheres, the British sphere, including northwest Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg, Holland and Denmark, and the U.S. sphere, generally southern Germany and France, with Austria a U.S. sphere, initially under the Mediterranean command. It is understoood that planning by COSSAC is now proceeding on this basis.

2. The U.S. Chiefs of Staff now propose that these spheres be changed as follows:37 a. U.S. sphere. The general area Netherlands, Northern Germany as far east as the line Berlin-Stettin, Denmark, Norway and Sweden. The boundary of this area is to be as follows: Southern boundary of the Netherlands; thence to Duesseldorf on the Rhine; down [up] the east bank of the Rhine to Mainz; thence due east to Bayreuth; thence north to Leipzig; thence northeast to Cottbus; thence north to Berlin (exclusive); thence to Stettin (inclusive).

b. British sphere. Generally the territory to the west and south of the American western boundary.

2 [3]. The U.S. Chiefs of Staff further propose that COSSAC be directed to examine and report on the implications of revising his planning on the basis of the new allocation of spheres of occupation.

32 Not printed.

33 Maj. Gen. John H. Hilldring, Director of the Civil Affairs Division of the War Department.

34 The three enclosures were not found attached to the file copy of this document. Copies of the two maps and the cartogram (reproduced on facing page) are included in the EAC files: Lot 52 M 64, box 9602, files 136 and 138 Germany—Zones of Occupation I.

35 For record of the Meeting of the Combined Chiefs of Staff, December 4, 1943, at Cairo at which this paper was agreed upon by the C.C.S., see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehran, 1943, p. 688.

36 Not printed.

37 For Minutes of the President’s Meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, November 19, 1943, aboard the U.S.S. Iowa on the way to the Cairo Conference, during which meeting the President outlined his views regarding the spheres of responsibility in Germany, see Foreign Relations, the Conferences at Cairo and Tehran, 1943, pp. 253–256. For a reproduction of the map on which the President sketched his idea of occupation zones for Germany, see Maurice Matloff, Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare, 1943–1944, in the official Army history United States Army in World War II (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1959), facing p. 341.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/113: Telegram

[Document 105]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, March 10, 1944—noon.
[Received March 10—8:55 a.m.]

1944. Comea 38. Thank you for your message 1623 March 3, 10 p.m., Eacom 8. After receiving it I contacted my two colleagues here and came to the conclusion that if we met formally, as scheduled, on March 7, we could not hope for anything more than a continuation of the deadlock in which each of us insisted on his respective draft. Therefore, I suggested that the three representatives meet informally in Gousev’s private office at Lancaster House. We had an amicable and useful discussion lasting some 3 hours. I believe I can now give you a clearer picture of the situation here.

Strang said that he thought that the British might agree to accept a shorter document, since both we and the Russians are agreed on a relatively brief instrument for German signature; but with the understanding that the proclamation and orders would contain the substance of the points covered by the British draft. On the latter reservation I stated personally that I felt my Government would agree. I based my position on paragraph 6 of the comment which accompanied our draft instrument. Gousev replied that he had already agreed to this in our formal meetings, and graciously said he felt that Strang’s statement was more than a concession, that it was a contribution to general agreement. Strang then added that he hoped that his Soviet and American colleagues might be able to compromise their documents into a combined short instrument; but the British would want to make some drafting comments and possibly add two or three clauses which they felt should be included.

I had previously pointed out that there were certain general obligations covered in clauses 5, 6, and 7 that we considered essential to an inclusive instrument of surrender. It had already become plain to me that the concept back of our draft, which in a sense was a briefing of the British instrument was to ensure for us a broad basis of authority, while the Russian document was a strategic military instrument recognizing the possible psychological and political reactions on the part of the surrendering power. In Gousev’s comments which followed I came to understand both the Russian position as well as their point of view as translated into their draft surrender instrument.

The Russians have consistently refused to consider any other question before the Commission until the form of surrender terms has been decided. I came for the first time to realize fully that they did not want to be compromised on any collateral issue until we reached agreement on this basic decision, to which they attach primary importance. They are determined to end the war as quickly as possible. I believe they are willing to deal with any government or control [central?] military command that will agree to unconditional surrender and immediate disarmament and demobilization. They want nothing in the surrender instrument that would hamper the achievement of this objective. As Gousev pointed out with crude realism, if you include a clause on war criminals and are attempting to deal with men who might consider themselves in that category, they might well refuse to do business on any terms; or, as he said, if we asked for terms and included articles such as our V, the Germans might well refuse to meet our terms and then use the drastic nature of our demands as a weapon with which to whip their people back to continued resistance. To put the case quite simply, he stated that his Government believed that if we could get unconditional surrender and disarmament and demobilization, the continuance of war would become impossible as a practical matter. All this would mean a separation of surrender terms from other demands.

It is my understanding, from what General Wickersham tells me of his recent talk with General Hilldring, that the reference in clause IV of our draft to “the annexed proclamation and orders” is not meant to imply that the proclamation and orders should be shown to the Germans simultaneously with the surrender terms. Thus Gousev’s attitude, as described above, falls generally in line with our present position. I believe that we can persuade the British to join us in this position, provided we can get agreement in advance to the proclamations and orders which will be issued after signature of the surrender document.

The point that I kept hammering at was that the surrender terms and the proclamation and orders should be made a part of a general agreement by all three countries. I personally accept the reasonableness of the chronology suggested by the Russians of tackling first the military surrender terms and working out the proclamations and directives in order of importance; but the surrender terms and the proclamation and the orders should be part of a general agreement to be arrived at in the Commission.

It would be very unfortunate if we made concessions on surrender terms and the Governments jointly agreed to subscribe to them and then ran into difficulty on the proclamation and orders. I believe the Democracies will ultimately hold us responsible for a standard of conduct in enemy countries wherever there is joint surrender to the armed forces of the three powers.

Gousev told me in answer to a question I put him that the agreement on the proclamation and orders would be as binding on the three nations in his view as the agreement on surrender terms themselves.

Since it is impossible to envisage in proclamations and orders drawn up in advance all the future contingencies to be met in the course of military occupation, I asked if his Government would support a continuing tri-partite authority for the immediate post-hostilities period. He said that they would, provided we could agree on surrender terms.

At our last formal meeting38 we asked the question which you later suggested we might put as to prisoners of war. You now have their reply. The Russian position is that as a practical matter it would be easier to handle the German forces as prisoners of war and that the psychological effect in Germany would be to force the recognition of complete defeat.

I told him that we did not want a war guilt clause to be part of our terms of surrender. I do not think that there would be serious objection to the elimination of this provision from their terms.

We are scheduled to hold a meeting of the commission on next Tuesday39 at 3:00 o’clock. I would very much appreciate any guidance you could give me as to my approach at that meeting on the question of surrender terms.

Winant

38 March 3, 1944.

39 March 14.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/113: Telegram

[Document 106]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 16, 1944—3 p.m.

1976. Eacom 13. Your message 1944, March 10, noon, Comea 38, has been considered. We feel your talk with Strang and Gousev was helpful, especially since British now envisage use of a short instrument of surrender.

We believe with the British that agreement among the three Governments on policies for implementing the surrender instrument and for the control of Germany is essential prior to Germany’s capitulation. We have assumed that, in addition to the negotiation of a surrender instrument, joint policy agreements embodying the basic objectives and procedures for the implementation of the surrender instrument would be worked out in the Commission ad referendum, for eventual transmittal by the three Governments in the form of directives to the respective Allied and Soviet Commanders-in-Chief.

We would expect the Commission, in drawing up these policy agreements, to consider the points covered by the British draft as well as the various documents transmitted from here, and assume that this procedure would meet Strang’s point. At the time of surrender, and subsequently, there would be issued to the Germans such proclamations, orders, and ordinances on the basis of the policies agreed to by the three Governments as are deemed necessary. The Commission may wish to proceed to draw up the initial proclamations and orders. We believe with the Russians that none of these documents should be shown to the Germans before signing the surrender instrument. We desire to avoid any implication that those documents involve a contractual relation with the German authorities. Document EAC (44) 1140 should be modified to conform with the foregoing comments.

This Government is in accord with the Soviet Government in its determination to bring the war against Germany to a close as early as possible and under conditions which will preclude a renewal of German resistance and a revival of German aggression. However, we do not believe that the present German leaders would be more willing to make an essentially military capitulation as prescribed by the Soviet draft than to accept the United States terms. We have to assume that they expect severe terms in any case, and will surrender only when no other choice is open to them.

We consider the inclusion of Articles 4, 5, 6, 7, and 9, or their substantial equivalent, to be essential to prevent later legal disputes concerning the rights and powers of the victors, and to forestall a repetition of the criticism, made after the last war, that the victors increased the severity of the armistice terms once Germany was unable to renew hostilities. These articles would establish an incontestable recognition of our right to take all measures deemed appropriate for the control and reorganization of Germany and for the punishment of war criminals.

In addition to the disadvantages of the Soviet draft on the foregoing points, article 20 of that draft might be interpreted as imposing serious limitations on our freedom of action in Germany, since the additional requirements to be presented are limited to “questions connected with the surrender of Germany”, and are to be carried out by “the German Government and the German Supreme Command”.

We are gratified to learn of probable British and Soviet willingness to omit from surrender instrument reference to war guilt.

Comment on the question of prisoners of war will be transmitted to you later.

We are not clear whether your suggestion of a continuing tri-partite authority for control of Germany in post-hostilities period, referred to in your telegram, was based on our proposal outlined in WS–15c.41

We trust these comments will assist you in arriving at joint recommendations to be submitted by the Commission to the three Governments.

Hull

40 Memorandum dated March 3, p. 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 102].

41  Ante, p. 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 98].

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang) 740.00119 EAC/146

[Document 107]

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)42

E.A.C. (44) 14 London, 22 March, 1944.43

High Commission Machinery for Germany

1. On 15th January, 1944 I circulated to the Commission a paper (E.A.C. (44) 3)44 making proposals for the Allied control machinery which would operate in Germany during the period of occupation.

2. One of the proposals made in that paper was the establishment of a High Commission for Germany.

3. According to this proposal, it was suggested that during the period of active hostilities the authority of the Commanders-in-Chief would be supreme, but that the High Commission would also exist in embryo in order to help Commanders-in-Chief by providing guidance to them on economic and political matters (see paragraph 9 of the memorandum annexed to E.A.C. (44) 3).

4. During the middle period, that is to say during the period of the aftermath of hostilities, the ultimate responsibility would still rest with the Commanders-in-Chief; but the field covered by the advisory functions of the embryo High Commission would be progressively extended throughout this period (see paragraph 10 of the memorandum annexed to E.A.C. (44) 3).

5. It would only be in the ensuing period of effective Allied control that the High Commission would become the supreme Allied authority in Germany (see paragraph 12 of the memorandum annexed to E.A.C. (44) 3).

6. The further proposals now made in the annexed paper relate to this third period, the period of effective Allied control. In it, consideration is given to the functions which would belong to the High Commission when it became the supreme Allied authority in Germany, and to the organisation required in order to enable these functions to be performed. In particular, it outlines in some detail the structure of the machinery of control through which the High Commission would work.

7. The annexed paper does not deal with the organisation of the machinery of control in the middle period referred to above. The United Kingdom Delegation hope to follow it up in due course with a further paper making proposals for the middle period also.

W[illiam] S[trang]

[Annex]

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Delegation to the European Advisory Commission

HIGH COMMISSION MACHINERY FOR GERMANY

(Note.—For the purpose of this Memorandum the following definitions have been used:— Three Powers: United Kingdom, United States and U.S.S.R.

Allied: United Kingdom, United States, U.S.S.R., plus those Allied countries, including the Dominions, directly concerned with the European settlement.

United Nations: All members of the United Nations.)

Introduction

1. In the paper on “Machinery in Germany during the Period of Occupation” circulated to the European Advisory Commission on the 15th January, 1944 (E.A.C. (44) 3, paragraph 17(b)), it was recommended that a High Commission (consisting initially of one representative each of the United Kingdom, United States and U.S.S.R.) should be set up in Germany, and that it should direct:— (a) The Forces of Occupation.

(b) The Control Commission, charged with supervising the execution of the terms of surrender imposed on Germany.

(c) The Agencies in Germany of the United Nations Organisations for relief, repatriation, transport, &c., such as U.N.R.R.A.45

(d) The Central Civil Administration, should it be decided (on further examination) to keep this distinct from the Control Commission.

As soon as conditions warranted, and at a time to be decided by the Governments of the Three Powers, on the recommendations of the Commanders-in-Chief, the High Commission would become the supreme Allied authority in Germany.

2. In paragraph 17(a) of the above paper it was also recommended that during the period before conditions would enable the High Commission to operate fully:— (a) Each of the Allied Commanders-in-Chief would exercise supreme authority in the area controlled by his own forces.

(b) The High Commission would co-ordinate policy on economic and political matters by providing guidance to the Commanders-in-Chief through the appropriate channels.

(c) Control of the Central German Government (if any) or the central German administrative machine would be exercised by representatives of the Allied Commanders-in-Chief, sitting together as a body.

During the earlier period the High Commission would thus act in an advisory capacity only, and would have no executive authority.

3. In the present paper consideration is given to the functions of the High Commission, and the organisation required to carry them out when the High Commission becomes the supreme Allied authority in Germany, that is to say, during the period of effective Allied control described in section C, paragraphs 11–15, of E.A.C. (44) 3. The “middle” period immediately after the cessation of hostilities, described in section B, paragraph 10, of that paper, is not dealt with here and is receiving separate consideration.

Relations of the High Commission with, and Division of Functions Between, Its Subordinate Bodies

The High Commission.

4.—(a) The High Commission would be responsible for tasks of considerable magnitude and diversity. In order to act promptly and efficiently the High Commission itself should be a small body concerned solely with the broad policy and the general direction and control of the work of its subordinate executive bodies, and it should not be overloaded with the detail involved in day-to-day executive action.

(b) The High Commission should initially be representative of the Three Powers only—subject to consideration of the position of France—but other Allied Governments might with advantage be connected with its work in some way, possibly on an Advisory Council.

The nature and composition of such an Advisory Council is being further studied.

The Forces of Occupation.

5. In regard to the functions of the forces of occupation and their relations with the High Commission, it is not necessary to add anything to what has already been said in E.A.C. (44) 3 (see paragraphs 14 (a) and 15). The High Commission would exercise control subject to the right of Commanders-in-Chief:— (a) to appeal direct to their respective Governments, and

(b) to declare a state of martial law in any area in their respective zones of occupation, should they consider this necessary.

Control Commission and Civil Administration.

6. It was contemplated in paragraph 14 of E.A.C. (44) 3 that, under the High Commission, there would be a Control Commission enforcing the execution of terms imposed, and a Central Civil Administration; but the question whether the latter was to be a separate body was left for further consideration.

7. When the functions involved in Control and Administration are analysed, it becomes clear that they have three main aspects:— (a) ensuring that the terms imposed on Germany are carried out;

(b) taking such measures as are necessary to encourage the growth of fresh systems of government, education, economy, &c., in accordance with the policy of the United Nations;

(c) controlling (in the light of (a) and (b) above, and in such manner as may be rendered necessary by the conditions in Germany at the time) the day-to-day administration of Germany.

8. Whilst, as explained in paragraph 4 above, the High Commission will be responsible for tasks of considerable magnitude and diversity, the paramount aim to which all others should be subordinated is the disarmament of Germany, disarmament including the destruction of Germany’s capacity to wage war, the disbandment of all German armed forces, the eradication of German militarism and the prevention of their re-emergence.

The terms of surrender would themselves constitute a first step towards the attainment of these objects. Their practical attainment may, however, well necessitate wide control of the German administrative machinery.

9. If therefore two separate bodies were set up to undertake the respective tasks of (a) enforcing the execution of the surrender terms and (b) directing the Civil Administration, it would be extremely difficult to draw a hard and fast line and to delimit precisely the functions of each of the bodies or to ensure proper co-ordination between them.

It would be best therefore to set up one body only, which would be responsible not only for disarmament as defined above, but also for controlling the German administrative system. This should provide a stronger administrative machine.

10. One body accordingly should carry out the tasks which in paragraph 14 of E.A.C. (44) 3 were referred to under the heads of “Control Commission” and “Central Civil Administration.” This body would comprise the whole organisation which it is proposed should carry out the main functions of the High Commission. This machinery of control would be headed by an Executive Committee of Control (see paragraph 16 below), answerable to the High Commission. It would follow that, if agreement could not be reached in the Executive Committee of Control, the subject of dispute would be referred to the High Commission for decision.

United Nations Agencies chained, in Germany, with problems of Relief, Repatriation, Transport, &c.

11. These agencies would be part of larger organisations covering a wide area, and would be administered and to some extent controlled by their own parent organisations. At the same time, it would be essential that their work in Germany should be co-ordinated, and for them to act in consonance with the general policy of the other Allied authorities. In E.A.C. (44) 3, it was recommended that they should come directly under the control of the High Commission. It is felt, however, that there might be difficulties in this proposal and that the day-to-day contacts of these agencies should be with the Executive Committee of Control and with the relevant Sections and Sub-Commissions under it. These agencies should, however, have the right of direct access to the High Commission, through the President of the Executive Committee of Control.

Organisation under the High Commission

General principles on which the control machinery should be organised.

12. The Executive Committee of Control cannot itself carry out the terms imposed, and its purpose is to supervise their execution by the Germans. For this reason it should be designed so far as possible to conform functionally with existing German machinery.

It follows that the structure of the control machinery must correspond fairly closely to the structure of the German administrative machinery. Therefore, Sections of the control machinery should correspond for the purpose of disarmament to the German Naval, Military and Air authorities; likewise other Sections should correspond to the Ministries of Armaments and War Production, Economics, Food, Finance, Interior, Transport and so on.

13. The High Commission would act on behalf of the United Nations.

In order to ensure uniformity in the work of control, it would be desirable for control staffs to be “mixed” (i.e., representative of the Three Powers) at the higher levels, and that other Allied nationals should be associated with this work.

Administrative difficulties and shortage of interpreters and suitable control personnel would, no doubt, make it impracticable to “mix” staffs below a certain level. Although “mixing” is in general desirable, the extent to which it may be found practicable in each case will be a matter of detailed planning.

Structure of Proposed Organisation.

14.—(a) Appendix “A”47 illustrates how the various functions of German Ministries would be controlled by the proposed control machinery.

Appendix “A” sets out— In Column 1, existing German Ministries.

In Column 2, the proposed Section of the control machinery which will control the functions of each Ministry in Column 1.

In Column 3, the functions which each Section will be responsible for in the disarmament and control of Germany.

Sections should be divided into Sub-Commissions as required.

(b) Some of the functions of German Ministries have been taken over by party organisations. For the purposes of this paper, however, it is assumed that these party organisations will be liquidated as soon as this can be done without serious dislocation to the German administrative machine, and the usurped functions returned to the Ministries originally concerned.

(c) Appendix “B”47 illustrates the whole proposed structure of the High Commission machinery on the basis set out above.

(d) It is emphasised that Appendices “A” and “B” set forth the general conception only, and that they will require elaboration and possibly some adjustment at the stage of detailed planning.

15.—(a) Each Section should have:— (i) its own Director;

(ii) a Board and Secretariat. The Board should consist of the following:— Director of the Section;

Heads of the Sub-Commissions.

(b) The tasks of the Board would be to co-ordinate the work of, and to resolve any difficulties arising between, the Sub-Commissions.

(c) In view of the outstanding importance of the work of the Naval, Land and Air Forces Sections and the necessity for close co-operation between them, it would be desirable to set up a Council to co-ordinate their work. It is suggested that it should consist of the Directors of the three Sections and that they should elect one of their members as Chairman at their meetings.

Executive Committee of Control.

16. Though many questions of concern to two or more Sections may be settled by direct consultation between their Directors, it will obviously be necessary that the work of the various parts of the control machinery shall be co-ordinated and directed by a governing body. It is suggested that this should take the form of an Executive Committee of Control comprising representatives of the various Sections. The Executive Committee of Control might be made up of the Directors of each Section, as follows:— Naval Forces Section

Land Forces Section

Air Forces Section

Economic Section

Finance and Deliveries Section

Political Section

Manpower Section

Transportation Section

Internal Affairs Section,

making a total of 9 members. (Some multiple of three would seem to be desirable for the purpose of allotting posts between the Three Powers.)

The Executive Committee should elect its own Chairman. If the Committee were unable to reach agreement on any matter, it would refer it to the High Commission for decision. The Director of any Section should have a right of appeal to the High Commission in any matter on which he had been overruled in the Executive Committee.

To assist the Executive Committee in its task a strong Secretariat will be required.

17. In E.A.C. (44) 3 (see paragraph 16(b)), it was proposed that the High Commission should have Political, Economic and Administrative staffs. In the present proposals these staffs appear as the Sections of the control machinery.

In the above paper it was also proposed (see paragraph 16 (c)) that the High Commission should have a Military Staff to act as a link between the High Commission and the Commanders-in-Chief. No alteration in this proposal is suggested in the present paper.

London, 21 March, 1944.

42 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 14617, March 23; received March 30.

43 The memorandum was originally circulated in the European Advisory Commission by the United Kingdom Representative on March 21.

44 Memorandum dated January 15, p. 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81].

45 United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration.

47 Not printed.

47 Not printed.

The Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn) to the Director of the Civil Affairs Division of the War Department (Hilldring) 800.0146/298

[Document 108]

The Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn) to the Director of the Civil Affairs Division of the War Department (Hilldring)

Washington, April 5, 1944.

My Dear General Hilldring: I should like to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of February 25, 194448 enclosing a copy of CCS 320/4 (Revised)49 setting forth the views of the United States Chiefs of Staff with respect to certain European spheres of occupation for the United States and British forces. You recommended that these views be transmitted to Ambassador Winant for consideration in the European Advisory Commission.

This document was transmitted to Ambassador Winant in accordance with your recommendation. Mr. Winant replied by telegram on March 2350 to the effect that his recommendations on this subject would be brought to the Secretary of State, and would be presented by Mr. George F. Kennan, the Counselor of our Delegation in the Commission.

I now enclose a memorandum prepared by Mr. Kennan in which these recommendations are set forth. I understand that Mr. Kennan has also spoken to the President about the proposed boundary of the Russian zone, and that the President expressed himself on that occasion as being favorably inclined to an acceptance of the western border of the Russian zone as proposed by the British and Russian delegations.50a

In view of these circumstances, the Department proposes to have drawn up in the Working Security Commission [Committee] new instructions to Mr. Winant on the subject of the zones of occupation. The draft of these instructions will be made known to you in the usual manner by the War Department representative on the Working Security Committee.

Sincerely yours,

James Clement Dunn

[Enclosure]

Memorandum by the Counselor to the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Kennan)

[Washington,] April 4, 1944.

On March 8, the Department sent to Ambassador Winant (Instruction no. 3831) a letter from General Hilldring enclosing a memorandum, dated December 4, setting forth the views of the U.S. Chiefs of Staff with respect to proposed zones of occupation in Germany “for negotiation in the European Advisory Commission”.

On March 23, Mr. Winant cabled that his recommendations on this subject would be brought to the Secretary and to the President by me.

I am taking this means to set forth these recommendations.

Mr. Winant feels that it would be most inadvisable to present this memorandum, as it stands, to the Commission. His reasons are the following:

(1) Since the memorandum was written, the Russians and the British have placed before the Advisory Commission identical proposals on this subject which would give the Russian zone a western boundary beginning about at Lübeck in the north and running from there generally south to the vicinity of Plauen. Our proposal placed the western boundary of the Russian zone along a line anywhere from 50 to 150 miles further east, beginning at Stettin, in the north, and running south from there.

If we were to come forward now with the Joint Chiefs’ proposal, the Russians would only conclude that we had decided to cut down their zone by nearly fifty percent over what they themselves asked for. This would cause them to be highly suspicious of our motives, and Mr. Winant would be asked at once for explanations as to why we wanted to do this.

Mr. Winant has not been told why we want the line so far east, and could give no explanations. He would thus find himself in the embarrassing position of having made a proposal which he could not defend; and the Russians, receiving no answer, would be offended, and doubly suspicious.

(2) The other members of the Commission would ask why our proposed borders of the zones do not coincide with German administrative boundaries, and what we propose to do about the administration of territorial units dismembered by these borders. Mr. Winant would have no explanation to give on this point.

(3) The other members of the Commission would ask on what basis the Russians would be deprived of the important railway junction of Cottbus. Mr. Winant could give no explanations on this subject.

(4) Mr. Winant would surely be asked exactly where the line would be drawn between the Soviet zone and the proposed British zone in the South. On this point, again, he could give no answer.

(5) Mr. Winant would be asked whether our Government had not given attention to the proposals with respect to zones of occupation placed before the Commission by the British and Soviet Delegates, and, if it had, what objections it had to make to the boundaries of the Soviet zone set forth therein. He has no instructions which would enable him to answer these questions.

Mr. Winant hopes that it will be found possible to accept the boundaries of the Soviet zone as already agreed to by the Russians and the British. If this should not be the case, he feels that he must have adequate argumentation to support any counter-proposals he may make.

George F. Kennan

48 Not printed.

49  Ante, p. 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 104].

50 Telegram 2352, March 23, 2 p.m., from London, not printed.

50a In a letter of May 10, 1944, to Ambassador Winant (not printed), Kennan gave the following brief description of his meeting with the President, which apparently occurred on April 3: “He did most of the talking, but I was able to explain the mix-up about zones of occupation and to give him the messages you had asked me to deliver. He received the latter with interest and inquired very kindly about you.” (740.00119 EAC/5–1044) After his meeting with the President, Kennan left at the White House an informal record, in the form of a questionnaire, of his own personal views on the work of the American delegation to the European Advisory Commission. A copy of this record was attached to Kennan’s May 10 letter to Winant.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/160a: Telegram

[Document 109]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, April 10, 1944—6 p.m.

2815. Eacom 16. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have given further consideration to the question of surrender terms for Germany and under date of April 8 have submitted the views set forth below with the request that they be communicated to you for information and guidance: “1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff are of the opinion that a long and detailed document partaking the character of an armistice or agreement with the German Government and attempting to anticipate all of the contingencies possible at the time of surrender and thereafter, should not be entered into.

“2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff are of the opinion that the capitulation of Germany should be recorded in a single brief instrument which should: “a. Include an acknowledgment on the part of Germany of the complete defeat of German armed forces on land, at sea and in the air, and of her unconditional surrender to the United States, United Kingdom, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, acting in the interests of the United Nations.

“b. Provide for the immediate cessation of hostilities by German armed forces on land, at sea and in the air in all theaters of war.

“c. Include such other broad and general language as may be deemed necessary to reserve absolute authority, without limitation or condition of any character whatsoever, over the German Government, territory, people and resources, including power to completely disarm, demobilize and demilitarize Germany and to take such other action to implement the surrender terms as the three Governments may at any time deem necessary or advisable without consultation or agreement with the Germans.

“3. The precise form which the surrender document should take is of secondary importance provided the views herein stated are substantially reflected in the instrument.

“4. The Joint Chiefs of Staff anticipate that necessary adjustments of the points of view of the three Governments will be made in the councils of the European Advisory Commission, and that the discussions of the Commission will result in its formulating a surrender instrument which can be recommended to the three Governments for adoption.”

The Department hopes that, particularly in view of paragraphs 3 and 4 above, this latest statement of the Joint Chiefs of Staff will facilitate your negotiations in the Commission and that the latter will be in a position to submit recommendations in the near future.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/172c: Telegram

[Document 110]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, May 1, 1944—11 p.m.

3499. Eacom 18. With reference to the question of zones of occupation of German and Austrian territory, the following instructions51 to you have been approved by the Department, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the President: 1. You may concur in a recommendation by the European Advisory Commission that the boundaries of the Soviet Zone of Occupation be defined as proposed by the Soviet Delegation.

2. You may concur in a recommendation by the Commission that the boundary between the northwestern zone and the southern zone be defined as proposed by the British Delegation.

3. With respect to the zones to be occupied by the United States and the United Kingdom, you are instructed to adhere to the directives which were set forth in the Department’s 1435 of February 25 [26] 5 p.m. (Eacom 7) transmitting the decision of the President that American forces should occupy the northwestern zone. This Government is of the opinion that the southern zone, including Austria, should be occupied by armed forces of the United Kingdom.

Hull

51 The original draft of these instructions was prepared by the Working Security Committee as WS–134b, dated April 17, 1944, not printed.

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang) 740.00119 EAC/179

[Document 111]

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)52

E.A.C. (44) 17 London, 2 May, 1944.53

Machinery in Germany During the “Middle Period”, i.e. the Period of Military Government After Hostilities Cease

1. On 22nd March, 1944 I circulated to the Commission a paper (E.A.C. (44) 14) covering a memorandum outlining the structure of the machinery of control through which the proposed High Commission would work during the period when the High Commission would be the Supreme Allied authority in Germany.

2. I explained that that memorandum did not deal with the organization of the machinery of control required in the “middle period”, that is to say the period between the cessation of hostilities and the opening of the period when the High Commission would be the Supreme Allied authority in Germany. I said that the United Kingdom Delegation hoped in due course to submit a further memorandum for the “middle period” also.

3. I now circulate to the Commission, as an Annex to the present paper, a memorandum making proposals for the machinery of control required for Germany during the “middle period”, that is to say, the period of military government after the cessation of hostilities.

W[illiam] S[trang]

[Annex]

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Delegation to the European Advisory Commission

MACHINERY IN GERMANY DURING THE “MIDDLE PERIOD,” i.e., THE PERIOD OF MILITARY GOVERNMENT AFTER HOSTILITIES CEASE

Introduction

1. The present memorandum deals with the machinery of control required for Germany during the “middle” period immediately after the cessation of hostilities.

2. In the memorandum enclosed in the paper circulated by the United Kingdom Delegation on the 15th January, 1944 (E.A.C. (44) 3), the machinery required in Germany during the following periods, was considered in outline:— (a) The Period of Active Hostilities (Period A).

(b) The “Middle Period,” i.e., the Aftermath of Hostilities (Period B).

(c) The Period of Effective Allied Control (Period C).

3. In the memorandum enclosed in the paper circulated by the United Kingdom Delegation on the 22nd March, 1944 (E.A.C. (44) 14), the proposals for the period of Effective Allied Control were considered in greater detail. In particular, the functions of the High Commission and the organisation it would require to carry them out were examined.

4. The present memorandum deals with the Middle Period, i.e., the Aftermath of Hostilities, in more detail than the memorandum in E.A.C. (44) 3.

5. It is not possible to tell what the conditions will be when hostilities cease. On the one hand Allied forces may not yet have set foot on German soil; on the other, large parts of Germany may already have been occupied.

While the Allied forces are in process of completing the occupation of Germany, it will be necessary for Commanders-in-Chief to be the supreme authorities within their own zones and to exercise local control through their own civil affairs and disarmament staffs, in the same way as will be necessary if German territory is occupied before hostilities cease.

6. The United Kingdom Delegation are, however, impressed with the need for establishing on a Three-Power basis and at the earliest possible moment a form of Military Government at the centre, the function of which will be to exercise authority throughout Germany as a whole by controlling German Authorities at the centre.

Consideration will first be given below to the form which Military Government should take and then go on to deal with the stages by which it might be established.

Form which Military Government should take

Supreme Authority.

7.—(a) Supreme authority should be exercised by, or on behalf of, the Commanders-in-Chief of the Forces of Occupation. It is recommended, therefore, that supreme authority should be vested in a Military Commission consisting of the Commanders-in-Chief themselves—though, if local conditions precluded, they could be represented by their deputies. While the United States/British Forces are under one Command, it is considered essential that a senior British Commander should sit on the Military Commission, so that, from the start, all Three Powers will be represented on an equal footing.

(b) The Military Commission would act in accordance with directives received from the three Governments. It is assumed that on all matters, other than those of individual concern to each of the Forces of Occupation, directives would be co-ordinated through the medium of the European Advisory Commission or whatever Inter-Allied body is then in existence for dealing with European affairs.

8. If an acceptable central German Government exists, the Military Commission would act as the channel through which the policy of the United Nations would be imposed on that Government. In the absence of such a German Government, it might be necessary for the Military Commission to assume considerable administrative responsibility. Even so, it would have as far as possible to use German machinery and suitably selected German personnel.

Machinery of Military Government under the Military Commission.

9. The tasks to be performed in the matter of Government by the Allies in Germany immediately after the cessation of hostilities would involve control of much the same nature, and over much the same fields of German activity, as would require to be exercised later on by the High Commission. It follows that the central machinery of control required during the period of Military Government would be substantially the same as that required under the High Commission.

It is therefore recommended that the machinery of control outlined in E.A.C. (44) 14 for the High Commission period should be set up during the Middle Period, but under the supreme authority of the Military Commission. It should be named “Military Government.” Thus the body in Period B corresponding to the “Executive Committee of Control” in Period C would be called the “Executive Committee of Military Government” and so on.

Staffing of Proposed Machinery

10. The United Kingdom Delegation are impressed— (a) by the need for continuity in carrying out the task of controlling Germany throughout all the three periods referred to in E.A.C. (44) 3;

(b) by the need for personnel of sufficient calibre to be available very early to deal adequately with the immensely complex problems with which they will be faced.

With regard to (a) continuity would be assured if the personnel employed during the period of Military Government (Period B) were the same as those who would later work under the direction of the High Commission during Period C, and include a considerable proportion of those who had been engaged in the exercise of Allied Military Government in Period A.

In particular, it is considered essential that the Directors of the Sections who would form the “Executive Committee of Military Government” should be the men who would later be Directors of the Sections who would form the “Executive Committee of Control” under the High Commission.

With regard to (b), it is recommended that the Directors of the various Sections should have had wide administrative experience in their own particular fields. The staffs of the non-military Sections should, where necessary, be recruited from civilian sources in spite of the fact that during Period B they would be the agents of “Military Government.”

11. Furthermore, the United Kingdom Delegation consider that, in order to ensure uniformity in the work of control, it would be desirable for control staffs to be “mixed” at the higher levels.

The Forces of Occupation.

12. Any necessary co-ordination between the forces of occupation would be effected by the Military Commission through a central Military Staff.

United Nations’ Agencies charged in Germany with the problem of Relief, Repatriation, Transport, &c.

13. So long as Military Government lasts it would be necessary for these agencies to be subordinate to it. It is suggested that they should be answerable to the Executive Committee of Military Government, but that in the event of disagreement they should have the right of access to the Military Commission through the President or Chairman of the Executive Committee of Military Government.

The High Commission.

14. As already indicated in paragraph 10 of the memorandum enclosed in E.A.C. (44) 3, it is suggested that three representatives of the future High Commission should be available throughout to advise the Military Commission on economic and political matters.

Advisory Council.

15. As indicated in paragraph 4 of the memorandum enclosed in E.A.C. (44) 14, further study is being given to the possibility of setting up a council composed of the representatives of other Allied Governments, to function in an advisory capacity to the High Commission. It is considered desirable that the “middle” period should be of very limited duration and that as soon as possible after the end of active hostilities the High Commission should take over control. If this takes place, it should not be necessary to set up the Advisory Council during the “middle” period. If, on the other hand, the latter period should prove to be prolonged, it would be desirable to establish the Advisory Council before the High Commission takes over control. In that case its contact with the Military Commission should be through the future High Commission, rather than direct. This would obviate the necessity for the Military Commission receiving advice from more than one quarter.

Structure of Proposed Machinery.

16. For ease of reference, Appendix A54 to the memorandum enclosed in E.A.C. (44) 14 is repeated, with appropriate changes, as Appendix A to the present memorandum. It illustrates the German Ministries to be controlled, and the functions to be performed, by each of the various sections.

17. The whole proposed structure of the machinery under the Military Commission is illustrated at Appendix B.54 Below the Executive Committee of Military Government level it is the same as Appendix B to the memorandum enclosed in E.A.C. (44) 14.

Method of Setting up Military Government

18. As already indicated, the United Kingdom Delegation consider it essential that Military Government at the centre should be established at the earliest possible moment. In view of paragraph 10 above, it is essential that the personnel who would compose it should be the men who would carry on under the High Commission in Period C and at the same time would have been closely identified during Period A with the Civil Affairs Staff of the Allied Armies, and should have worked with them at least during the planning stage.

The Military Government organised at the centre in Periods B and C must of necessity be tripartite (British-American-Soviet) as already indicated in paragraph 6. During Period A, however, Allied Military Government would be carried out by an Anglo-American organisation in the West and a Russian organisation in the East. The problem, therefore, is to provide at the commencement of Period B an organised British-American-Soviet team, suitable in composition and calibre to control the Central German Administrative Machine, in conjunction with the necessary elements of the Allied Military Government personnel who had earlier been functioning with their respective Commanders-in-Chief during Period A.

19. The United Kingdom Delegation recommend that a British-American-Soviet team, to form the nucleus of the Executive Committee of Military Government and the nucleus staffs of Sections and Sub-commissions, should be formed in London at the earliest possible date.

This team, working within the agreed Directives issued to the Supreme Allied Commanders, as a result of the advice tendered to the three Governments by the European Advisory Commission, would undertake the detailed planning for the control of the German Central Machinery. In this task the team would of necessity co-operate closely with the staffs of the Supreme Allied Commanders, i.e., Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force, and the appropriate Soviet Headquarters. It would be available at the commencement of Period B as the agency which the respective Commanders-in-Chief would utilise to set up the necessary tripartite machinery at the centre, and would, together with the Commanders-in-Chief and their Deputies, proceed, if necessary by air, to the seat of the German Government.

20. The three representatives of the future High Commission referred to in paragraph 14 would accompany the Military Commission in an advisory capacity.

Duration of the “Middle Period,” i.e., the Aftermath of Hostilities

21. It is not possible to tell how long this period will last. This must largely depend on the internal conditions in Germany when the time comes. The United Kingdom Delegation would, however, emphasise the recommendation made in paragraph 11 of the memorandum enclosed in E.A.C. (44) 3, namely, that supreme authority should be transferred to the High Commission at the earliest possible moment that the situation permits.

London, 1 May, 1944.

52 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 15413, May 4; received May 13.

53 The memorandum was originally circulated in the European Advisory Commission by the United Kingdom Representative on May 1.

54 Not printed.

54 Not printed.

Memorandum by the United States and United Kingdom Representatives to the European Advisory Commission (Winant and Strang) 740.00119 EAC/187

[Document 112]

Memorandum by the United States and United Kingdom Representatives to the European Advisory Commission (Winant and Strang)56

E.A.C. (44) 18 London, 15 May, 1944.57

Directive to the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force in Respect of Military Government in Germany for the Pre-Surrender Period

By its terms of reference the European Advisory Commission is directed to make detailed recommendations upon the terms of surrender for Germany and upon the machinery required to ensure the fulfilment of those terms. The question of the policy to be adopted by the Allied Commanders in German territory captured or occupied by the Allied forces in the course of military operations before the defeat or surrender of Germany has not been referred to the Commission by the three Governments.

In order, however, that the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force may be in a position to draw up in advance the necessary plans in respect of German territory occupied by forces under his command prior to the defeat or surrender of Germany, it is necessary that he should receive directions from the two Governments to whom he is responsible.

A directive has therefore been drawn up for his use, a copy of which is annexed.58 Directives concerning financial, economic and relief matters are in process of preparation and will be presented in the near future.

It is evident, however, that the policy in respect of German territory during the pre-surrender period may be affected by the policy approved by the three Governments in respect of Germany for the post-surrender period as a result of recommendations by the European Advisory Commission.

It is for this reason that it is stated, in the first sentence of the annexed directive, that the directive “is subject to such alterations as may be necessary to meet the joint recommendations of the European Advisory Commission in regard to the post-surrender period”.

The annexed directive is therefore circulated to the European Advisory Commission in order that the Commission may take it into consideration when examining and making recommendations upon corresponding questions that will arise during the post-surrender period.

J[ohn] G. W[inant]
W[illiam] S[trang]

annex

Directive for Military Government in Germany Prior to Defeat or Surrender

1. This Directive is subject to such alterations as may be necessary to meet joint recommendations of the European Advisory Commission in regard to the post-surrender period. It relates to the period before defeat or surrender of Germany and to such parts of Germany and Austria as are overrun by the forces under your command during such period. The same policy will be applied to occupied parts of Austria as to occupied parts of Germany except where different treatment is required for Austria to meet the provisions of the Political Guide at Appendix “B” or other paragraphs dealing specifically with Austria.

2. Military government will be established and will extend over all parts of Germany, including Austria, progressively as the forces under your command capture German territory. Your rights in Germany prior to unconditional surrender or German defeat will be those of an occupying power.

3. (a) By virtue of your position you are clothed with supreme legislative, executive, and judicial authority and power in the areas occupied by forces under your command. This authority will be broadly construed and includes authority to take all measure deemed by you necessary, desirable or appropriate in relation to the exigencies of military operations and the objectives of a firm military government.

(b) You are authorized at your discretion, to delegate the authority herein granted to you in whole or in part to members of your command, and further to authorize them at their discretion to make appropriate sub-delegations. You are further authorized to appoint members of your command as Military Governors of such territory or areas as you may determine.

(c) You are authorized to establish such military courts for the control of the population of the occupied areas as may seem to you desirable, and to establish appropriate regulations regarding their jurisdiction and powers.

(d) The military government shall be a military administration which will show every characteristic of an allied undertaking, acting in the interests of the United Nations. Whether or not U.S. and U.K. civil affairs personnel will be integrated other than at your headquarters will be a matter for your decision.

4. The U.S. and British flags shall be displayed at headquarters and posts of the military government. The administration shall be identical throughout those parts of Germany occupied by forces under your command, subject to any special requirements due to local circumstances.

5. The military administration shall contain no political agencies or political representatives of the U.S. and U.K., U.S. and U.K. political officers appointed at your headquarters will continue in office.

6. Representatives of civilian agencies of the U.S.-U.K. governments or of UNRRA shall not participate unless and until you consider such participation desirable when it will be subject, as to time and extent, to decision by the Combined Chiefs of Staff on your recommendation.

7. Appendix “A”, Political Guide for Germany; Appendix “B”, Political Guide for Austria, are attached hereto. Appendix “C”, Financial Guide; Appendix “D”, Economic Guide; and Appendix “E”, Relief Guide; will be transmitted at a later date.59

Appendix “A”

Political Guide

1. The administration shall be firm. It will at the same time be just and humane with respect to the civilian population so far as consistent with strict military requirements. You will strongly discourage fraternization between Allied troops and the German officials and population. It should be made clear to the local population that military occupation is intended: (1) to aid military operations; (2) to destroy Nazism–Fascism and the Nazi Hierarchy; (3) to maintain and preserve law and order; and (4) to restore normal conditions among the civilian population as soon as possible, insofar as such conditions will not interfere with military operations.

2. (a) Adolf Hitler, his chief Nazi associates and all persons suspected of having committed war crimes will be arrested and held for investigation and subsequent disposition, including those who appear on lists drawn up by the United Nations which will be communicated to you. The heads of all ministries and other high political functionaries of the German Reich and those Germans who have held high positions in occupied allied countries found within occupied territory will be interned and held pending further instructions.

(b) The same shall apply to the case of any national of any of the United Nations who is alleged to have committed offenses against his national law and of any other person whose name or designation appears on lists to be similarly communicated.

3. The intention is to dissolve the Nazi Party throughout Germany as soon as possible. In furtherance of this object, you should: (1) take possession of offices and records of all Party organizations and make lists of them; (2) suspend activities of all Party organizations except those which you may require to continue to function for administrative convenience; (3) arrest and imprison high Party officials; (4) take Party property into custody, except for those organizations specially directed by you in (2) above. A special effort should be made to seize and preserve all records and plans of the German military organizations and of the Nazi Party, and of the Security, Criminal and Ordinary Police, and records of Nazi economic organisations and industrial establishments.

4. You will take steps to prevent the operation of all Nazi laws which discriminate on the basis of race, color or creed or political opinions. All persons who were detained or placed in custody by the Nazis on such grounds should be released subject to requirements of security and interests of the individual concerned.

5. (a) The operation of the criminal and civil courts of the German Reich will be suspended. However, at the earliest possible moment you should permit their functioning under such regulation, supervision, and control as you may determine. The operation of politically objectionable courts, e.g. people’s courts, will be permanently suspended with a view to eventual abolition. All Nazi elements will be eliminated from the judiciary.

(b) Security Police, excluding Criminal Police, but including Gestapo and Sicherheitsdienst,60 should be disarmed, disbanded and imprisoned. Criminal and Ordinary Police should be retained, subject to the removal of Nazi or otherwise undesirable elements.

6. The replacement of local Government officials who may be removed will rest with the Supreme Commander who will decide whether the functioning of the military government is better served by the appointment of officers of the occupation forces or by the use of the services of Germans. Military Government will be effected as a general principle through indirect rule. The principal link for this indirect rule should be at the Bezirk or Kreis level; controls at higher levels will be inserted at your discretion. Subject to any necessary dismissals, local officials should be instructed to continue to carry out their duties. No actual appointment of Germans to important posts will be made until it has been approved by the Combined Chiefs of Staff. It should be made clear to any German, after eventual appointment to an important post, and to all other Governmental officials and employees, that their continued employment is solely on the basis of satisfactory performance and behavior. In general the entire Nazi leadership will be removed from any post of authority and no permanent member of the German General Staff nor of the Nazi Hierarchy will occupy any important Governmental or Civil position. The German Supreme Command and General Staff will be disbanded in such a way as will insure that its possible resuscitation later will be made as difficult as possible.

7. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 10, and to the extent that military interests are not prejudiced, freedom of speech and press, and of religious worship should be permitted. Consistent with military necessity, all religious institutions shall be respected and all efforts will be made to preserve historical archives, classical monuments, and objects of art.

8. Diplomatic and consular officials of countries at war with any of the United Nations and of neutrals will be dealt with in accordance with instructions to be issued by the Combined Chiefs of Staff.

9. (a) Prisoners of war belonging to the forces of the United Nations and associated Nations and their Nationals, confined, interned or otherwise under restraint by German authorities will be freed from confinement and placed under military control or restriction as may be appropriate pending other disposition.

(b) So far as practicable after identification and examination, Allied nationals should be given opportunity to join the armed forces of their country if represented by units in the theater, or to serve in labor battalions organized by the military or in other approved civilian work, provided their loyalties to the allies have been determined and they qualify physically and otherwise. All practical measures should be taken to insure health and welfare of Allied nationals. They should not be allowed to disperse until plans are made for their employment or other disposition. Former prisoners of war released by the Axis may be found. They should be identified and requests addressed to their respective military commands for instructions as to their disposition.

(c) Allied and neutral civilian internees found in the territory should be placed in restricted residence with provision being made for their care until they show that they can provide for themselves. Work should be provided when practicable. They should be identified as to nationality in order that their presence in the territory may be communicated to their respective governments.

(d) If feasible and practicable, enemy nationals, other than nationals of the country under occupation, will be identified and registered and those whose freedom of movement would endanger the security of the armed forces or be otherwise undesirable will be interned or their activities curtailed as may be necessary under the circumstances.

10. (a) The propagation of Nazi doctrines and propaganda in any form shall be prohibited. Guidance on German education and schools will be given to you in a separate directive.

(b) No political activity of any kind shall be countenanced unless authorized by you. Unless you deem otherwise, it is desirable that neither political personalities nor organized political groups, shall have any part in determining the policies of the military administration. It is essential to avoid any commitments to, or negotiations with, any political elements. German political leaders in exile shall have no part in the administration.

(c) You will institute such censorship and control of press, printing, publications and the dissemination of news or information by the above means and by mail, radio, telephone and cable or other means as you consider necessary in the interests of military security and intelligence of all kinds and to carry out the principles laid down in this directive.

11. A plan should be prepared by you to prevent transfers of title of real and personal property intended to defeat, evade or avoid the orders, proclamations or decrees of the military government or the decision of the courts established by it.

12. (a) All property in the German territory belonging to the German Reich or to any country with which any of the United Nations are at war will be controlled directly or indirectly pending further instructions, subject to such use thereof as you may direct.

(b) Your responsibility for the property of the United Nations other than U.K. and U.S. and their nationals in areas to be liberated or occupied by Allied Forces shall be the same as for the property of U.K. and U.S. and their nationals except where a distinction is expressly provided, by treaty or agreement. Within such limits as are imposed by the military situation you should take all reasonable steps necessary to preserve and protect such property.

Appendix “B”

Political Guide for Austria

1. The political aims of the occupation of Austria will differ fundamentally from those of the occupation of Germany in that their primary purpose will be that of liberation. Though it will be of great importance that the occupying forces in Germany should make a good impression on the inhabitants, this will be of even more importance in Austria and the impression to be aimed at is of a different kind. You should try to insure that occupation by Allied Forces in no way suffers by comparison with occupation by Germans.

2. In applying the political guide at Appendix “A” to Austria you should bear in mind the following points: (a) Paragraph 1. The attitude to the Austrian population should be more friendly than in Germany. There will be no need to discourage some degree of fraternization. In addition to the four points enumerated in the last sentence in this paragraph the following should be added: “To liberate Austria from German domination and pave the way for a free and independent Austria.”

(b) Paragraph 6. A large proportion of the administrative posts in Austria have been filled by Reich Germans and the replacement of local government officials may therefore have to be more complete than in Germany. Their replacement should proceed as rapidly as practicable having regard to the requirements of military security and administrative possibilities. Every encouragement should be given to Austrians untainted by Nazi sympathies to fill the vacated posts. Only the highest appointments will require the prior approval of the Combined Chiefs of Staff.

(c) In Austria there is no intermediate administrative unit between the Reichsgaue and the Kreise and the principal link for civil affairs must therefore be the former until it is possible to restore the old Austrian länder.

(d) Paragraph 10 (a). In addition to Nazi doctrines and propaganda, it will be necessary to prohibit propaganda for pan-Germanism and renewal of association with Germany.

(e) Paragraph 10 (b). You should be prepared to give more latitude to political activity in Austria than in Germany.

56 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Secretary to the U.S. Delegation, European Advisory Commission (Lightner), in his despatch 15660, May 16; received May 19.

57 This memorandum was originally circulated in the European Advisory Commission by the United States and United Kingdom Representatives on May 12.

58 The directive was approved by the Combined Chiefs: of Staff and dispatched to General Eisenhower on April 28, 1944. For a brief description of the genesis of this directive, see Forrest C. Pogue, The Supreme Command, in the official Army history United States Army in World War II: The European Theatre of Operations (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1954), p. 347.

59 In a memorandum designated E.A.C. (44) 20, dated June 13, 1944, the United States and the United Kingdom Representatives circulated in the European Advisory Commission the directive including the financial, economic, and relief directives referred to here. According to Hajo Holborn, American Military Government, Its Organization and Policies (Washington, Infantry Journal Press, 1947), p. 135 (footnote), the financial guide was revised in August 1944. For the texts of the revised financial guide and the economic and relief guides, see ibid., p. 140.

60 Intelligence and counter-intelligence agency of the SS.

President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill) [Document 113]

President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill)61

[Washington,] 27 May, 1944.

545. For the Former Naval Person. I propose that the Combined Chiefs of Staff be directed by both of us to send the following message to Eisenhower: “You are hereby directed to make such plans as are practicable to send American troops to the Netherlands and northwest Germany as forces of occupation when hostilities with Germany cease. For planning purposes, the area in Germany to be occupied by U.S. Forces will comprise the states of Schleswig, Hanover, Brunswick, Westphalia, Hesse-Nassau and the Rhine Province.

It will be assumed in this plan that France, Austria, and the Balkans will not be included in an American zone of responsibility and that Berlin will be occupied jointly by the U.S., British and Soviet Forces.”

Roosevelt

61 Copy of telegram obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.

The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt [Document 114]

The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt 62

[London,] 31 May, 1944.

686. Reference your number 545.63 As you had not reverted to the question of the zones of occupation by our respective forces since I sent you my number 589 of 23rd February, I had the impression that all this was settled.

It has however occurred to me that in sending your number 545 you might possibly have overlooked the arguments in my number 589 which, in our view, are just as cogent now as they were in February last.

I hope that if there has been a misunderstanding we can clear it up, as a change of policy such as you now propose would have grave consequences.

62 Copy of telegram obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.

63  Supra.

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang) 740.00119 EAC/195

[Document 115]

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)64

E.A.C. (44) 19 London, 31 May 1944.65

Draft General Directives for Germany and Austria in the Post-Surrender Period

I circulate for consideration by the European Advisory Commission the annexed draft general directive for Germany in the post-surrender period (Annex I) and draft general directive for Austria in the post-surrender period (Annex II).

2. In paragraph 10 (a) of the memorandum circulated to the Commission on January 15th (E.A.C. (44) 1) I explained the conception of the United Kingdom Delegation in regard to the issue of directives for the guidance of the Allied Commanders in applying the Terms of Surrender in Germany. I observed that some of the surrender provisions would necessarily be expressed in general terms. An essential complement to the Terms of Surrender would therefore be a series of directives to be issued to the Allied Commanders containing particular instructions as to the manner in which such provisions should be fulfilled. I expressed the view that many of these directives would have to be ready well before the cessation of hostilities as they would necessarily cover a wide field in which immediate action by the Commanders would be essential. Action under these directives would be taken by the Commanders by way of orders and instructions issued in virtue of general powers conferred upon them by the Instrument of Surrender. I suggested therefore that it was desirable that attention should be given as soon as possible to the elaboration of such directives.

3. The general scheme which the United Kingdom Delegation have in mind is therefore as follows:— (a) The basic document will be the Instrument of Surrender to be signed by the Germans and by the Allied Representatives.

(b) In virtue of Article 12 (b) of the Instrument of Surrender the Allied Representatives will issue proclamations, orders, ordinances or instructions for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Instrument and for laying down additional requirements in the political, administrative, economic, financial, military and other fields. The United Kingdom Delegation have agreed to the present general form of the draft Instrument of Surrender on the understanding that an initial series of orders which, taken together with the Instrument itself, will cover broadly speaking the same ground as the United Kingdom draft (E.A.C. (44) 1), will be issued by the Allied Representatives immediately or very shortly after the signature of the Instrument; and on the understanding that drafts of these orders will be prepared by the Commission and recommended to the three Governments in the same way as the draft Instrument itself. The United Kingdom Delegation are at present at work upon such drafts.

(c) The Commission will also prepare and recommend to the three Governments draft directives designed to assist the Allied Representatives in applying the Instrument of Surrender and the initial orders mentioned in (b) above.

(d) It is possible that the Commission may also find it desirable to prepare and recommend to the three Governments drafts of the more important orders to be issued by the Allied Representatives in virtue of the directives referred to in (c) above.

4. I have already sent to my colleagues the drafts of several such directives, for the consideration of their Delegations. I propose to circulate these drafts to the Commission in due course.

5. The two draft directives annexed to the present paper are of a general and fundamental character and are intended, as stated in paragraph 1 of each of them, to govern the action of the Allied Representatives in relation to general matters not covered by particular directives.

6. I therefore circulate these two drafts to the Commission in the hope that the Commission will be able to take them into early consideration. They should be read in conjunction with the draft directives to the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force in respect of Military Government in Germany for the pre-surrender period, circulated to the Commission by the United States and United Kingdom Representatives on 15th May (E.A.C. (44) 18).

W[illiam] S[trang]

[Annex 1]

Draft General Directive for Germany in the Post-Surrender Period

1. This directive relates to the period after Germany’s surrender and will govern your action in relation to general matters not covered by particular directives.

2. You will on all occasions and by all means emphasise and display the Allied character of the occupation of Germany. You will tolerate no action by any German individual or organisation which seeks to undermine the unity of the Allies.

3. You will bear in mind and seek to promote the purposes of the occupation of Germany, which are— (a) To complete the disarmament of Germany and the destruction of the German war machine.

(b) To convince the German people that they have suffered a total military defeat, in order to break for ever the legend of the invincibility of German arms, and to correct the belief that aggression pays.

(c) To destroy the National Socialist Party and system, and to do everything possible to uproot and discredit National Socialist doctrines.

(d) To ensure that German militarism and National Socialism do not continue to operate underground or in some other guise.

(e) To lay the foundations for the rule of law in Germany, and for eventual peaceful co-operation in international life by Germany.

(f) To encourage individual and collective responsibility in Germans.

4. You should bear in mind that positive action in the sense of (e) and (f) above must be taken by the Germans rather than by the United Nations on their behalf; but one purpose of the occupation is to make it possible for Germans to take such action. Direct action by the United Nations will, however, be needed under (a), (b), (c) and (d).

5. You will strictly forbid and vigorously suppress any political activity by remnants of the National Socialist Party, or any groups that seek to propagate its doctrines or any similar ones. In particular, you will tolerate no continuance of discrimination against individual Germans on grounds of race or religion. Your attitude towards other political activities in Germany will be governed by the overriding necessity for the maintenance of military security. Subject to such security, you will not forbid political activities, including public demonstrations or meetings. You will be careful not to lend your support or authority to any particular political party or policy in Germany, but you should be aware that the United Nations hope to encourage any movement in Germany towards decentralisation or federalism. Movements of a separatist character will also be looked on with favour by the United Nations, but you should be careful that such movements (though they may be favoured at a later stage) should not at the outset be compromised by being given the appearance of being actively promoted by the Allies.

6. Subject again to the necessity for maintaining military security and a smooth administration, you will, so far as possible, permit freedom of speech and freedom of the press, and you will encourage the formation of free Trades Unions.

7. You will do all you can to foster freedom of religion and the maintenance of respect for the churches in Germany; though you should take steps to ensure that religious activities are not used as a cloak for the spreading of undesirable political ideas or of propaganda directed against any of the United Nations.

8. In general, the attitude to the German population of all forces and agencies under your command or control should be just, but firm and distant. You will strongly discourage fraternisation between Allied forces and the German population. In particular, you will reduce to a minimum all contact between forces under your command and German forces not yet demobilised. In general, contact with German officials should be as little as is necessary in order to ensure the adequate supervision of administration.

9. All Germans appointed to official positions (e.g., in the police or the administration) should understand that they hold office only during good behaviour.

[Annex 2]

Draft General Directive for Austria in the Post-Surrender Period

1. This directive relates to the period after Germany’s surrender and will govern your action in relation to general Austrian matters not covered by particular directives.

2. You will on all occasions and by all means emphasise and display the Allied character of the occupation of Austria. You will tolerate no action by any Austrian individual or organisation which seeks to undermine the unity of the Allies.

3. You will bear in mind and seek to promote the purposes of the occupation of Austria, which are:— (a) To disarm Austrians embodied in the German services, and to destroy the German war machine in so far as it exists or is based in Austrian territory.

(b) To demonstrate the complete defeat of Germany; to destroy the legend of the invincibility of German arms; and to correct the belief that aggression pays.

(c) To destroy the National Socialist party and system in Austria, and to uproot and discredit National Socialist doctrines.

(d) To make clear to Austria that association with Germany has brought her to disaster, and to fortify her will not to renew that association.

(e) To assist in the process of disentangling the national life of Austria, in every sphere, from Germany.

(f) To assist in the establishment of a free, independent and prosperous Austria, based on the rule of law, ready and able to co-operate in international life.

4. You will observe that the purposes of the occupation of Austria differ from those defined for the case of Germany. This difference will much influence the character of Allied occupation in Austria, which in this case is intended to be exercised in the interests of the country occupied as well as in those of the United Nations. It is probable that proportionately fewer Allied troops will be engaged in the occupation of Austria than in that of Germany; and that the occupation will end sooner than that of Germany. Though it will be of great importance that occupying forces in Germany should be respected by the inhabitants, this will be of even more importance in Austria, and the impression to be aimed at is of a different kind. You should bear in mind that—in a certain sense—Austria already has a six-years’ experience of being occupied.

5. You will strictly forbid and vigorously suppress any political activity by remnants of the National Socialist party in Austria, or any groups which seek to propagate its doctrines or any similar ones. In particular you will tolerate no continuance of discrimination against individual Austrians on grounds of race or religion. You will also forbid any political activity or propaganda based on pan-Germanism or seeking to renew in any way the association of Austria with Germany.

6. Your attitude towards other political activities in Austria will be governed by the over-riding necessity for the maintenance of military security; this will, however, leave you more latitude than will be the case in Germany. Subject to this necessity, you will not forbid political activities, including public demonstrations or meetings. But you will be careful, in the absence of further instructions, not to lend your support or authority to any particular political party or policy in Austria.

7. Subject again to the necessity for maintaining military security and a smooth administration, you will encourage freedom of speech and freedom of the Press, and the formation of free Trades Unions.

8. You will do all you can to foster freedom of religion and the maintenance of respect for the churches in Austria; but you should take steps to ensure that religious activities are not used as a cloak for the spreading of undesirable political ideas or of propaganda directed against any of the United Nations.

9. In general, the attitude to the Austrian population of all forces and agencies under your command or control should be firm and just, but more friendly than in Germany. You will exercise your discretion in regard to the degree of fraternisation to be permitted between Allied forces and the Austrian population. You will, however, reduce to a minimum all contact between forces under your command and Austrian forces not yet demobilised. Similarly, contact with Austrian officials can be more friendly and forthcoming than will be desirable in Germany.

10. After Germany’s surrender, your first concern in Austria will be to ensure the functioning of a central administration. This task will be complicated by the fact that no such administration has existed since 1939, when the seven Reichsgaue into which Austria was divided were made directly dependent on Berlin. It will be necessary to build up a central machine in Vienna to take control of Austrian affairs in many spheres. You should encourage the Austrians themselves to undertake this task, and you should do so as far as possible without prejudicing the question of the political and constitutional future of Austria. In selecting Austrians for posts in this central administration, you should have regard to administrative competence. There is no objection to you using suitable Austrian émigrés for this purpose. Some time is bound to elapse before sufficient representative Austrians of the right type emerge to form a central administration. You should, therefore, yourself be prepared not only to control the Austrian administration in the general interests of the United Nations, but also to supplement its personnel, where necessary, by providing the services of Allied officers and officials.

11. In Austria there is no intermediate administrative unit between the Reichsgaue and the Kreise, and the principal link for civil administration must, therefore, be the former until it is possible to restore the old Austria länder.

12. Some time must elapse before it becomes possible for an Austrian Government to be formed, though it is to be hoped that this may be done with as brief a delay as possible. You should bear in mind that, even after the surrender of Germany, Austria will remain technically a part of Germany, till she is formally constituted as an independent State. During this time there can in any case be no independent Austrian Government, and Austria will, of course, remain as much subject to control by the United Nations as Germany. In Austria this control will be exercised as far as possible by organisations and staffs separate from those operating in Germany; and you will use this period for helping to carry out the process referred to in paragraph 3(e) above.

13. For the “disentangling” of Austria from Germany, you will be given fuller instructions at a later stage. But at the earliest moment you will control the passage of persons across the frontier between Austria and Germany in both directions.

14. You should bear in mind that the problem of purging the administration (on which you will have received a particular directive) will not be the same in Austria as in Germany. In Austria it will be necessary to get rid not merely of extreme National Socialists, who will be, if anything, more firmly in control of the administration there than in Germany, but also of the many Reich Germans who hold Austrian posts. The necessity for removing these, in which process you should act in concert with whatever Austrian elements you may have established in the central administration at Vienna, may for some time increase the number of Allied officers and officials you will have to provide to assist that administration.

64 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 16012, June 1; received June 6.

65 This memorandum was originally circulated in the European Advisory Commission by the United Kingdom Representative on May 30.

Memorandum by the Military Adviser to the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Wickersham) EAC Files: File 144 I66

[Document 116]

Memorandum by the Military Adviser to the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Wickersham)67

[Extracts]

[London,] June 1, 1944.

A meeting of the Delegates was held at 4 p.m. on 31 May at Lancaster House. There were present M. Gousev, Chairman, Mr. Winant,68 Sir William Strang, Mr. Donaldson,69 the interpreter and myself.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

There was a long discussion on zones of occupation. Mr. Gousev said that the Soviets agreed to the principle of zones; that is occupation of each zone by forces of one of the three nations. The question of liaison is to be worked out in the Commission, as well as the machinery for control. Sir William Strang said that the demarcation of zones, as shown by the British proposal of January 15, included a revised description owing to a mistake in the earlier description. This line was accepted by M. Gousev. The British are willing to accept tri-partite occupation of Austria. Reference a new delimitation of the tri-partite Berlin area. British in favor of occupation by zones, one for each of the three countries, but they recommend that there be contingents in each zone from the forces of the two other countries. Similarly, contingents or token forces from other Allies in each zone. That Gousev’s point as to Commanders be discussed when the control machinery is discussed. He referred to Article 15 of the Soviet paper70 stating that the purpose of occupation was to carry out disarmament of the German armed forces. Strang said the purposes were somewhat wider than disarmament and referred to paragraph four of the British paper of 15 January, also part one. Germany to be confined to the frontiers of 1 January 1938. East Prussia to be in the Soviet zone.

Mr. Winant said that he agreed on the following points: 1. Three zones—each by forces of one of the countries.

2. N–S71 line as agreed upon by Soviets & British.

3. All East of that line to be Soviet.

4. Berlin area tri-partite.

5. Austria tri-partite.

6. No instructions or opinion as to token forces.

7. Liaison.

M. Gousev said the principles of occupation must be settled: first that occupation must be by the three nations; secondly that the machinery for occupation and the agencies should have a simple structure; thirdly that a zone when occupied by one force gave this simplicity of structure but the addition of even a small number of other troops would be complicated.

There followed a long discussion about the token forces of the other Allied countries. Gousev stated the zones were to be occupied by the forces of the three nations but that the question of Belgians and Dutch, etc. serving with the British Army, etc. belonged in a special category. Strang said the contingents would be under the command of the Zone Commander. Gousev saw the difficulty of refusing those who had been in the operations. Mr. Winant said there should be liaison and Gousev said he thought in principle there was no objection but we must work out the practical features. Strang said this was part of the control questions. It was agreed to continue this discussion at the next meeting.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

C[ornelius] W. W[ickersham]

66 The files of the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission, while regarded as a part of the files of the American Embassy in London, were maintained separately from the latter files and form a separate documentary collection in the Department of State files.

67 Addressed to Col. Thomas W. Hammond, Jr., Assistant Military Adviser to the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission.

68 Ambassador Winant had just returned from his visit to Washington, May 13–May 30, where he apparently consulted on matters relating to the European Advisory Commission. No records have been found in the files regarding his discussions in Washington.

69 E. P. Donaldson, Secretary General of the European Advisory Commission.

70  Ante, p. 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 93].

71 North–South.

President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill) [Document 117]

President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill)72

[Washington,] 2 June, 1944.

549. For the Former Naval Person. Referring back to your message of February 23rd, No. 589, and in reply to your 686,73 my telegram No. 457 of February 7th on this subject contained the following statements: “I am absolutely unwilling to police France and possibly Italy and the Balkans as well”.

I am worried lest you also did not receive my letter to you of February 29th and I was really waiting to hear from you in response to that letter of mine.

I am worried because I fear you did not get it and that that was the reason for your silence until the other day.

A good part of the letter does not refer to the subject but I am now quoting it to you in full lest it did not reach you:

[Here follows a verbatim text of the letter of February 29, printed on page 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99].]

As a result of this exchange back in February and March, I believed until recently that at least tentative plans would be made for occupation of northwestern Germany by American forces.

I am just as strongly for this point of view as I was before, and your special problems can be perfectly easily handled on the naval side even if American forces are in northwest Germany.

In view of my clearly stated inability to police the south and southwestern areas now occupied by the Germans, I really think it is necessary that General Eisenhower shall even now make such plans as are practical to use American forces of occupation in northwestern Europe during the occupation period. Such plans as it is practicable for Eisenhower to prepare in advance would help to meet the contingency of your not being able to provide forces of occupation in all of the surrendered and liberated areas not occupied by the Soviets and of my inability to police the southern areas—France, Italy, etc.

There is ample time for this unless Germany suddenly collapses because, as you and I know, the present timetable proves the point.

Under my plan all of your needs can and will be taken care of in the northwest area, but I hope you will realize that I am in such a position that I cannot go along with the British General Staff plan. The reasons are political, as you well know, though, as a result, they enter necessarily into the military.

Over here new political situations crop up every day but so far, by constant attention, I am keeping my head above water.

Roosevelt

72 Copy of telegram obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.

73 Dated May 31, p. 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/198: Telegram

[Document 118]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 10, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received June 10—4:10 p.m.]

4655. Comea 61. At an informal meeting of the European Advisory Commission yesterday the draft of surrender terms for Germany was accepted by the three representatives. Some minor changes were made in the text and the language has been much improved. At the insistence of the other representatives it was decided that before the draft is finally recommended to the three Governments, certain points are first to be disposed of including the question of consultation with other Allied Governments and the general outline of occupation. Discussion has shown progress toward agreement on these points and we will continue our work on Monday.74 The Russian delegation has agreed to discuss control machinery for Germany at an early date. They are also completing their drafts of the proclamations and orders which together with those drafted by ourselves and by the British will be studied by experts of the three delegations.

Winant

74 June 12.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/198a: Telegram

[Document 119]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 10, 1944—10 p.m.

4624. Personal to the Ambassador. I have not yet received any word from you since your return75 about the terms of surrender for Germany. I realize, of course, that Gousev or Strang may have raised objections, but I am most anxious at least to have your report on the present status of this document.

Both the War Department and the Joint Chiefs of Staff are pressing us to exert every effort to obtain agreement on the German surrender terms so that the Advisory Commission may proceed forthwith to the consideration of other problems of almost equal importance. In particular, the War Department points out that with the invasion now in progress, it is imperative that there be no further delay in working out plans for military government and the control machinery for Germany and in preparing the many directives which will be required by the Commanding Officers.

I am fully aware of the great difficulties which you have encountered in this work and if new obstacles have now arisen we want to give you all possible assistance in overcoming them.

Stettinius

75 Ambassador Winant was, in Washington for consultation from May 14 to May 26 and returned to London on May 30.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00113 EW 1939/1429: Telegram

[Document 120]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 12, 1944—8 p.m.

4659. As you know, a Committee76 within the Department has been working on the subject of restitution and reparation for some months. Reference your 4320, May 29.77 The Committee has practically completed the preparation of a report,78 and it is expected that it will be submitted to the Post-War Programs Committee within the next 2 weeks.

It is the conclusion of those who have worked on the report that restitution must be dealt with as a part of the reparation program. Whatever is done on the subject, for example, would be very closely related to the requisitioning of German stocks and the removal of capital equipment from Germany during the early period following surrender. While we agree with the observation reported in your reference telegram that it will be some time before a comprehensive agreement can be reached on all phases of reparation, some interim decisions will have to be made not only on restitution but on principles and procedures to govern the early phases of the reparation program. Moreover, we doubt whether, as a practical matter, the subject of reparation could be excluded in discussions of restitution when the subject is taken up with the governments of the occupied countries.

As soon as we are in a position to send you the Committee’s report we will do so for your information. There have been no inter-departmental discussions on the subject as yet and a decision as to the procedure for obtaining inter-departmental clearance will have to await action by the Post-War Programs Committee. It has occurred to us that it might be desirable to have informal exploratory conversations with the British and Soviets at a technical level in the near future before views in Washington have crystallized. These discussions would be confined to the subjects requiring decisions in the early post-surrender period, namely, restitution, the initiation of deliveries in kind (together with the related question of how to finance German trade during that period) and the procedure which should be adopted in reaching decisions on these matters and for integrating this procedure with the military administration of Germany. The desirability of initiating discussion in this manner is suggested by the fact that British considerations of restitution and reparation is apparently still at a technical rather than a policy level. Your 2794, April 6.79 If the matter is approached in this fashion we may wish to send someone to London to participate in the conversations and to return here for report. This method of proceeding would not however prejudice subsequent discussion in the European Advisory Commission.

Your comments on the foregoing would be welcomed.

As was mentioned to the Ambassador, we are planning to keep Spiegel80 here.

Hull

76 Committee on Reparation, Restitution, and Property Rights.

77 Not printed; it reported that a British Foreign Office official suggested that an agreement on restitution by Germany would be desirable (740.00113 European War 1939/1429).

78 For the final text of this report as reviewed and revised by the Executive Committee on Foreign Economic Policy, see p. 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 151].

79 Not printed; it stated that British civil servants felt little could be done on reparations and restitution problems at the technical level until American views on these subjects were formulated (740.00113 European War 1939/1366).

80 Harold R. Spiegel, senior economic analyst at the Embassy in London.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/207: Telegram

[Document 121]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 22, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received June 22—4:45 p.m.]

4955. Personal for the Secretary and Mr. Dunn. In the European Advisory Commission we have completed the draft of surrender terms for Germany but have not as yet had a formal decision of the Commission to forward it with a recommendation for its acceptance by the three Governments.

We have completed and unofficially approved within the Commission a protocol covering the occupation of Germany. In this we have designated Russia as occupying the eastern area and have left blank the names of the two countries which are to occupy the northwest and southwest areas respectively although we have delineated these areas.

The Russian delegate, Mr. Gousev, wants to complete a protocol outlining the occupation of Austria before forwarding any documents to our respective Governments (my 4844, June 17, 4 p.m.81 ). Strang and I want to forward at once the draft surrender terms and the protocol covering the occupation of Germany. We hope to settle this difference at a meeting the first of next week.

Under the present schedule we will next take up the question of control machinery for Germany. We have already done a great deal of work on the proclamations and orders but to date Gousev wants to finish agreement on control machinery before clearing the proclamations and orders.

At our informal meeting at the end of last week Gousev, after consulting his Government, accepted in principle the canvassing of other Allied Governments for their views and agreed to consider the ways and means of doing so after completing the draft surrender terms and the protocol on the occupation of Germany and the protocol on the occupation of Austria.

When the three Chiefs of Staff82 were here I gave each of them a copy of the draft surrender terms. I also forwarded a copy by courier to the Department. I understand this draft has been seen by the British Cabinet without suggestion of change.

Winant

81  Post, p. 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 230].

82 The Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, Gen. George C. Marshall; the Commander in Chief, U.S. Fleet and Chief of Naval Operations, Adm. Ernest J. King; the Commanding General, Army Air Forces, Gen. Henry H. Arnold.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 740.00113 E.W./6–2944: Telegram

[Document 122]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, June 29, 1944—3 p.m.
[Received 9:40 p.m.]

2340. With respect to the tentative suggestion of informal exploratory conversations at a technical level with the British and Soviets contained in the Department’s 4659, June 12, to London sent to Moscow in Department’s 1555, June 26, 4 p.m.,83 I desire to point out that Soviet technical experts are rarely allowed to discuss matters of this kind except within clearly defined limits and in accordance with definite instructions of policy from the Soviet Government. I believe it doubtful, therefore, that Soviet experts would be allowed to participate in “informal exploratory conversations” and I feel that if they did participate they would not take an active role and would be little more than observers. While in view of the complexity of the problems it may be advisable to set up a technical committee, I believe that Soviet participation would best be insured if some procedure were established whereby the questions to be referred to this Committee were first clearly determined and agreed upon by the EAC in order that the Soviet Government could be in a position to issue definite instructions to its technical experts.

Sent to Department, repeated to London as 122.

Harriman

83 Telegram 1555 not printed; it repeated substance of Department’s telegram 4659, p. 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/7–144: Telegram

[Document 123]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 1, 1944—3 a.m.
[Received 5:20 p.m.]

5205. Comea 65. As one of the questions to be disposed of before the submission of surrender terms for Germany to the three Governments (my 4655, June 10, 5 p.m., Comea 61), we have been discussing in informal meetings of the Commission a draft protocol between the Governments of the USA, USSR and UK on the occupation of Germany (excluding Austria). This protocol defined the boundaries of the zones of occupation in Germany proper on the basis of the lines suggested by the British and the Russians and accepted by ourselves (Department’s 3499, May 1, 11 p.m., Eacom 18)—the respective countries occupying the northwestern and southwestern zones being left blank; “Greater Berlin” was named as the special area to be under joint occupation. The protocol stated that the occupying forces in each zone will be under a Commander-in-Chief designated by the Government of the country whose forces occupy that zone and provided that each of the three powers may, at its discretion, include among the forces assigned to occupation duties under the command of its Commander-in-Chief, auxiliary contingents from the forces of any other Allied power which has participated in military operations against Germany.

Today the Russian delegation submitted for the consideration of the Commission an amended text which added to the earlier draft protocol, a delimitation of three zones of occupation within Greater Berlin itself and an outline regarding the joint administration of Greater Berlin. The text of these proposals is as follows: “The Berlin area, by which expression, is understood the territory, of ‘Greater Berlin’ as defined by the law of the 27 April, 1920, will be occupied by the armed forces of the USSR, UK and USA. For this purpose the territory of ‘Greater Berlin’ will be divided into three zones:

Northeastern part of the city (districts of Pankow, Prenzlauerberg, Mitte, Weissensee, Friedrichshafen, Lichtenberg, Treptow, Koepenick) will be occupied by the forces of the USSR;

Northwestern part of the city (districts of Reinickendorf, Wedding, Tiergarten, Charlottenburg, Spandau, Wilmersdorf) will be occupied by the forces of blank;

Southern part of the city (districts of Zehlendorf, Steglitz, Schoeneberg, Kreutzberg, Tempelhof, Neukoeln) will be occupied by the forces of blank.

The central aerodrome of Berlin, Tempelhof, will be used by the USSR, UK and USA on equal terms.

(a) An inter-Allied governing authority (Komendatura) will be established to administer ‘Greater Berlin’, consisting of three commandants—one from each of the Allied powers. The head of the inter-Allied governing authority will be the Chief Commandant, whose duties will be carried out in rotation by each of the three commandants.

Each of the three commandants shall hold office as Chief Commandant for a period not exceeding 15 to 20 days.

(b) The necessary technical machinery, staffed by personnel of the three Allied powers, will be set up at the offices of the inter-Allied governing authority, and its form will, in general, correspond to the structure of the municipal organizations of ‘Greater Berlin’. The inter-Allied governing authority will communicate direct or through this machinery with the municipal organizations of Berlin.

(c) The inter-Allied governing authority for the administration of ‘Greater Berlin’ parallel with its functions of administering the city, will also exercise day-to-day supervision over the activities of the municipal organizations of Berlin controlling the various departments of the city’s daily life.

(d) The Allied forces stationed in the territory of ‘Greater Berlin’ will also be responsible for the maintenance of public order in the respective zones of ‘Greater Berlin’ and for the protection both of the inter-Allied governing authority administering ‘Greater Berlin’ and of all other agencies which may be set up by the Allies in that city.”

Strang indicated to us that he would probably have to consult other departments of the British Government, in particular the military, before he would be able to give any definite decisions regarding the Russian proposals concerning Berlin. At the informal meeting of the EAC this afternoon, his delegation asked the following questions to which are appended Gousev’s replies: (1) Might it not be better from the viewpoint of sound administration if the Chief Commandant were to remain in office for one month instead of 15 to 20 days? Gousev replied that the government would be exercised by the three commandants, one of whom would be the principal for a time, but that the other two would also have active functions. He said it would not be advisable to specify a long term of office for the Chief Commandant since the main purpose is to control German agencies and organs. Assuming only supervision and control, frequent change of the Chief Commandant would not affect efficiency of administration since it was envisaged that the Government would be a board or collegium.

(2) What is the principle which will determine when the collegium or board will communicate direct or through the machinery indicated in paragraph (b) above with the municipal organizations of Berlin? Gousev replied that in cases of urgency the Chief Commandant will act direct, in other words at his discretion.

(3) Who will be responsible for the maintenance of public order in the respective zones in Greater Berlin? Will it be the German police under the supervision of the collegium or board, in which case the Allied forces would be called in when the situation got out of hand and the police could not manage it, or would there be no German police, the Allied Forces doing all their work? Gousev replied that the Allied Forces will be responsible for the maintenance of public order but that the means of enforcing responsibility is not stated. He said it would seem evident that German police can be used.

In order that our Air Force might be given access to the Staaken airfield, I presented an additional paragraph as follows which the Russians indicated might be acceptable: “The Staaken aerodrome, which for purposes of administration will be included in the Greater Berlin area, will be used by blank.”

I believe that our delegation is in much the same indefinite position of error as the British find themselves at this stage with respect to the Russian proposals regarding Berlin. We have already taken steps to obtain the preliminary views of the American military authorities in SHAEF84 and ETOUSA85 who will be concerned from the viewpoint of operations. I know our authorities in Washington will also be interested and I should like to receive such comments as they have to offer. I hope these may be furnished me without delay and before the next meeting of the EAC on Wednesday.86 I feel that whether or not the decision is taken to incorporate the Russian proposals regarding Berlin within this protocol, clearance of these questions would place us in a favorable position to insist that the Russians present immediately their material on general control machinery for Germany.

Winant

84 Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force.

85 European Theatre of Operations, U.S. Army.

86 July 5.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00113 E.W./7–144: Telegram

[Document 124]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 4, 1944—6 p.m.

5266. The topics we have had in mind to discuss in the informal exploratory conversations referred to in the Department’s 4659, June 12, and your 5211, July 1, 4 p.m.,87 and on which agreement before the cessation of hostilities is considered essential for the prompt and orderly initiation of reparation, are as follows: 1. Purpose and objectives of reparation;

2. Organization of reparation machinery for immediate post-surrender period;

3. Restitution and replacement;

4. Requisitioning of capital goods out of existing stocks;

5. Relation of reparation to problem of control of German foreign trade;

6. Form of payment;

7. Relation of reparation to German standard of living.

We may also wish to discuss the question of labor services, now being explored here.

While all of these points are in greater or lesser degree related to the question of economic security, it is believed both possible and highly desirable to initiate discussions on them even if final decision on economic security has not yet been reached.

Consideration of economic security problem here is now at the inter-agency stage and a definite position should be reached shortly.

Please continue urgently your efforts to obtain early date for the discussions.

This is being repeated to Moscow.88

Hull

87 Latter not printed.

88 As telegram 1614, July 4, 6 p.m.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/7–644: Telegram

[Document 125]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 6, 1944—10 a.m.

5314. Eacom 24. Your 5205, July 1, 3 a.m. (Comea 65). Since in our opinion the plan for the joint administration of Berlin should form an integral part of the plan of control machinery for the whole of Germany, the incorporation of the Soviet proposal into a general protocol of the nature indicated in the above-cited telegram seems out of place. For the purpose of that document, as interpreted from your brief account, it would appear adequate to state that the administration of the area of Greater Berlin is to be under the control of a combined administrative authority as proposed in WS–15c.89

Pending consideration of a comprehensive plan for the entire administration of military government in Germany, concerning which the United States and United Kingdom have already submitted proposals, we offer the following comments on the Soviet text: 1. The Soviet proposal to divide Berlin into zones is acceptable in principle on the assumptions that the actual administration of the city is a combined function and that the zones are for billeting and police purposes only. Under such assumptions the disposition of troops would appear to be largely a matter of detailed planning for final decision on a military level rather than a matter for immediate consideration by EAC. An agreement on specific delimitation of the zones at this time seems premature, since due to destruction, facilities in zones delimited now may be inadequate at the time of occupation.

2. We believe that the text of the Russian proposal would need clarification with respect to the functions of the inter-allied governing authority, and specifically an explanation of why it should be necessary to empower that authority to communicate directly or indirectly through “the necessary technical machinery” with the municipal organizations in Berlin. We would also wish to understand the distinction made in Section C between administering the city and exercising day-to-day supervision over the activities of the municipal organizations.

3. Rather than to make reference to airdromes or other specific facilities, it would be desirable to state that all facilities in the combined area shall be accessible to the USSR, the United Kingdom and the USA under the overall control of the tripartite authority.

Hull

89  Ante, p. 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 98].

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 740.00113 E.W./7–844: Telegram

[Document 126]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, July 8, 1944—9 a.m.
[Received 2:30 p.m.]

2469. As far as our records show, London’s 4320, May 2990 and 5211, June [July] 1, 4 p.m.91 were not repeated to this Mission and I am not entirely clear as to just what the Department wishes me to propose to the Soviet Government. I take it from the Department’s 4659, June 12 to London and 1614, July 492 to me that the Department envisages informal discussions to be held in London, but outside of the EAC, between experts of the three countries and that these discussions would cover the seven questions enumerated in message to London cited in Department’s 1614, July 4, 6 p.m. to Moscow with possible addition of question of labor service. Is it desired that I extend an invitation to Russians to appoint technical experts to engage in such conversations or has this been discussed with the Soviet representatives in London?

Harriman

90 See footnote 77, p. 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120].

91 Not printed.

92 Regarding telegram 1614, see footnote 88, p. 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 E.A.C./7–844: Telegram

[Document 127]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 8, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received July 8—6:16 p.m.]

5412. Comea 68. I am grateful for your sending Mosely93 and his presence here will, I feel, be most useful in tying in more closely our work with that of the Department on EAC matters. I thought you might be interested in a statement of our program of work and in certain suggestions we have to offer regarding the type of material it would be helpful for us to have from our authorities in Washington.

As soon as I can get clearance from the Russians and the British for the submission to the Governments of the draft surrender terms for Germany and the protocols on Germany and Austria, I intend to press for consideration by the Commission of control machinery for Germany (see Comea 6594 ). As you know, we and the British have submitted papers and the Russians have promised to present their material. For possible use in the Commission with a view to obtaining preliminary agreement, we have drawn up a set of general principles on control machinery based on our paper (Department’s instruction 3784, February 26); an early draft of which was brought by General Wickersham.

As regards the draft proclamations and general orders designed to give immediate implementation to the surrender instrument, we have prepared a set of such proclamations and orders, taking into account in a general way the subjects covered in the British 70-paragraph document, in accordance with the agreement made with the British whereby they consented to the short form of surrender instrument. This set has been given to both the British and the Russians and Strang has informally expressed himself as satisfied with our proclamations and orders and has indicated that there are no important points of difference between our texts and the British. I have suggested an early meeting between the drafting experts of the three delegations and the Russians have informed me that they are studying the documentation with this in view.

As regards directives, the Department will have observed from the transmitting despatches that the British have circulated to the Commission some 15 detailed drafts on a variety of subjects.95 We have not had any indication of the Department’s reaction to the British drafts. In the meantime, a planning committee set up by my advisers is preparing a few preliminary drafts, which under present plans would be transmitted for comment. We hope that while the Commission is working toward agreement on control machinery, the Russians will also be willing to discuss the directives.

Although the British plan to take up their draft directives in the Commission, we feel that they are too detailed, technical and legalistic and are not suitable to the working out of joint policy on broad lines at the Commission level, at which the Russians will probably insist that they be discussed. I believe strongly that we will make far more rapid progress if the papers which we present to the Commission set forth the basic policy decisions which must be worked out jointly by the delegates, leaving the technical and administrative details to be elaborated by their advisers.

What we would like would be brief policy directives of one or two pages outlining the broad objectives which we would want to see adopted on each subject. To be most useful, these policy directives should have received appropriate clearance in order that they may be presented to the Commission as the policy of our Government. It would also be useful to continue to receive all available background and supporting memoranda for our information and guidance.

I append a tentative list of subjects on which we would like to receive policy directives if the above plan is found acceptable: Control and operation of civil aviation; disposition of naval vessels, armaments and facilities; control of industrial potential for war; evacuation of civil authorities and personnel to 1937 Germany, control of information services, including radio broadcasting; control and disposition of police; use of German officials in administration; review of judicial personnel; abrogation and replacement of Nazi laws; disposition of Nazi organizations; disposition of political prisoners; disposition of foreign nationals found in Germany; control of political activities; relations of Germany with neutrals and with states at war with the United Nations; supervision of education; operation of rationing system; control of wages and employment; disposition of clearing accounts; disposition of central planning board; relation of reichsmark to foreign currencies; control of foreign-owned property in Germany; control and disposition of German-owned property abroad. We may augment this list from time to time and we hope the Department will make further suggestions. Earliest possible receipt of policy directives will greatly facilitate the next stage of the Commission’s work.

Winant

93 Philip E. Mosely, Chief of the Division of Territorial Studies, on detail as Political Adviser to Ambassador Winant.

94 Telegram 5205, July 1, p. 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 123].

95 According to a memorandum by the Secretariat of the United States delegation dated July 8, the following draft directives had been received from the British as of July 2: 1. Prisoners of war and civilians under restraint; 2. Control of inland transport; 3. Exercise of German rights in international transport bodies; 4. Control of broadcasting in Germany; 5. Prevention of German nationals from leaving German territory; 6. Recall of German (and Austrian) nationals resident abroad; 7. Finance and property in Germany (excluding Austria); 8. Displaced persons in Germany of other than German nationality; 9. General directives for Germany and Austria; 10. Comprehensive directive of shipping and associated matters; 11. Relations of Germany and countries at war with any of the United Nations; 12. Neutral missions in Germany and communication with German missions to neutral countries; 13. Discharge and disbandment of the German armed forces; 14. German police; 15. Employment or non-employment of German forces for the preservation of law and order and for guard duties; 16. Withdrawal of German forces, authorities, officials and civilian inhabitants from territories outside the German frontiers of 1937. (Lot 52 M 64, Box 9600, Folder British Draft Directives—134.2)

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/7–1144

[Document 128]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

No. 16799 London, July 11, 1944.
[Received July 18.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit a draft General Directive for Germany which has been prepared by the Planning Committee of the political, military, military air and naval advisers to Ambassador Winant on the European Advisory Commission. This paper has been approved by the advisers and is submitted for comment and clearance.

It is believed that tripartite negotiations in the Commission on the directives for the three Allied Representatives in Germany will begin at an early date. The subject of the enclosed draft directive may be one of the first to be discussed and it is therefore important for the Ambassador to receive official comments on this paper as soon as possible. Naturally this directive and all other draft directives which may finally be approved by the appropriate authorities in Washington will be subject to modification in the course of the negotiations in the Commission.

As indicated in Comea 68 of July 8, 1944, a series of policy directives covering the broad objectives of United States policy would be of great assistance to the Planning Committee in its work of formulating more detailed administrative directives. Such directives would also be of great use to the Ambassador if, as seems possible, the three members of the European Advisory Commission should themselves take up each of the many directives which will have to be agreed upon.

Respectfully yours,

For the Ambassador:
E. Allan Lightner, Jr.
Secretary to the U.S. Delegation European Advisory Commission

[Enclosure]

Draft Directive to the Three Allied Commanders-in-Chief General Directive for Germany 96

1. This directive relates to the post-surrender period and is concerned with certain general matters not covered in particular directives.

2. You will bear in mind the general mission of the forces of occupation, which is: a. To enforce the Terms of the Unconditional Surrender of Germany and of all Proclamations, General Orders, Ordinances and Instructions issued pursuant to these terms.

b. To disarm and to demilitarize Germany and to destroy Germany’s war-making potential.

c. To convince the German people of their total defeat by the United Nations, and of the futility of future wars of aggression.

d. To destroy the National Socialist Party and its system and to discredit completely its doctrines.

e. To impress upon the German people the unity of the occupying powers and the Allied character of the occupation.

f. To make available to the maximum extent possible, the resources of Germany for relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction in the countries which have been overrun or damaged as a result of the war.

g. To permit those elements among the German people who desire German participation in a peaceful international life to lay the foundations for such participation by the establishment of responsible democratic government.

3. Your administration will be firm but just. You will in particular, punish fully and promptly any organization or individual who fails to render satisfactory cooperation with your military government or who fails to comply fully with any Proclamations, Orders, Ordinances or instructions that will be issued.

4. You will take steps consistent with the maintenance of military security and the enforcement of the Terms of Surrender to assist the German people to establish efficient administration and to develop a national economy which will provide for minimum German subsistence and enable Germany to make the maximum contribution toward relief, rehabilitation and reparation.

5. You will, insofar as feasible, govern Germany indirectly, requiring the professional government servants and public service employees to continue to carry out their functions. You will, however, dismiss all active Nazi leaders and others among such government servants and employees whom you believe to be unreliable, replacing them, if feasible, with competent German personnel who will cooperate fully with your military government. You will warn all professional government servants and public service employees that they will hold their positions only during continued cooperation.

6. You will tolerate no discrimination against individuals or organizations on the grounds of race, color or religion, and you will permit freedom of religious worship.

7. You will not allow political activities which constitute a threat to military security or a return to National Socialist doctrines, or doctrines inimical to general security and good order. You will refrain from giving your authority or support to any particular party or movement.

8. You will discourage all fraternization between your forces and the German population.

9. You are authorized to delegate in whole or in part, at your discretion, the authority granted to you in this and other directives, in the Terms of Surrender and in any ordinance, order or instruction, to any member of your command, and further, to authorize them to make appropriate sub-delegations of authority.

96 This draft is dated July 12, 1944.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/7–1144

[Document 129]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

No. 16858 London, July 11, 1944.
[Received July 18.]

Sir: With reference to the enclosure to the Department’s instruction No. 3784 of February 26, 1944, entitled “Germany: Occupation Period: Proposed Control Machinery for the Administration of Military Government in Germany” (WS–15C), dated January 27, 1944, I have the honor to transmit a paper on the “Principles of Allied Military Government in Germany” which has been prepared by this delegation’s Planning Committee and which has been approved by Ambassador Winant’s advisers.

This paper is a statement of certain fundamental principles covering the objectives and general framework of Allied military government in Germany. It takes into account the provisions of WS–15C, which was circulated in the Commission on March 25, 1944, as EAC 44/16.97 It also takes into account the British paper EAC 44/17.97a It does not cover Soviet views, which, as the Department is aware, have not as yet been stated by Mr. Gousev.

The United States political, military, military air and naval advisers attach considerable importance to this document, which they hope will be given prompt and careful consideration. They would like to see it or a similar paper cleared in Washington and formally sent back to Ambassador Winant with authorization for its circulation in the Commission. If the three delegates were to agree on such a set of principles, the more detailed plans for the Allied control machinery in Germany might be worked out by a group of advisers from the three delegations, thus expediting completion of the work on this subject.

Respectfully yours,

For the Ambassador:
E. Allan Lightner, Jr.
Secretary, U.S. Delegation European Advisory Commission

[Enclosure]

Principles of Allied Military Government in Germany

[London,] 12 July, 1944.

(Revised Draft)

It is suggested that Mr. Winant may desire to obtain agreement with Mr. Gousev and Sir William Strang on certain fundamental principles to be embodied in the plans of military government in Germany in order that existing differences may be expeditiously resolved in principle by the delegates. Such an agreement could then be referred to a tripartite committee of advisers with instructions to work out a draft plan of control machinery in such detail as may be desirable or possible at this time.

The broad principles on which we might secure agreement are as follows: 1. Main objectives of control machinery: a. To supervise and enforce the execution of the surrender terms;

b. To disarm and to demilitarize Germany, and to destroy Germany’s war making potential;

c. To apprehend and punish Germans who have committed war crimes;

d. To liquidate the Nazi party and to discredit its doctrines;

e. To provide control over the existing administrative machinery in Germany;

f. To provide administrative machinery where governmental agencies have ceased to function or where no machinery exists to carry out Allied policies;

g. To guide the political reconstruction of Germany on a basis which will provide the maximum German contribution to international security;

h. To supervise the economic reconstruction of Germany on a basis which while providing minimum subsistence in Germany, will furnish the maximum German contribution to the relief, rehabilitation and reparation of the United Nations.

2. The Supreme Authority:

The Commanders-in-Chief of the three Allied forces, as the representatives of the three Allied Governments, should comprise a tripartite Supreme Authority which should direct a military government of Germany in accordance with the instructions of the three Governments.

3. Control Council: a. The Supreme Authority should have subordinate to it, a Control Council composed of experienced and qualified military, political and economic assistants furnished in equal numbers by each of the three Allied Governments, which should direct and supervise on a tripartite basis the major divisions of the military government.

b. The Council should direct and supervise the government of Greater Berlin.

c. The Control Council should, as a major function, recommend to the Supreme Authority, the policies to be followed with respect to the administration of the military government. The Control Council would thus supplant the policy-making organs of the existing German government now composed of leading Nazis.

d. The Council should be small enough to provide efficient operation, but large enough to exercise effective general supervision over the administrative departments subordinate to it.

4. Administrative machinery: a. To the extent possible, the existing German administrative machinery, but not policy-making machinery, should be used for the execution of agreed policies and the routine administration of Germany. The employment of leading Nazis or persons suspected of being war criminals should not be permitted at any level of administration. In practice it may be necessary for the efficient conduct of the administration to employ professional government servants who have held nominal party membership but have not participated actively in party affairs.

b. There should be tripartite participation by the three Allied Governments in all places in the central administration where high policy is formulated or directed; in other places in the central administration there may be one chief and two deputies or even a single Allied official. Distribution of Allied personnel should be maintained on an equitable basis.

c. At regional branches of the departments of the central German administrative machinery, control should customarily be exercised by a single official who normally would be of the same nationality as the troops occupying the zone in which the branch is located. Liaison officers of the other two nationalities could be attached to these regional branches, if either of the two other countries so desire.

d. Such control officials in regional branches of departments which are centrally operated, should normally receive their instructions through the channels of the central control administration.

e. The administration in each zone and in regional branches of the German Government should be such as to insure that all policies promulgated through the central control council, will be implemented in a uniform manner throughout Germany.

97 See footnote 14, p. 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 98].

97a Dated 2 May, p. 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 740.00113 EW/7–844: Telegram

[Document 130]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, July 14, 1944—11 a.m.

1690. Answering your 2469, July 8, 9 a.m. Department does not believe it desirable that Russians be invited to appoint technical experts to engage in exploratory reparation discussions until questions of procedure have been definitely settled with British.

As you will see from following message sent to London today,98 attempt is now being made to reach such procedural agreement. Pending advice from Department that these arrangements have been completed, you are requested to defer action in the premises.

“AmEmbassy London.

We have just received an inquiry from Moscow asking whether invitation should be extended to Russians to appoint technical experts to participate in exploratory conversations referred to in our 5266, July 4, 6 p.m.

We believe that before extending such an invitation it is necessary for us to reach agreement with the British as to the procedure to be followed. Such an agreement need not await British government’s decision on position they will take on substance of the discussions. Since Russians will probably take some time after being invited before assenting to participate, the need for prompt action in preparing the ground for the discussions should be evident.

You are accordingly requested to take the necessary steps to reach definite understanding with British on procedure, especially (1) list of topics to be covered, (2) place, (3) relation of EAC to conversations, (4) “level” of conversations. Please keep Department fully informed of progress made.

Sent to London, repeated to Moscow.”

Hull

98 As telegram 5512.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/206: Telegram

[Document 131]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 15, 1944—2 p.m.

5535. Eacom 26, in reply to your Comea 64 of June 20.99 Joint Chiefs of Staff have now expressed their views on participation of other Allied forces in occupation zones of Germany.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that from a military point of view the provision of token United States forces in enemy areas controlled by other Allied Nations is inadvisable. However, the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that there is no objection from a military point of view to the presence in occupied zones of troops of other Allied Nations actually participating in military operations under the authority of the Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force.

Hull

99 Telegram 4900, Comea 64, June 20, 7 p.m., from London, asked for additional views on the question of stationing token forces within occupied Germany (740.00119 EAC/206).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00113 EW/7–2044: Telegram

[Document 132]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 20, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received 11:23 p.m.]

5751. We have continued our talks with the appropriate Foreign Office officials concerning the urgent need for early discussions on the aspects of reparations and restitution outlined in Department’s 5266, July 4. Civil servants concerned with the subject are agreed on the desirability of early discussions and the delay in our reply has been due to questions of clearance at the Ministerial level. The substance of Department’s 5266, July 4, has also been taken up with the Foreign Office and they are taking up both at the Civil Service and as soon as possible at the Ministerial level the questions of procedure referred to in the last paragraph of that telegram.

The tentative preliminary reactions of Foreign Office officials are (I) that as an essential first stop an approach should be made to the Soviet in view of the substantial interest which it has in the subject; (II) that the matter closely concerns EAC but that if it were difficult because of the Soviet conception of procedure to carry on informal preliminary discussions in EAC the British would probably agree to any alternative procedure; (III) that it is unlikely that the Soviet will be ready to designate representatives for any discussions without giving them definite instructions on policy matters; (IV) that some tentative decisions will probably be made by the British on the extent to which in their view questions of economic security should govern the informal discussions of reparation questions.

We are now maintaining close touch with the appropriate Foreign Office officials and will keep the Department informed promptly of developments.

The matter has been discussed within the Embassy in connection with the work of EAC. We recommend that the first step should be to explore the practicability of the following procedure: (I) to obtain Tri-partite Agreement among the representatives on EAC on a statement of topics concerning reparation and restitution to be discussed informally by experts of the three countries: (II) informal discussions by experts the objective of which would be to analyze alternative forms of reparation and reach technical agreement on their probable economic effects: (III) submission of the results to EAC and to the three Governments: (IV) policy discussions by the representatives on EAC after the Governments had considered the technical reports of the experts: (V) discussions through appropriate machinery with other European Allies after Tri-partite Agreement has been reached.

Foreign Office officials asked informally whether we could let them have any reports or conclusions of the Committee which works on the subject in Washington. They thought it might save some time in preliminaries if they could study any such paper during the period in which they are waiting for Ministerial decision. We suggest that sections 2 and 3 of PWC–2221 might be handed informally to the British as a general but not binding indication of present thinking of experts in the Department.

Winant

1 Post-War Programs Committee document not printed. For text of the final version of this document as revised and approved by the Executive Committee on Foreign Economic Policy, see memorandum dated August 12, p. 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 151].

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn) to Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy 740.00119 EAC/7–2244

[Document 133]

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn) to Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy

[Washington,] July 22, 1944.

There are enclosed two memoranda prepared in the Department of State respecting the treatment of Austria and Germany, together with two summary statements to accompany these memoranda setting forth policy recommendations.2

These reports were prepared at the request of the Post-War Programs Committee of the Department of State and have been approved by this Committee. The two papers on Austria, furthermore, have been submitted to the White House and were approved by the President.3

The Department of State would welcome the comment of the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff on these memoranda, and particularly would like to be informed if the Joint Chiefs of Staff approve those sections which relate to military considerations.

After consideration by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, it is anticipated that both reports will be transmitted to Ambassador Winant in London for background and guidance in his discussions in the European Advisory Committee.

J[ames] C. D[unn]

2 For texts of the memorandum dated June 8 and summary dated June 21 respecting the treatment of Austria, see pp. 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 231] and 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 231], respectively. For texts of the memorandum dated August 5 and summary dated May 31 respecting the treatment of Germany, see pp. 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 154] and 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 154], respectively.

3 See footnote 52, p. 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 231].

Minutes of the Seventh Formal Meeting of the European Advisory Commission, Lancaster House, London, July 25, 1944, 6 p.m. 740.00119 EAC/7–2644

[Document 134]

Minutes of the Seventh Formal Meeting of the European Advisory Commission, Lancaster House, London, July 25, 1944, 6 p.m. 4

Present

Mr. J. G. Winant (in the Chair)

Brigadier-General V. Meyer

Mr. P. E. Mosely

Mr. F. T. Gousev Sir W. Strang

Mr. G. F. Saksin Brigadier F. G. French

Mr. C. O’Neill

Secretariat

Mr. E. P. Donaldson

Mr. I. G. Prigorny

Agenda

1. Approval of text of the Unconditional Surrender of Germany.

2. Approval of the Report by the European Advisory Commission to the Governments of the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

3. Letter of the Chairman of the European Advisory Commission in regard to consultation.

1. Approval of Text of Unconditional Surrender of Germany The Commission— (a) Approved the text of the Unconditional Surrender of Germany, agreed between the Delegations of the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. (The text in English and Russian is annexed;4a the text in German will be transmitted later)

(b) Decided to submit the Instrument entitled “Unconditional Surrender of Germany” to the Governments of the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics for consideration and approval.

2. Report by the European Advisory Commission to the Governments of the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics The Commission— Approved the text of the Report by the European Advisory Commission and decided to transmit it, signed by the three Representatives on the European Advisory Commission, as a covering document to the agreed text of the Unconditional Surrender of Germany, to the Governments of the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

(The text of the Report in English and Russian is annexed).4b

3. Letter of the Chairman of the European Advisory Commission in regard to consultation The Commission— Approved the text of the letter in regard to consultation and invited the Chairman of the European Advisory Commission through the Secretariat of the Commission to transmit it to the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Luxemburg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland (see note), Yugoslavia and the Representatives in London of Greece and the French Committee of National Liberation.

(The text in English and Russian is annexed).5

Note: The Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the European Advisory Commission reserves his position in regard to the Polish Government in London.

Representative of the Government of the United States of America on the European Advisory Commission
John G. Winant
Representative of the Government of the United Kingdom on the European Advisory Commission
William Strang
Representative of the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the European Advisory Commission
F. Gousev

London , 25 July, 1944.

[Annex 1]

Report by the European Advisory Commission to the Governments of the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

In virtue of the Terms of Reference of the European Advisory Commission, agreed upon at the Moscow Conference, the Commission has given attention to the terms of surrender to be imposed on Germany and submits herewith, for the consideration of the three Governments, a draft Instrument entitled “Unconditional Surrender of Germany”.

We have individually reported to our respective Governments on the course of the discussions which have resulted in the settlement of the terms of the draft Instrument. It is unnecessary for us therefore to rehearse the history of those discussions. It should be sufficient for us to say that the draft is designed as a predominantly military Instrument, consisting essentially of three parts. The first is the Preamble, which includes unqualified acknowledgment on the part of Germany of the complete defeat of the German armed forces on land, at sea and in the air. The second part is a short series of military Articles, which provide for the cessation of hostilities by all German armed forces, and which will enable the Allied Representatives to carry out the more immediate measures of disarmament in Germany. The third part is a general Article setting forth the supreme authority of the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, with respect to Germany, including the power completely to disarm and to demilitarize Germany and to take such other steps as the three Governments may deem requisite for future peace and security. The Article further states that the Allied Representatives will present additional political, administrative, economic, financial, military and other requirements arising from the surrender of Germany which the German authorities bind themselves to carry out unconditionally. The Commission will submit in due course, for the consideration of the three Governments, drafts of basic Proclamations, Orders, Ordinances or Instructions laying down additional requirements as provided in the general Article.

There are three matters in the draft upon which the Commission makes supplementary observations and recommendations.

I.

The Preamble states that the Allied Representatives, “acting by authority of their respective Governments and in the interests of the United Nations, announce the following terms of surrender, with which Germany shall comply”.

The Commission has considered what action it should take or what procedure it should recommend in order to give effect to the statement that the Allied Representatives would be acting “in the interests of the United Nations”.

In virtue of the discretion extended to it in its terms of reference, the Commission has, as a first step, addressed a communication, a copy of which is annexed, to the Governments of Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Greece, Luxemburg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland and Yugoslavia and to the French Committee of National Liberation in view of their special interest in the terms of surrender for Germany. After taking into account any views expressed in response to this communication, the Commission will consider further practicable steps lying within its competence for consultation with these Governments and authorities, as well as with Governments of other United Nations.

Note: The Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the European Advisory Commission reserves his position in relation to the Polish Government in London.

II.

Article 2 (b) of the draft Instrument states:— “The personnel of the formations and units of all the forces referred to in paragraph (a) above, shall, at the discretion of the Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces of the Allied State concerned, be declared to be prisoners of war, pending further decisions, and shall be subject to such conditions and directions as may be prescribed by the respective Allied Representatives.”

The Commission recommends to the three Governments the following understanding as regards Article 2 (b):— “Under Article 2 (b) of the draft Instrument of Surrender of Germany, there is no obligation on any of the three Allied Powers to declare all or any part of the personnel of the German armed forces prisoners of war: it is their right. Such a decision may or may not be taken, depending on the discretion of the respective Commanders-in-Chief. Prisoners of war so declared will be treated in accordance with the standards of international law.”

III

Article 11 of the draft Instrument states:— “The Allied Representatives will station forces and civil agencies in any or all parts of Germany as they may determine.”

The Commission will submit for the consideration of the three Governments a draft Protocol on the Zones of occupation in Germany and the administration of “Greater Berlin”.

The Commission will also submit for the consideration of the three Governments a draft Protocol regarding the military occupation of Austria.

John G. Winant
William Strang
F. Gousev
London , 25 July, 1944.

[Annex 2]

Unconditional Surrender of Germany

The German Government and the German High Command, recognising and acknowledging the complete defeat of the German armed forces on land, at sea and in the air, hereby announce Germany’s unconditional surrender.

The Representatives of the Supreme Commands of the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, hereinafter called the “Allied Representatives,” acting by authority of their respective Governments and in interests of the United Nations, announce the following terms of surrender, with which Germany shall comply:—

Article 1

Germany will cease hostilities in all theaters of war against the forces of the United Nations on land, at sea, and in the air. The German Government and the German High Command will at once issue instructions to all German military, naval and air authorities and to all forces under German control to cease hostilities at . . . . hours Central European Time on . . . . . . . (date) . . . . .

Article 2

(a) All armed forces of Germany or under German control, whereever they may be situated, including land, air, anti-aircraft and naval forces, the S.S., S.A. and Gestapo, and all other forces or auxiliary organisations equipped with weapons, will be completely disarmed, handing over their weapons and equipment to local Allied Commanders or to officers designated by the Allied Representatives.

(b) The personnel of the formations and units of all the forces referred to in paragraph (a) above shall, at the discretion of the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Allied State concerned, be declared to be prisoners of war, pending further decisions, and shall be subject to such conditions and directions as may be prescribed by the Allied Representatives.

(c) All forces referred to in paragraph (a) above, wherever they may be, will remain in their present positions pending instructions from the Allied Representatives.

(d) Evacuation by the said forces of all territories outside the frontiers of Germany as they existed on the 31st December, 1937, will proceed according to instructions to be given by the Allied Representatives.

(e) Detachments of civil police to be armed with small arms only, for the maintenance of order and for guard duties, will be designated by the Allied Representatives.

Article 3

(a) All aircraft of any kind or nationality in Germany or German-occupied or controlled territories or waters, military, naval or civil, other than aircraft in the service of the Allies, will remain on the ground, on the water or aboard ships pending further instructions.

(b) The German authorities will forthwith order all German or German-controlled aircraft in or over territories or waters not occupied or controlled by Germany to proceed to Germany or to such other place or places as may be specified by the Allied Representatives.

Article 4

(a) The German authorities will issue orders to all German or German-controlled naval vessels, surface and submarine, auxiliary naval craft, and merchant and other shipping, wherever such vessels may be at the time of surrender, and to all other merchant ships of whatever nationality in German ports, to remain in or proceed immediately to ports and bases as specified by the Allied Representatives. The crews of such vessels will remain on board pending further instructions.

(b) All ships and vessels of the United Nations, whether or not title has been transferred as the result of prize court or other proceedings, which are at the disposal of Germany or under German control at the time of surrender, will proceed at the dates and to the ports or bases specified by the Allied Representatives.

Article 5

(a) The German authorities will hold intact and in good condition at the disposal of the Allied Representatives, for such purposes and at such times and places as they may prescribe— (i) all arms, ammunition, explosives, military equipment, stores and supplies and other implements of war of all kinds and all other war material;

(ii) all naval vessels of all classes, both surface and submarine, auxiliary naval craft and all merchant shipping, whether afloat, under repair or construction, built or building;

(iii) all aircraft of all kinds, aviation and anti-aircraft equipment and devices;

(iv) all transportation and communications facilities and equipment, by land, water or air;

(v) all military installations and establishments, including airfields, seaplane bases, ports and naval bases, storage depots, permanent and temporary land and coast fortifications, fortresses and other fortified areas, together with plans and drawings of all such fortifications, installations and establishments;

(vi) all factories, plants, shops, research institutions, laboratories, testing stations, technical data, patents, plans, drawings and inventions, designed or intended to produce or to facilitate the production or use of the articles, materials and facilities referred to in sub-paragraphs (i), (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) above, or otherwise to further the conduct of war.

(b) The German authorities will at the demand of the Allied Representatives furnish— (i) the labor, services, and plant required for the maintenance or operation of any of the six categories mentioned in paragraph (a) above; and

(ii) any information or records that may be required by the Allied Representatives in connection with the same.

(c) The German authorities will at the demand of the Allied Representatives provide all facilities for the movement of Allied troops and agencies, their equipment and supplies, on the railways, roads and other land communications or by sea, river or air. The German authorities will maintain all means of transportation in good order and repair and will furnish the labor, services and plant necessary therefor.

Article 6

(a) The German authorities will release to the Allied Representatives, in accordance with the procedure to be laid down by them, all prisoners of war at present in their power, belonging to the forces of the United Nations, and will furnish full lists of these persons indicating the places of their detention in Germany or territory occupied by Germany. Pending the release of such prisoners of war, the German authorities will protect them in their persons and property and provide them with adequate food, clothing, shelter, medical attention and money in accordance with their rank or official position.

(b) The German authorities will in like manner provide for and release all other nationals of the United Nations who are confined, interned or otherwise under restraint, and all other persons who may be confined, interned or otherwise under restraint for political reasons or as a result of any Nazi action, law or regulation which discriminates on the ground of race, color, creed or political belief.

(c) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Article the German authorities will hand over control of the places of detention there mentioned to such officers as may be designated for the purpose by the Allied Representatives.

Article 7

The German authorities will furnish to the Allied Representatives— (a) full information regarding the forces referred to in Article 2 (a), and in particular will within twenty-four hours of the time of surrender furnish all information which the Allied Representatives may require concerning the numbers, locations and dispositions of such forces, whether located inside or outside Germany;

(b) complete and detailed information concerning mines, minefields and other obstacles to movement by land, sea or air, and the safety lanes in connection therewith. All such safety lanes will be kept open and clearly marked; all mines, minefields and other dangerous obstacles will as far as possible be rendered safe, and all aids to navigation will be reinstated. Unarmed German military and civilian personnel with the necessary equipment will be made available and utilised for the above purposes and for the removal of mines, minefields and other obstacles as directed by the Allied Representatives.

Article 8

The German authorities will prevent the destruction, removal, concealment, transfer or scuttling of, or damage to, all military, naval, air, shipping, port, industrial and other like property and facilities and all records and archives, wherever they may be situated, except as may be directed by the Allied Representatives.

Article 9

Pending the institution of control by the Allied Representatives over all means of communication, all radio and telecommunication installations and other forms of wire or wireless communications, whether ashore or afloat, under German control, will cease transmission except as directed by the Allied Representatives.

Article 10

The forces, nationals, ships, aircraft, military equipment, and other property in Germany or in German control or service or at German disposal, of any other country at war with any of the Allies, will be subject to the provisions of this Instrument and of any proclamations, orders, ordinances or instructions issued thereunder.

Article 11

The Allied Representatives will station forces and civil agencies in any or all parts of Germany as they may determine.

Article 12

(a) The United States of America, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics shall possess supreme authority with respect to Germany. In the exercise of such authority they will take such steps, including the complete disarmament and demilitarisation of Germany, as they deem requisite for future peace and security.

(b) The Allied Representatives will present additional political, administrative, economic, financial, military and other requirements arising from the surrender of Germany. The Allied Representatives, or persons or agencies duly designated to act on their authority, will issue proclamations, orders, ordinances and instructions for the purpose of laying down such additional requirements and of giving effect to the other provisions of the present Instrument. The German Government, the German High Command, all German authorities and the German people shall carry out unconditionally the requirements of the Allied Representatives and shall fully comply with all such proclamations, orders, ordinances and instructions.

Article 13

This Instrument will enter into force and effect immediately upon signature. In the event of failure on the part of the German authorities or people promptly and completely to fulfil their obligations hereby or hereafter imposed, the Allied Representatives will take whatever action may be deemed by them to be appropriate under the circumstances.

Article 14

This Instrument is drawn up in the English, Russian and German languages. The English and Russian are the only authentic texts. In case of any question as to the meaning of any of the provisions of this Instrument, the decision of the Allied Representatives shall be final.

(Date and year) . . . . . . . (Place) . . . . . . . (Hours—Central European Time).

Signed by the Allied Representatives: Signed by the Representatives of the German Government and the German High Command thereunto duly authorised:

(Name) . . . . . (Title) . . . (Name) . . . . . (Title) . . .

(Name) . . . . . (Title) . . . (Highest German civil authority)

(Name) . . . . . (Title) . . . (Name) . . . . . (Title) . . .

(Name) . . . . . (Title) . . . (Highest German military authority)

The above text of the Unconditional Surrender of Germany has been prepared by the European Advisory Commission on the instructions of the Governments of the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

The text of the Unconditional Surrender, as agreed in the English and Russian languages, consists of fourteen articles and has been unanimously accepted by the Representatives of the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the European Advisory Commission at a meeting of the Commission held on the 25th July, 1944 and is now submitted to their respective Governments for approval.

Representative of the Government of the United States of America on the European Advisory Commission
John G. Winant
Representative of the Government of the United Kingdom on the European Advisory Commission
William Strang
Representative of the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the European Advisory Commission
F. Gousev
Lancaster House, London.
25 July, 1944.

4 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 17092, July 26; received July 28.

4a The English text is printed on p. 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 134].

4b The English text is printed as annex 1, p. 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 134].

5 The English text is printed on p. 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/7–2844: Telegram

[Document 135]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 28, 1944—3 p.m.
[Received July 28—12:43 p.m.]

5998. Comea 73. European Advisory Commission met yesterday Thursday.6 Entire session devoted to consideration of the protocol on Germany. Three subjects were discussed, which are listed hereunder in order of importance.

First subject: The Soviet Delegation insists that the time has now arrived for a statement to appear in the protocol as to the specific countries which will occupy the northwest and the southwest zones of Germany. The Soviets state that, in view of the fact that the Instrument of Surrender has been forwarded to the three Governments, it is essential that the two protocols should follow at the earliest practicable date. However, the Soviets argue that sufficient time has elapsed to permit a decision on this question and that their Government do not want to pass on a paper in which blanks appear.

I feel that unless a decision is made we will be deadlocked on this issue in the German protocol. Until these two protocols are agreed to, there is no indication that the Soviets will be willing to proceed on other matters. Discussion of control machinery, proclamations and general orders, and United Nations prisoners of war is critically urgent, but further progress is at a standstill until the decision on the zones of occupation is reached by the United States and United Kingdom Governments. This matter is beyond the power of adjudication by the three representatives of the European Advisory Commission.

Second subject: Numerous complications are involved in trying to properly describe the three zones into which Germany is to be divided, and the three parts into which Greater Berlin is to be divided. These difficulties result from numerous changes of German boundary laws in 1938, 1939, 1940, 1941, and 1944. The descriptive matter, as it now appears in the current draft of the protocol, cannot be reconciled with the boundaries as of December 31, 1937, which were drawn in ink on the five maps received here from the State Department on July 25.7 A subcommittee has been appointed to present a solution of this matter to the Commission.

Third subject: The Soviet Delegation conceded to the British Delegation its acceptance of the term “auxiliary contingents” as set forth in paragraph 4 of the current draft protocol. This is a worthwhile concession since it has been a cause of extended argument. However, the Soviet concession is contingent upon the agreement by all three powers not to use auxiliary contingent forces either in the occupation or in the control of Austria. Soviets also insist that any auxiliary contingents which occupy Germany alongside of forces of the three powers will not be permitted to prejudge participation in the control machinery of Germany. On this latter point the British agree.

Next meeting is scheduled for Monday July 31.

Winant

6 July 27.

7 Transmitted as enclosures to instruction 4338, July 22, to London, not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/8–444: Telegram

[Document 136]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 4, 1944—midnight.

6175. We have taken up with the President question of U.S. and British zones in Germany.8 He is awaiting an agreement by the Prime Minister that American troops will police northwest Germany and will not police southern Europe. It is the President’s view that as we have already agreed that the Soviets may police that part of Germany which they have expressed a desire to control he is unable to understand that any further discussion with the Soviets is necessary at this time.

In order to get the matter forward, we have sent the following instructions to Harriman:9 “The Russian representatives on the European Advisory Commission have stated that they are unable to proceed further with development of plans for military occupation of Germany until a decision is reached between the British and ourselves as to our respective zones of occupation in the Anglo-American area. As the President is away and this subject will require discussion between the United States and British Governments on the highest level, it is impossible for us to arrive at any solution of this question at the present time.

“In view of the agreement already made that the Soviets may police all that part of Germany in which they have expressed a desire to exercise control, we are unable to understand why they are concerned with the necessity of deciding this question before proceeding to any others.

“Because of the time factor and the necessity for all the Army commands to make their preparations for occupation based on tripartite discussions, please press upon Molotov the necessity for the Soviet representative on the European Advisory Commission to continue discussion of general occupation questions pending settlement between British and ourselves of our respective zones of occupation.”

You may wish to urge Eden and Strang to have Clark Kerr10 in Moscow press Molotov along the same lines.

Stettinius

8 In a memorandum for President Roosevelt dated August 2, 1944, which is summarized in Pogue, The Supreme Command, p. 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 170], the Acting Secretary of State urged that the question of zones be settled as soon as possible and proposed that the United States accept the southern zone of Germany if the British would agree to occupy France, Italy, and the Balkans should that become necessary and would agree further to share use or control of northwest German ports with the United States.

9 As telegram 1857, August 4, 9 p.m.

10 Sir Archibald Clark Kerr, British Ambassador in the Soviet Union.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/8–444

[Document 137]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 4, 1944.

The Secretary: This morning I received two messages from the President—one on the subject of the surrender terms and the other one on the zones of occupation.11

Surrender Terms

The President stated he did not wish to approve formally the surrender instrument until he had reviewed the text once more. I therefore cabled him the text of the terms themselves and forwarded by pouch a copy of the formal recommendation of the European Advisory Commission covering the Minutes of the July 25 meeting, the report of the Commission, the text of the terms, and the letters to the Foreign Ministers of the Governments in exile.

Zones of Occupation

In his message on the zones, the President requests us to inform Ambassador Winant that he is awaiting an agreement from the Prime Minister that American troops will police northwest Germany and not Southern Europe. He states that he is unable to understand why the Russians refuse to carry on further discussions inasmuch as the Soviet Zone is agreed upon. He stresses again the desirability of having Hamburg, Bremen and ports in the Netherlands for our use.

I immediately cabled Ambassador Harriman asking him to urge the Russians to permit the continuation of discussions in the European Advisory Commission pending settlement of the zones question. I also cabled Ambassador Winant informing him that the President is awaiting the Prime Minister’s reply on the zones question and suggesting that he urge the British to have their Ambassador in Moscow associate himself with Harriman in requesting the continuation of discussions.

I then wired the President advising him of the action taken and pointed out that we also failed to understand the insistence of the Russians on this point.

For your information I enclose herewith copies of the messages from the President and of the cables to the President and to Ambassadors Harriman and Winant on the zones.11a

E[dward] S[tettinius]

11 Neither printed; the President’s message on the subject of zones of occupation in Germany is quoted in part in Cordell Hull, The Memoirs of Cordell Hull (New York, The Macmillan Company, 1948), vol. ii, p. 1613. President Roosevelt was on a trip to Hawaii and Alaska.

11a None printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/8–844: Telegram

[Document 138]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 8, 1944—3 p.m.

6254. The President has now approved the surrender instrument for Germany and you are therefore authorized to inform the European Advisory Commission that the American Government agrees to the instrument as recommended by the Commission.

For your confidential information, the President has indicated his desire that China be given an opportunity to approve the surrender instrument without, however, making China a party thereto. The Department will therefore make available to representatives of the Chinese Government here for their confidential information the text of the terms and will inform you subsequently of the Chinese reaction.

Stettinius

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/8–944: Telegram

[Document 139]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 9, 1944—1 p.m.
[Received August 9—8:23 a.m.]

6370. For the Acting Secretary. In regard to second paragraph of your 6254 of August 8 I want you to know that the Russians on the European Advisory Commission are not aware that we intend to inform the Chinese in regard to the surrender terms. The conversations within the EAC bind us to absolute secrecy until notice and consent are agreed to by the three parties represented.

In relation to this same problem I want to warn you against the Chinese codes which I believe are unsafe and probably known to the Germans as well as to our two Allies.

Winant

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/8–944: Telegram

[Document 140]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 9, 1944—2 p.m.

6285. Your 6370. Action with Chinese taken on the instruction of the President and we are already committed to do so but are attempting to arrange it here rather than having terms cabled to Chungking.

In your discretion please inform your Soviet and British colleagues on the Commission of this, explaining done on the President’s instructions.

For your confidential information, the Canadians must have had a copy of the terms on July 28 as on that date they made certain comments and raised some questions concerning them with Atherton.12

Stettinius

[Formal notification of the United States Government’s approval of the surrender terms for Germany was made in identical letters dated August 9, 1944, from Ambassador Winant to the British and Soviet Representatives on the European Advisory Commission; not printed.]

12 Ray Atherton, Ambassador in Canada.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to Mr. Harry L. Hopkins, Special Assistant to President Roosevelt [Document 141]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to Mr. Harry L. Hopkins, Special Assistant to President Roosevelt 13

London, August 10, 1944—1:30 a.m.
[Received 4:35 a.m.]

954. Please read Department’s message 6254 of August 8th my message 6370 of August 9th and Department’s 6285 of August 9th.

Although I am aware that technically after recommendations are formally made by the European Advisory Commission and forwarded to their respective Governments action taken by the respective Governments falls outside the jurisdiction of the European Advisory Commission I am still deeply disturbed by the President’s suggestion that China be shown a draft of the unconditional surrender terms for Germany and be given an opportunity to approve the surrender instrument without proper notice having been given to the United Kingdom and Russia.

My fear in regard to the security of Chinese communications further complicates the problem.

At Moscow when the European Advisory Commission was created on Molotov’s request it was agreed that the deliberations of the European Advisory Commission be secret. Gousev on many occasions has made clear the Russian position on this point. He stated from the beginning that his Government considered the surrender terms as a part of military strategy and on one occasion when he believed the British were responsible for leakage on a direct order from Moscow registered a vigorous protest to both the Prime Minister and to Eden as well as bringing the matter before the Commission. For three months following this incident no additional information was placed before the Commission by the Russian Delegation. Strang and I have both concurred in supporting the confidential character of all discussions and findings of the Commission and pledged our agreement to this policy. When the British suggested that certain Allied Governments be shown the final draft of the surrender terms at an appropriate time Gousev refused to concur.

I am very fearful if I carried out Stettinius’ suggestion of informing my Soviet and British colleagues of notification to the Chinese of the surrender terms it might lead to either withdrawal of the Russians from the Commission or block further discussions in that body. Such action at this critical point in our work or even further prolonged delay in carrying forward our work would be most unfortunate.

Stettinius suggests that the Canadians probably have knowledge of the draft terms. This may be so. When the Prime Ministers of Canada, New Zealand, and South Africa were here and sitting as members of the War Cabinet it was understood in the Commission that they were probably informed of the work of the Commission. Although there was no vote taken on this question I feel this fact was accepted because of the contributions of the Dominions to the war effort and the form of government that exists under the Commonwealth. I do not think that either the Russians or the British would feel that any precedent had been established to include other nations in a consideration of the problems affecting the three powers. Would it be possible to treat the action already taken by the State Department at the President’s wish as simply a personal communication from the President to General Chiang Kai-shek13a taking great care to see that the individual at the Chinese Embassy in Washington entrusted with this message carry it directly to the Generalissimo for his eyes only. Limiting this notice to a trusted ambassador in Washington might be even a better procedure.

I very much doubt if the President was fully aware of the understandings in relation to security that have bound the Commission in its work and implied secrecy unless notice was given to the other powers.

I hope very much that you will discuss this problem with Stettinius. I am cabling this message to you because of your relationship to the President and because this means of communication is more rapid and secure.

[ Winant ]

13 Copy of telegram obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.

13a President of the National Government of the Republic of China.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/8–1044: Telegram

[Document 142]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 10, 1944—3 p.m.

6315. Eacom 29. In considering your Comea 68,14 we have reviewed the various documents now before the EAC and the Working Security Committee. There are three general categories of such documents, namely, those submitted to EAC by the British, those prepared by the Planning Committee of U.S. advisers, and those submitted to the Working Security Committee by the State Department.

To expedite clearance here and negotiation in the Commission, we suggest that the next objective of the Commission should be to reach agreement on the general principles to be followed in the control and administration of Germany after its surrender. If we are to keep pace with the indicated course of military events, it seems essential that we reach in the near future agreement on these general principles and then proceed to a discussion of details as rapidly as possible. Some of the subjects referred to in Comea 68 appear to be in the latter category.

On this basis, we propose the following action here: (1) There are now before the Joint Chiefs of Staff two papers setting forth American views on the future treatment of Germany and Austria, respectively (PWC–141a15 and PWC–21816 ). Clearance of these papers will be obtained as rapidly as possible and will be sent to you for your guidance in presenting American views but not for presentation to, or negotiation in the EAC.

(2) For negotiation in the Commission, the Working Security Committee will prepare a brief statement of general policies to be followed in the administration of Germany, will obtain approval from State, War, Navy and the Joint Chiefs of Staff and will forward it to you as soon as cleared. The subjects covered in this document will be limited to those which in our opinion must be agreed upon by the three Governments. We hope to transmit this document in the near future as it has already been prepared in draft form.17

(3) The Working Security Committee will continue the preparation and review of documents on the detailed aspects of administration of Germany and transmit them for your guidance after summary examination and approval by State, War, Navy and the Joint Postwar Committee of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

(4) If any general policies are not adaptable to treatment in the general statement referred to in (2) they will be dealt with in separate documents and similarly reviewed and transmitted.

We regard some such course of action as that suggested above to be required if we are to be in position to take over effectively in Germany in the event of an early surrender.

The procedure suggested above is based on the assumption that the Commission will reach agreement on zones of occupation and tripartite control machinery for Germany in as much as the statement of general policies will be drafted on that assumption.

Your comments on the foregoing will be welcomed. The subject will be discussed with Hammond on his arrival.

Stettinius

14 Telegram 5412, July 8, p. 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127].

15 Not printed, but substantially the same as PWC–141b, dated August 5, p. 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 154].

16 Dated June 8, p. 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 231].

17 For text, see memorandum dated August 30, p. 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/8–944: Telegram

[Document 143]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 10, 1944—6 p.m.

6318. Please take no action on my telegram of August 918 authorizing you to inform the British and Soviet representatives on E.A.C. of our intention to communicate the surrender terms to the Chinese. We are taking this matter up with the President and shall communicate with you later.

In view of the information set forth in your 6370 of August 9, if the Chinese are informed of the surrender terms it will be done in such manner as to maintain complete security. If the President approves, we contemplate communicating orally to the Chinese only the substance of the terms on the understanding that they will not be transmitted to Chungking by cable or by pouch.

Stettinius

18 No. 6285, p. 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, and Doc. 140].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/8–944: Telegram

[Document 144]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 11, 1944—9 p.m.

6366. The President has now approved the procedure set forth in last paragraph of Department’s 6318, August 10, 6 p.m., for informing the Chinese of the German surrender terms.

Please inform your British and Soviet colleagues on the EAC of our desire to proceed in this manner, explaining that it will be done on the direct instructions of the President.

Stettinius

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/8–1644: Telegram

[Document 145]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 16, 1944—1 p.m.
[Received August 16—9:45 a.m.]

6591. Personal to the Secretary and for the President. Since receiving your 6366 of August 11 Gousev who is now Acting Chairman has not called a meeting as he is waiting on and expecting this weekend directives from Moscow that would permit consideration of the major military and political problems that are before the Commission in relation to Germany and Austria.

Therefore I decided yesterday I would approach both Strang and Gousev separately on the question of the President’s desire of informing the Chinese of the German surrender terms under the procedure and with the limitations outlined in your 6318 August 10.

Yesterday afternoon I talked with Strang with Eden sitting in. I knew that Strang would report immediately to Eden and felt I would rather state our wishes directly to Eden than have Strang relay them to him. Neither Strang nor Eden were disturbed by the President’s proposal but at once took the position that the French should also be notified on the ground that they were making a far larger contribution in defeating Germany than the Chinese. I simply told them that the President’s proposal did not include their suggestion. They both promised me they would keep my conversation with them to themselves so that I would have an opportunity to talk with Gousev and report back to Washington.

My conversation with Gousev was of quite a different order. He was deeply disturbed and told me he was certain that his Government would not understand and asked that before anything be done in this direction that our Government consult with his Government. All the facts that I stated in my message to Hopkins, of which Stettinius is informed, were brought up by him including the protest of his Government on an alleged British leakage of information at which time he was directed by his Government to protest to the Prime Minister, Mr. Eden, and his colleagues on the European Advisory Commission, and he added that information given to the Chinese on previous occasions had not only become known within Allied circles but also reached German sources. I have found Gousev a completely sincere and unafraid person and an unfailing friend in his personal efforts to support collaboration between our three Governments. He was not angry but was more deeply concerned about this proposal than on any subject that I have discussed with him since he came here. He told me that he felt the British would use it in their desire to influence some of the other Allied Governments and that such action was unalterably opposed by his Government.

Since neither the British Government nor the Soviet Government have as yet approved the unconditional surrender terms recommended by the European Advisory Commission wouldn’t it be possible to postpone action on this matter at least until such approval has been given by the other two Governments? I strongly recommend this. The next fortnight may bring about agreement on control machinery, basic proclamations any [and] orders, zones and areas of occupation in Germany and Austria and other matters that are essential to military planning by our armies in France.

References to Department’s 6254 August 8, my 6370 August 9, my message to Hopkins, and Department’s messages 6285 August 9, 6318 August 10 and 6366 August 11.

Winant

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00113 E.W./7–2044: Telegram

[Document 146]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)19

Washington, August 16, 1944—4 p.m.

6485. We refer to your 5751 of July 20, 8 p.m. We consider that an interim arrangement for securing prompt and substantial contribution from the German economy is essential both in order to accelerate European rehabilitation and to avert an unduly heavy imposition of European requirements upon the American economy while the war against Japan is still in progress. It is also necessary that general policies be agreed upon as soon as possible in order to avoid possible sources of friction between the Allies immediately following the termination of hostilities in Europe and to avoid in that period destruction or concealment by Germans of looted Allied property. We also believe that development of such an interim arrangement should not await agreed, final determinations with respect to the long-term economic treatment of Germany or the ultimate amount, composition, allocation and duration of reparation payments. In our view, therefore, the purpose of technical conversations at this time should be to recommend plans for prompt establishment of (1) an operating machinery and organization, integrated to the Allied control machinery as a whole, which will quickly initiate restitution and reparation transfers, and develop and carry out a large, interim program of transfers, and

(2) a deliberating organization, which, during this interim period, will record and scrutinize claims, and develop and propose the terms of a final reparation settlement.

Although it is recognized that some consideration may have to be given to long-term questions even in the formulation of arrangements for an interim organization, our view is that at present these questions are not appropriate for discussion at the technical level except to the limited extent that may be necessary in planning effective interim arrangements.

We agree with the preliminary reactions of the Foreign Office as to the essentiality of approaching the Soviet Union because of its substantial interest in the subject. We also agree with the recommendation of the Embassy that the first step should be to explore the practicality of obtaining tripartite agreement of the representatives of EAC as to statement of topics concerning reparation and restitution to be discussed by experts of the three countries.

The results of such technical discussions should be reported to EAC and through that organization to the three governments. This would be followed by policy discussions by the representatives on EAC and as soon as general agreement has been reached on the basic policies similar discussions would be instituted with the other European Allies. In view of the need for instituting discussions in the near future it may be impracticable to proceed through EAC. If an attempt to proceed through the EAC would result in lengthy delays we should be agreeable to participate in discussions on a technical level independent of EAC. In conformity with this general approach we are presenting below a list of topics which in our view would form a suitable basis for discussions either through or independent of EAC. It is suggested that unless you perceive some objection you discuss the list of topics with the Foreign Office as a proposed basis for tripartite discussions at a technical level and also the question of procedure and inform the Department as soon as possible of the British reaction. A similar request is being sent to Harriman at Moscow. The list of topics is as follows: 1. Organization of Allied Machinery for restitution and reparation transfers for early, post-surrender period, in particular: a. Composition, membership and powers; integration with Allied control organization for Germany.

b. Machinery and procedures for procurement and allocation of goods and services from Germany and for coordinating and expediting Allied requests for such procurement.

c. Relationship of reparation transfers to procedures for control of German foreign trade and exchange, including (1) measures necessary to secure such imports as may be agreed upon as necessary for reparation program, and

(2) measures to mobilize existing German assets abroad, to prevent new accumulations by Germany, and to handle debts and other claims competitive with reparation.

2. Forms and methods of payment in early post-hostilities period, in particular: a. Policies and procedures regarding transfers on restitution or reparation account of existing assets, including financial assets, unique objects, and existing capital equipment and stocks.

b. Questions with respect to reparation transfers from current production of goods, from labor services, from foreign exchange and procedures with respect to any transfers permitted.

c. Financial and payment procedures (1) within Germany, and

(2) with claimant countries.

d. Provisions for accounting and record keeping.

3. Procedure and Allied machinery for developing terms of final reparation settlement.

Referring to the final paragraph of the cable under reference, the British Embassy was furnished copies of the documents informally and with the clear statement that the documents were purely tentative and represented merely the thinking in some quarters of this Government. Such a course of action was considered desirable in as much as the Malkin Report21 had been made available to us. We understand that copies of the documents have been sent by the British Embassy to London. The documents made available were those presented to the Executive Committee on Economic Foreign Policy which were the same as those transmitted to you except all references to the Malkin Report were deleted.

Hull

19 This telegram with the exception of the last paragraph was repeated to Moscow as telegram 1951, August 16, 4 p.m.; the last paragraph of telegram 1951 to Moscow read: “It is suggested that unless you perceive some objection you discuss the list of topics with the appropriate Soviet authorities as a proposed basis for tripartite discussions at a technical level and also the question of procedure and inform the Department as soon as possible of the Soviet reaction.” (740.00119 EAC/8–1644)

21 Report of the British Foreign Office interdepartmental committee on reparations and economic security presided over by the Foreign Office Legal Adviser, William Malkin.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/8–1644: Telegram

[Document 147]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 16, 1944—11 p.m.

6506. Your 6591, August 16, 1 p.m., our 6366 August 11. Chiang Kai-shek having authorized Dr. H. H. Kung22 and General Shang Chen23 now in Washington to be informed of the proposed terms for the unconditional surrender of Germany as approved by the European Advisory Commission, the terms were read to these officials on August 14. We impressed upon the Chinese officials the top secrecy of the document and asked their assurances that the terms would not be communicated to Chungking by mail or by cable. The Chinese officials gave these assurances. No document was handed to the Chinese officials.24

Hull

22 Chinese Minister of Finance and Chief Delegate to the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference at Bretton Woods.

23 Head of the Chinese Military Mission in the United States.

24 A memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State, dated August 21, stated: “I do not think it is necessary to press this matter in view of the feeling of Gousev.” (740.00119 EAC/8–2144)

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/8–1944: Telegram

[Document 148]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 19, 1944—midnight.
[Received August 20—1 a.m.]

6750. Personal to the Secretary and for the President. We are in agreement with the Department’s view that an interim arrangement for securing prompt and substantial contribution from the German economy in the early post war period is essential in order to accelerate European rehabilitation and to avert an unduly heavy imposition of European requirements on the American economy while the war against Japan is still in progress. It is also clear from discussions in the EAC that the Russians, the British and ourselves agree that there shall be central controls during this same early post surrender period.

No discussions have as yet taken place on partition. We recognize that this problem presents three distinct lines of action (1) division of Germany into three or more completely separate states; (2) a cutting off of certain areas east and west; (3) decentralization of the political structure within a territorially united Germany.

In considering the immediate decisions before the EAC which are necessary to military planning and recognizing the thinking of the Department and the Chiefs of Staff as outlined in messages and preliminary papers which have reached us in London I would recommend that for the time being the EAC give priority (1) to acceptance of unconditional surrender terms and (2) the implementation of these terms which includes (a) completion of the protocols in regard to the assignment of zones in Germany and the areas of Berlin and the stationing of troops in Austria; (b) control machinery in Germany and Austria; (c) basic proclamations and orders to accompany the surrender instruments; (d) directives to be agreed upon as instructions to the three Commanders-in-Chief for their guidance in administering Germany and Austria.

It is understood that such actions and assignments as may be made in these fields in respect to the satellite states fall within the sphere of the deliberations of EAC except in cases where emergency requirements lead to their being handled directly by the three Governments.

Any confusions which have arisen between EAC planning [and] SHAEF planning have been due to the slowness of the EAC in reaching tripartite agreement and the military necessity of the US–UK Allied forces to be prepared to act in case of partial occupation of Germany or immediate surrender. These latter contingencies have prompted SHAEF to plan on a bipartite basis rather than to wait for the formulation of tripartite agreement. There is also the recognition by SHAEF of the transition period during which the combined US–UK command divides into separate US and UK commands. The European Advisory Commission in its initial conception was organized as a deliberative body. In fact because of the action of the three Governments it has been used as an instrument for negotiation. Under the Moscow resolution its powers were advisory in character. Under its present practice its findings are purely preliminary until confirmed by the three Governments.

I believe that when the work outlined above by the EAC is completed it will be found necessary to merge the EAC into a high commission for Europe with authority to deliberate, to advise and to execute within the framework of general policies laid down by the Governments. (2–42C preliminary August 3, 1944).

The Russian and the US delegations have had neither the equipment nor the personnel nor the authority to function under the mandate laid down in the Moscow resolution. If the EAC went out of existence on completing the military phases of its assignments the need for secrecy which was agreed to under the mandate and is justified because of the military character of the information before us and its value to the enemy would be understood and at the same time the new commission would be able to operate under more flexible conditions from the point of view of public relations (I have also felt in studying the economy of Germany and Austria which was part of our assignment that it is difficult to formulate an economic policy towards Germany and Austria without considering its effects on the economy of the rest of Europe. I, therefore, believe that it would be wise to have these matters considered by a subcommittee of the European high commission whose assignment would cover all of Europe rather than by a group whose mandate was limited to the treatment of enemy countries. This change would not delay consideration of these subjects as the work of preparation has been and will continue to be carried on by coordinated groups of the respective Governments.

In a message to the Department25 I suggested that the preliminary formulation of a policy on reparation be undertaken in Moscow. The Soviet has a committee that has been working for a long time on this subject and I believe that better progress would be made if we and the British were close to those forming Soviet policy. It has been made plain to me that the Russian Government has difficulty in delegating to its agents sufficient latitude and discretion to enter into informal discussions away from their home base without delay and constant reference back for instructions.

When conclusions of such an advisory group were reached they could be reported back to the three Governments and after review forwarded to the European High Commission.

Winant

25 Telegram 6512, August 14, 6 p.m., not printed. In this telegram Ambassador Winant suggested that because of the pressure of other questions in the E.A.C. there would be advantages in having an exploratory ad hoc meeting on reparations in Moscow. He added that better progress on reparations matters would be made if negotiators were close to those forming Soviet policy, and an offer to go to Moscow to discuss these matters would help relations with the Soviet Union. (840.50/8–1444)

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/8–2144: Telegram

[Document 149]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 21, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received August 21—3:20 p.m.]

6763. Comea 75. The Russian Ambassador just called and left me a letter26 stating that his Government has resolved to confirm the terms of unconditional surrender for Germany agreed and signed by the European Advisory Commission on July 25.

Winant

26 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.50/8–1444: Telegram

[Document 150]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 22, 1944—midnight.

6711. Reurtel 6512, August 14, 6 p.m.27 We share your doubts that rapid progress could be made on reparations through EAC and doubt the advisability of having them discussed by a subcommittee of the proposed European trade committee. We see certain definite advantages in having them discussed in Moscow but would first like to have an indication of the views of the Russians and Ambassador Harriman. As a first step would you please discuss the matter informally with Gousev without implying any commitment or views on the part of this Government.

Hull

27 See footnote 25, p. 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 148].

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Stimson) 862.50/8–2444

[Document 151]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Stimson)

Washington, August 24, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: There is enclosed a memorandum entitled “General Objectives of United States Economic Policy with Respect to Germany”. This document was presented by the Department to the Executive Committee on Economic Foreign Policy and on August 4 received the approval of that organization. As you know, the Executive Committee was established by the President and consists of representatives of the Department of State, the Department of the Treasury, the Department of Agriculture, the Department of Commerce, the Department of Labor, the United States Tariff Commission, and the Foreign Economic Administration. Assistant Secretary of State Acheson acts as Chairman. In the President’s letter to me it was stated, “The function of the Executive Committee on Economic Foreign Policy will be to examine problems and developments affecting the economic foreign policy of the United States and to formulate recommendations in regard thereto for the consideration of the Secretary of State, and, in appropriate cases, of the President”.28

I am anxious to submit to the President as soon as possible a document on the long-range objectives of the United States with respect to the economic policy towards Germany for the reason that many subsidiary issues now require decision and studies can proceed only to a certain point without clear guidance as to our basic policy. For example, a report on Reparations, Restitution and Property Rights with Respect to Germany has also been approved by the Executive Committee on Economic Foreign Policy. It is naturally supplemental to the long-range objectives document and as such conforms with the latter. A copy of the summary of the Report on Reparations is also enclosed. Before submitting these documents to the President I would appreciate having the views of the War Department. A similar letter is being addressed to the Secretary of the Navy.29

In view of the importance of this matter and of indications that differences of opinion within the military exist on this subject, I believe it would be desirable if Mr. Acheson could discuss this matter informally with the appropriate officer in your Department.

In conclusion, may I emphasize the urgency of the matter. With the war progressing so favorably it is necessary for this Government to formulate a policy with respect to the economic treatment of Germany. Moreover, it is hoped that informal technical discussions in respect to reparations with representatives of the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union will be undertaken within the next three or four weeks.

Very truly yours,

Cordell Hull

[Enclosure 1]30

Memorandum by the Executive Committee on Foreign Economic Policy 31

ECEFP D–36/44 [Washington,] August 14, 1944.

Germany: General Objectives of United States Economic Policy With Respect to Germany

United States economic policy with respect to Germany envisages the reservation of far-reaching rights of control over the German economy after surrender. It is to be anticipated that the declarations, ordinances and orders to be issued by the occupation authorities will have been agreed upon by the British, Soviet and American Governments and will deal with the control of every important field of German economic life. Irrespective of the final form which these documents will take, the three Governments will, therefore, have final responsibility for determining the basic economic policies that are to prevail in Germany during the occupation period.

Whether the control period proves to be long or short, and whether detailed administrative responsibility is assumed by officers of military government or by German administrators operating under directives of the occupation authorities, these policies should be consistent with and contribute to the achievement of explicitly stated over-all objectives directed toward the final goal of world peace and security. Some of these objectives will be of paramount importance immediately upon surrender. Some are of long-run character, affecting not only Germany’s future position in the world economy, but also the peace and security of all the United Nations.

It is, therefore, imperative to formulate promptly the broad objectives of American policy with respect to Germany. Such a formulation cannot prejudge decisions still to be taken with regard to the form, extent and duration of United Nations control of Germany. These decisions, however, should in so far as possible be made within a general frame of reference.

The following statement of the guiding lines of American economic policy with respect to Germany is intended to provide such a frame of reference. It is not intended to sketch in detail, or to take the place of, more specific directives which will be formulated later in each major field of action.

i. the relation between american economic policy with respect to germany and the maintenance of peace and security

The basic long-term interest of the United States is peace. Consequently, so far as Germany is concerned, the basic objective of the United States is to see that that country does not again disturb the peace.

Security against a renewal of German aggression must for the most part be achieved by means other than economic controls. Economic measures do not, and cannot by their nature, provide a substitute for the general international organization for the maintenance of international peace and security, and for other measures of security, to which the United States and its principal allies are pledged by the Moscow Declarations of October 1943.32 American economic policies with respect to Germany, as set forth below, are intended not to take the place of but to buttress the instrumentalities which will have primary responsibility for maintaining peace and security by helping to create conditions in the economic sphere which will remove the danger of future aggression on the part of Germany. On the one hand, they are intended to provide necessary safeguards against resumption by Germany of its pre-war policies of economic preparation for war. On the other hand, they are intended to create conditions under which Germany will contribute to the reconstruction of Europe and the development of a peaceful and expanding world economy in the benefits of which Germany can hope, in due course, to share.

A corollary of the foregoing is that to establish enduring controls over the German economy for punitive purposes or in the search for security would be contrary to the objectives of American policy. In the immediate future—not necessarily confined to the occupation period—there will be occasion for the imposition of special economic restrictions and controls on Germany (as well as on certain other ex-enemy states). An indefinitely continued coercion of more than sixty million technically advanced people, however, would at best be an expensive undertaking and would afford the world little sense of real security. More important still, there exists no convincing reason to anticipate that the victor powers would be willing and able indefinitely to apply coercion. For the longer run, therefore, only those economic measures should be envisaged which are a part of general arrangements for collective security and which could be applied to each and every major power whose actions were deemed to constitute a threat to the maintenance of peace and security.

ii. general objectives and methods

Within this framework, the over-all economic policy of the United States with respect to Germany is directed to the achievement of the following four major objectives: 1. The performance by Germany of acts of restitution and reparation required by the United Nations.

2. The control of Germany’s economic war potential, by the conversion of German economic capacity directed to war purposes, and by rendering vulnerable to outside control the reconversion of Germany into a war economy able to launch and sustain a war of aggression.

3. The elimination of German economic domination in Europe, which Germany achieved by the systematic exploitation of the so-called “New Order” in Europe and by a series of other practices.

4. The effectuation in due time of a fundamental change in the organization and conduct of German economic life which will integrate Germany into the type of world economy envisaged by the Atlantic Charter.33

In seeking to attain these objectives, the directives of this Government dealing with the major aspects of economic policy with respect to Germany will be designed to provide the framework of a single self-consistent policy. Since, however, a major task confronting the United States and other United Nations at war with Japan after the surrender of Germany will be to achieve the defeat and unconditional surrender of Japan, the development and implementation of economic policy with respect to Germany will, whenever and to the extent that it proves inconsistent with the most effective prosecution of the war against Japan, be subordinated to the achievement of that primary objective.

It is not the policy of this Government that the controls over the German economy established by the occupation authorities should be used solely to force compliance with United Nations demands during the occupation period. The economic policy of this Government with respect to Germany as a whole looks to the future, and the work of the occupation authorities should be so directed as to open up new possibilities for an improvement of the organization of the European economy as a whole and the development of comprehensive international institutions in the economic field. This Government therefore includes among the general objectives of its economic policy with respect to Germany the desire to shape the interim control mechanisms so as to lay the technical groundwork for, or preserve the possibility of, improved international economic cooperation. It is anxious to facilitate the adaptation of these mechanisms to, and their utilization in, any general international functional organizations or controls that may be developed such, for example, as organizations designed to promote unification of European transport, power and communication facilities, to provide for the prohibition, regulation or control of enduring international agreements of a restrictive character between private firms, or to establish a general system of armaments regulation.

iii. reconstitution or maintenance of a minimum german economy

The objectives just stated cannot be achieved unless the German economy is maintained at, or, if necessary, restored to at least a predetermined minimum level of effectiveness. The state of the German economy at the time of surrender and the attitude of the German people thereafter will have a decisive bearing on the nature and extent of the economic controls and measures which the occupation authorities will be able initially to put in force. Under the most favorable circumstances, economic disruption will be great. It is even possible that a more or less complete economic collapse will occur either before or after surrender. Such a collapse would delay or impair the effective operation of the economic controls proposed below. At least a minimum degree of operating effectiveness in the German economy is especially important not only to facilitate the achievement of the major long-run objectives stated above, but also 1. to facilitate an orderly demobilization and absorption of the German armed forces into peace-time occupations;

2. to facilitate the orderly return of Allied prisoners of war, foreign workers and other displaced persons to their countries of origin or choice;

3. to ensure the maintenance and safeguarding of property in Germany and elsewhere under German control, in which the United Nations, for any reason, have an interest;

4. to make possible prompt German contributions to the relief and rehabilitation of other countries;

5. to enforce, as far as possible, the economic rehabilitation of minority groups within Germany which have been systematically despoiled;

6. to make possible the early beginning of a program of restitution and reparation by Germany to other countries;

7. to facilitate the administration of the entire German inland transport, communication and power systems in the interests of the European economy as a whole;

8. to guarantee the prompt reorientation of forces and resources, after the defeat of Germany, from Europe to the Pacific for the defeat of Japan.

It is therefore essential that the occupation authorities should formulate and be in a position to enforce a series of economic and financial policies in Germany adequate to maintain or reconstitute a minimum German economy promptly. For this purpose Germany should be required initially to retain and place at the orders of the occupation authorities the administrative machinery charged with economic responsibility which may be in existence at the time of surrender. It is, further, essential to orderly reconversion to post-war production that preliminary programs be developed in advance of the military collapse of Germany for reparation deliveries to meet the immediate needs of claimant countries.

A primary responsibility of the occupation authorities will be to carry out as soon as possible a reorganization of this machinery so as to eliminate Nazi Party influence and organization completely from the direction of German economic life. The formal dissolution of the Nazi Party and the elimination of active Nazis from policy-making positions will be only the beginning of this process. Purely party organizations exercising economic control functions should be destroyed, and the occupation authorities should, whenever possible, utilize the basic governmental administrative structure. When and if considerations of military necessity and the immediate requirements of maintaining a functioning economy permit, they should begin to eliminate from the German economic control system those features which are inconsistent with the fundamental aim of adjusting Germany’s international economic relations to the requirements of an integrated world economic system. It may be necessary at first, however, to utilize existing agencies of control, or those which can be restored to effective operation, having regard only to their capacity to hold the economy together.

iv. restitution and reparation

With regard to restitution, the major policy of this government is to require the return of identifiable stolen property to the governments of the former owners, and the relinquishment of German rights, claims, and controls over property in occupied countries obtained by duress or fraud.

The overriding principle with regard to reparation is that reparation policy should conform to the long-range objectives of this government respecting Germany and the world at large. Reparation cannot be regarded as a major means of accomplishing these objectives, but the effects of an unwise reparation settlement may go far toward defeating them. The reparation program must be designed so as to make the maximum contribution to the rehabilitation of the countries injured by German aggression, while at the same time avoiding or minimizing possible harm in other directions.

The main elements of a constructive reparation program are as follows:* 1. The time period should be short (preferably five years but in no event more than ten) in order not to delay unduly a return to normal world trade and finance, and not to prejudice the establishment and maintenance of democratic government in Germany.

2. The reparation obligation should be heavy (though not crushing), for only in this way can Germany make a substantial contribution to the reconstruction of Europe in a short period of years.

3. Reparation should be predominantly, though not exclusively, payable in kind, i.e. in the form of scheduled deliveries of goods and services to the claimant countries. This will avoid the anomalous situation wherein countries are unwilling to accept the reparation which they demand, and the exchange disturbances which arise therefrom. Deliveries should not be restricted to a few categories of goods but should include any which Germany is fitted to produce and which may be needed for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of the claimant countries.

4. There should be no extensive rebuilding of German plant and equipment for the purpose of maximizing reparation deliveries. The potential loss involved in such a policy will be outweighed by the relative industrial strengthening of Germany’s neighbors vis-à-vis Germany.

Execution of this program will require the establishment of an interim operating machinery and organization, integrated to the Allied control authority, which will quickly initiate reparation and restitution transfers while the terms of a final reparation settlement are being developed.

v. control of german economic war potential

It is the intention of this Government to pursue a policy with regard to German economic war potential which will reinforce and supplement the measures of strictly military disarmament which will be taken by the Allies after the unconditional surrender of Germany and which at the same time will be consistent with the major long-run economic objectives of the United States.

It is to be recognized that the pattern of the post-war German economy, and the steps to be taken in shaping it during the control period, will be influenced not only by policies relating to the German economic war potential, but also by policies relating to the reestablishment or maintenance of at least a minimum German economy in the control period, by policies relating to reparation and restitution, and by policies relating to the ultimate integration of Germany into a world economy. This section, which deals with the control of the German economic war potential, must therefore be read in connection with the other related sections of this paper.

Since a multitude of industries contribute to a country’s economic war potential, the destruction, dismantling or conversion of plants producing arms, ammunition, or implements of war will eliminate only one aspect of this economic war potential. These military measures will be buttressed by strengthening the economies of Germany’s neighbors under the program for restitution and reparation, and to eliminate those high-cost industries and agricultural activities which had been established in Germany to make it self-sufficient in terms of the requirements of a war economy.

The leading principles of the policy of control of economic war potential, which are to be implemented during the control period, are:

1. The control of imports of materials useful in the manufacture of armaments and the regulation of German inventories of such materials.

2. The conversion rather than the dismantling of industrial plants now serving the war effort of Germany but capable of contributing to the revival of a peace economy in Germany and to the reconstruction of Europe, without prejudice, however, to such dismantling and destruction of plants and facilities used in the production of war materials as the three Governments may agree to be necessary for the effective disarmament of Germany.

One class which might be presumptively earmarked for destruction or dismantlement would be those facilities whose location reflected a military purpose—e.g., underground plants and storage facilities, or facilities uneconomically located with respect to raw materials, labor, markets, etc., for strategic reasons.

The general policy does not envisage indiscriminate demolition or dismantlement of German industrial capacity. The emphasis is upon conversion to peacetime usefulness, rather than upon destruction. It is to the long-range interest of the United States that Germany be prosperous, but that, at the same time, the German economy should not again be directed to war-like purposes. To this end Germany should be forbidden the manufacture of arms, ammunition and implements of war and of other materials directly and exclusively (or for the most part) useful for war purposes. The latter category is most difficult, if not impossible, of definition in general terms and will have to be decided case by case. Germany will, however, be faced with a vast problem of reconversion and in industries where there is excess capacity from the standpoint of sound development of the German economy, it would be desirable from the psychological as well as the economic point of view, to select for scrapping, other things being equal, those plants which have been most directly related to the production of war material.

The maintenance or development in Germany, by trade barriers, direct subsidy or otherwise, of economically unsound productive capacity convertible to war purposes would also be contrary to the long-range interest of the United States. Here again precision of definition of general categories is difficult. Much will depend on technological progress and on the commercial policies not only of Germany but also of the countries which constitute Germany’s sources of supply and markets. Given, however, progress toward a reasonably liberal commercial policy and international monetary arrangements, there would appear to be no justification, other than strategic, in the present state of technology, for the maintenance of synthetic petroleum industries in Germany and their dismantlement or conversion would presumably be indicated by the criteria set forth above. Decision in each instance, however, should be made upon the basis of investigation which proves that these synthetic processes are in fact high-cost ways of producing these commodities.

3. The removal of certain plants to other countries, consistently with the recommendations on reparations.

4. The elimination of those forms of industrial and commercial organization within Germany which have been and might again become a threat to peace and security.

It is to the interest of the United States that Germany should not be permitted to use foreign trade or commercial relations as an instrument of nationalistic policy as it did in the past, particularly in the thirties in southeastern Europe and in Latin America.

In the interest of eliminating the social and economic bases of recurrent militarism, it is recommended that this Government approve a program for destroying the privileged positions of the Junker estate owners and of the great financial and industrial monopolies. The problem of the Junkers can be solved in large part by breaking up the large landed estates; the problem of financial and industrial monopoly could be met in part through disestablishing the top financial structures of the great industrial combines and redistributing the ownership of constituent operating companies, and in part through some effective form of public control exercised through a democratic regime. Moreover, this Government should oppose the development of new forms of industrial combinations, whether on a German or international basis, which could contribute to renewed German economic and political aggression in Europe.

It is further the policy of this Government 1) to ensure the control of German inland transport, power and communication facilities during the period of military and civil administration by the occupying powers, and their administration in the interests of Europe as a whole and 2) to require the surrender of German shipping to be used as needed in the economic interests of Europe as a whole or to further the war effort against Japan. This position does not involve any commitment to maintain these controls as permanent measures for the economic disarmament of Germany and is taken without prejudice to the ultimate disposal of these facilities.

vi. integration of germany into the world economy and the elimination of german economic domination in europe

A major objective of this Government with regard to Germany is that the latter must in due course be given the opportunity of finding a permanent place in the world economy, and of making a peaceful and constructive contribution to the development of the community of free nations envisaged by the Atlantic Charter. On the other hand, it is vital to prevent Germany from again becoming a primary focus of restrictive trade and financial practices. German economic self-sufficiency for war must be replaced by an economy which can be integrated into an inter-dependent world economy.

The achievement of these objectives will require that as quickly as possible Nazi principles be eliminated from German trade, industry, and finance, and that independent trade unions, cooperatives and similar forms of free economic association be restored. The longer range elements in the program which this Government considers to be essential to achieve the integration of Germany into the world economy and which should be instituted as soon as this may be done consistently with the reparation and short-range objectives outlined above, include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 1. The exposure of high-cost industries artificially created for self-sufficiency reasons to the pressure of world competition;

2. the persistent but orderly reduction of agricultural protection in the shortest possible period;

3. the elimination of discriminatory trade practices, bilateralism, and multiple currency devices;

4. the organization and administration of German business and other economic institutions in consonance with such international policies and institutions as may be established for the world economy as a whole, with particular reference to international cartels and combines;

5. full employment of manpower and resources in the production of those commodities and services of a non-military character for which the German economy is well adapted.

This Government regards the carrying out of such a program as essential for the success of its general economic policies, and also attaches great importance to it as a contribution to international security, because it will tend to 1) prevent Germany from again carrying on trade as a branch of war, 2) increase the vulnerability of Germany to economic sanctions, 3) remove some of the most formidable obstacles to the relaxation of trade barriers and 4) eventually make possible the rising standard of living necessary to reconcile the German people, under new leadership, to the peace settlement.

It is recognized that the accomplishment of the foregoing long-range objectives will require that Germany be afforded opportunity for developing adequate export markets and will also require the maintenance of policies and institutions, by other countries as well as Germany, which will permit the proceeds of German exports to be realized in internationally convertible currencies. It follows therefore that the full realization of such a program is dependent not only on acts by Germany but also on progress toward the general achievement internationally of the objectives of the Atlantic Charter and of Article VII of the Mutual Aid Agreements. The long-range integration of Germany into a world economy of this type cannot be wholly achieved unless other major countries are also pursuing compatible economic policies for the maximum reduction of the economic significance of frontiers and the development of agencies of international collaboration. It is to the interest of the United States that Germany eventually should participate fully in such international economic organizations and agencies and that the German people be allowed to determine the nature of their economic system, subject to the requirements outlined in this and the foregoing sections, and to the development of democratic institutions in Germany.

It is further recognized that immediate post-hostilities problems may require the temporary pursuit of policies inconsistent with some of the long-range objectives. The immediate need for foodstuffs, for example, may require continuation of measures for the support of agricultural prices and the maintenance of production, even though this production may be of a character which in the long run should be discouraged by the reduction of agricultural protection. The need for the maintenance of industrial production for urgent civilian needs, for reparation, for reconstruction, and possibly even for the prosecution of the war against Japan may similarly condition the treatment of German industry. The need for assuring the minimum import requirements of Germany may, during the early occupation period, require ad hoc trade and payment arrangements not fully compatible with a multilateral system, freedom from quotas, etc. It is nevertheless of importance that the long-range objectives be clearly formulated and clearly kept in view, that transitional expedients of a different character be adopted only after a balancing of emergency need and of long-range policy, and that where such transitional arrangements are adopted they be kept under continuing scrutiny with a view to abolishing them or tapering them off at the earliest practicable moment.

[Enclosure 2]34

Memorandum by the Executive Committee on Foreign Economic Policy 35

ECEFP D–37/44 [Washington,] August 12, 1944.

Summary: Report on Reparation, Restitution, and Property Rights—Germany

i. interest of the united states in german reparation

The problem of German reparation is immediately related to the broader question of a general peace settlement, through which the United Nations hope to attain certain political, economic, and security objectives. While not in itself a major means of achieving these objectives, a reparation program can, depending upon its nature, greatly help or hinder their attainment. This Government has approached the problem of German reparation with a view to reaching a solution which would facilitate the attainment of these objectives. The “direct” interest of the United States in German reparation, i.e. in the amount of reparation which this country may receive, is small. The claims of other nations which have suffered severely from German aggression are direct and substantial. The main concern of this Government with respect to German reparation is that the program aid in the attainment of (or interfere as little as possible with) its economic, political, and security objectives and policies.

Broadly stated, the general economic and political objectives of this Government are as follows: 1. The preservation of peace by a system of collective security and disarmament of the aggressors.

2. The early return to a multilateral system of international trade and finance through the removal of excessive barriers to the movement of goods and funds.

3. The rapid reconstruction and rehabilitation of war-torn areas.

4. The maintenance of high levels of employment and standards of living.

5. With respect to Germany:* a) The control of German economic war potential. This, however, is not assumed to imply a large-scale and permanent impairment of all German industry.

b) The elimination of German economic domination in Europe.

c) The eventual integration of Germany into the world economy.

d) The establishment of democratic institutions, including a free trade union movement.

ii. need for special arrangements for the immediate post-surrender period

It is unlikely that agreed decisions regarding all of the basic policy questions can be reached during the immediate post-surrender period. It is essential, however, that a program of restitution and reparation transfers be initiated promptly, both in order to hasten European reconstruction and to avert an undue imposition of European requirements upon the American economy while the war against Japan is still in progress.

In order to bridge this gap, immediate discussions looking toward agreement among the claimant states or, in any event, among the United States, United Kingdom, and Union of Soviet Socialist Republics should be inaugurated. Preliminary agreement must promptly be reached on 1. certain minimum basic principles;

2. an interim reparation organization and the relation of this organization to the machinery of Allied economic control of Germany;

3. the development in advance of the military collapse of Germany of an ad hoc program for reparation deliveries which will meet the immediate needs of claimant countries. Such an advance program is essential to the orderly reconversion of industry and labor to post-war production.

The purpose of such an interim arrangement would be to initiate and develop a large program of restitution and reparation transfers even before the terms of a final agreement had been settled.

A temporary arrangement of the kind contemplated would remain in effect until a more comprehensive program, based on a final agreement, could be inaugurated.

iii. résumé of recommendations on the final reparation agreement

The essential elements of the program recommended in the Reparation Report may be summarized as follows:

1. Time Period.

The reparation period should begin as soon as the United Nations have the power to impose economic controls on Germany. It should be limited to a minimum of about five years from its inception but perhaps may have to be extended to ten. Both political and economic considerations emphasize the need for a short reparation period.

The urgent needs of the devastated areas for relief and rehabilitation and the desirability of restoring normally functioning economies in these areas as rapidly as possible demand quick and decisive action. Moreover, unless the United Nations stand ready to exploit fully the opportunity for cooperative action during the early period after the surrender of Germany, it may prove difficult to accomplish the aims of the program.

The one-way movement of goods and services which takes place under reparation is artificial and necessarily different from normal trade. The longer it continues the longer is deferred the full resumption of regular multilateral trade and the desired integration of Germany into the world economy.

From the political point of view, it must be remembered that the humiliation and cost of reparation will almost inevitably be associated in the mind of the German public with the regime in power at the time. For this reason, long-continued reparation would prejudice the establishment of democratic government in Germany and, indirectly, the maintenance of peace.

The collection of substantial reparation from Germany will probably be impossible without fairly extensive controls over the German economy. Since this Government has taken the position that enduring controls of this nature are undesirable† the length of the reparation period will need to be correspondingly limited.

It is realized, however, that the countries which have been devastated by Germany will probably demand a much longer reparation period. The long-range objectives of this Government make a five-year period preferable to a longer one. If it is found necessary to extend this period, however, reparation deliveries should in no event continue beyond ten years. In case a period in excess of five years is adopted, deliveries should taper off toward the end of the extended period.

2. Amount of Reparation.

In view of the numerous uncertainties surrounding the post-war situation of Germany, no useful purpose would be served in attempting to estimate at this time the amount of reparation Germany will be able to pay. These uncertainties relate especially to the amount of damage to physical plant in Germany, the degree of disorganization or disruption of the country’s working force, the nature and extent of economic disarmament, and territorial adjustment.

This much may be stated with confidence, however: a) Barring dismemberment or extremes of devastation, Germany will be capable of paying, in absolute terms, a very substantial amount of reparation. This has been made manifest by the proportion of national income devoted by Germany (as well as by other countries) to war purposes.

b) Large as it may be in absolute terms the amount recoverable from Germany will, in all probability, be but a small fraction of the total admissible claims, and a much smaller fraction still of the total direct and indirect damage caused by Germany to the claimant countries. It would be highly misleading and dangerous to let the notion gain currency that Germany can be forced to make good all or even a large part of the damage she has wrought.

c) Reparation deliveries by Germany will be limited both in character and amount by the goods and services the claimant countries are willing and able to take.

Certain general principles regarding the amount of reparation are recommended as follows:

(1) As between the amount, on the one hand, and the time limit on the period of reparation on the other, the time limit should be the governing factor. This means that instead of beginning with the assessment of a definite amount of reparation and adjusting the time period accordingly, the maximum time limit should be defined from the outset and the greatest possible amount of reparation should be collected during that period.

Provision should be made for extending the time period in the event the Allied authorities believe the reparation program is being sabotaged. Conversely, in the event the reparation period is determined to be more than five years, it may be desirable to hold out to the Germans the possibility of reducing the duration of the period by fulfilling their obligations energetically. The decision as to the duration of reparation should not be made known to Germany until an appropriate time in the light of political developments.

(2) During the period of reparation the German people should be permitted to retain such part of their production as may be required to maintain a minimum prescribed standard of living. It is clear that the execution of such a program will require effective controls over the economic life of the country, perhaps similar to the wartime controls now in force.

During the control period Germany’s production will consist of that required: a) to maintain the prescribed minimum standard of living.

b) to furnish such exports as may be necessary to pay for essential German imports.

c) to furnish reparation.

The composition of German output and the reparation schedule should be so fixed as to utilize all German production above that required for (a) and (b) above.

All foreign exchange proceeds of exports should be utilized by the Allied control authorities to pay for necessary German imports and, if there is any surplus, to provide cash reparation. Imports should be restricted to the amounts necessary to effectuate the above types of German production.

3. Form of Reparation Payments.

The bearing of form of payment on the long-range political and security objectives of this Government is regarded as an important consideration. The most important question that arises in this connection is whether payment should be made predominately in kind or in cash. It is agreed that a policy of requiring payments in kind with allowance for cash payments only in exceptional cases should be adopted.

A. Reparation in Kind.

Payments in kind can be made from the following sources: a) Stocks of goods‡ ;

b) Existing capital equipment‡ ;

c) Current production of goods and services;

d) Direct labor services.

Stocks of raw materials and food above certain minima for German use will, no doubt, be taken immediately from Germany and transferred to the most needy surrounding countries. In regard to other classes of goods to be included in payments in kind, deliveries should consist of the widest possible range of goods needed by the claimant countries for rehabilitation and reconstruction purposes. Reparation in kind should include machinery, electrical equipment, and any other types of manufactured goods that Germany is fitted to produce and the claimant countries are willing to accept, as well as coal, fertilizers, chemicals, et cetera. Only in this way can Germany make its maximum contribution to the European recovery.

One major question, however, remains to be answered: To what extent should reparation come out of existing stocks of goods and capital equipment and to what extent out of current production?

This question involves consideration of the following factors:

(1) To what extent should deliveries be made out of existing stocks of goods and capital equipment for the purpose of satisfying immediate post-surrender needs in the claimant countries?

Deliveries of this nature should be confined to the early years of the reparation period, first, because they will make their maximum contribution to European reconstruction in these years, when the need will be most urgent, and secondly, because such transfers in the later years might impede the reintegration of Germany into the world economy. The transfer of equipment, particularly of equipment for capital goods industries, should be subject to the condition that the ability of such equipment to contribute the net reconstruction of Europe is not thereby seriously impaired.

This policy of taking reparation deliveries in the form of existing goods and equipment might be objected to on the ground that it will have the effect of reducing German productive capacity and will result in a reduction of reparation deliveries below the maximum obtainable over the total reparation period. It is believed that the long-range security objectives and the contribution to immediate reconstruction in the claimant countries outweigh this objection in many cases. It is recognized, however, that the great bulk of reparation deliveries over the entire period must come from current production since the reparation which could be derived from the transfer of capital equipment would, in any case, be relatively small compared to that available from current production.

(2) To what extent should German industry be rebuilt and operated for the purpose of maximizing current production for reparation deliveries?

It should be the policy of this Government to maximize reparation deliveries in so far as this is possible without extensive rebuilding of German plant and equipment. This kind of capital formation should be kept to a minimum in Germany and should be permitted to the maximum extent in the claimant countries. In general, Germany should be permitted only so much capital expenditure as may be necessary to maintain reparation schedules and the prescribed standard of living. It would be undesirable to leave Germany at the end of the reparation period with plant and equipment much newer and more modern than that of her European neighbors.

Qualifications to this principle would arise in instances such as the following: a) In case of extreme devastation of German industry it would be necessary to allow some rebuilding before substantial reparation could be delivered.

b) A limited quantity of capital equipment of a “bottleneck” nature will have to be provided so as to permit German production to get under way.

It is clear that decisions in regard to capital formation in Germany will depend not only on the extent of destruction but also on the types of plant and equipment destroyed in both Germany and the surrounding countries.

B. Reparation in Cash.

Cash payments depend on the commercial policy and the readiness to import of Germany’s potential customers. A program of heavy reliance on cash payments is accordingly vulnerable to the same difficulties that plagued the reparation program of the twenties. It will be possible to make use of cash reparation to the extent that a commercial cash market exists for German exports and to the extent that the control authorities decide in exceptional cases to permit such exports to exceed those required to pay for necessary imports. The gold and net foreign exchange assets available to Germany after the restitution program has been completed will be limited.

In a five-year reparation period there will be relatively little need for cash payment. Cash payment, however, can serve a useful purpose in taking care of exceptional cases and in lending flexibility to the reparation program provided the total volume is kept down to a relatively small figure.

If the period is extended to ten years, it may be desirable to increase the proportion of cash payment in the latter half of the period. With reconstruction substantially complete, the claimant countries will be less needful of German goods. As German resources are released from satisfying the wants of surrounding countries, they can be turned increasingly to the production of export goods for other markets on a commercial basis, thus creating foreign exchange for reparation purposes and beginning the process of reintegrating Germany into the world economy.

Reparation whether paid in kind or in foreign exchange should be strictly related to the export surplus of goods and services actually obtained from Germany. Any significant accumulation of external indebtedness by Germany during the period of reparation transfers is contrary to the objectives of this Government. This precludes both commercialization of reparation through the floatation of new German securities abroad and any other substantial extensions of credit to Germany.

Commercialization or other borrowing would in effect mean the financing of German reparation payments primarily by the United States and Great Britain. The continuance over a long period of years of payments by Germany may well become an internal political issue and thus create repercussions which would interfere with the long-range political and security objectives of this Government. Moreover, at present Germany’s credit worthiness is virtually nil. An estimation of Germany’s future credit worthiness cannot well be made until such time as the essential changes in her political and economic structure have begun.

4. Apportionment of Reparation.

It is recommended that the principal basis for the apportionment of reparation among claimant states should be the amount of damage to and loss of non-military property caused by or incident to hostilities.

This basis of admissible claims does not necessarily favor property owners over other classes of claimants such, for example, as those suffering personal injury since reparation payments will be made to governments, not to individuals. Governments may dispose of the proceeds of reparation and make such compensation to their injured nationals as they see fit.

A precise audit of property loss will be impossible. The total of admissible claims will have to be reached on the basis of reasonable estimates as determined by the appropriate Allied authorities.

It is recognized that the relative impact of property losses on different countries may not be accurately reflected by even the most careful computations. The hardships imposed depend on the circumstances surrounding the loss and on the wealth of the country concerned.

As a supplementary basis for the apportionment of reparation it is recommended that occupation costs levied by Germany also be allowed as an admissible claim but at a lower weighting than property losses. Occupation costs for this purpose should include clearing balances built up in Germany during the period of occupation. Some occupied countries have suffered relatively little physical damage but have undergone many other types of injury at the hands of the Nazis. It is felt that it will be difficult to deny the claims of such countries for some compensation.

In recommending the foregoing two bases for reparation claims, it is intended that all other claims should be excluded.

5. Restitution and Replacement.

The principal recommendations with respect to this subject may be summarized briefly as follows: a) In principle there should be an unlimited obligation on Germany to restore identifiable looted property, even though in practice official efforts to locate such property will have to be confined to a limited number of categories.

b) Restitution should be restricted to identifiable property in existence prior to German occupation. Looted property should be restored to the existing governments of the territories where the property had its situs and not to the former owners individually.

c) Looted property should be returned in the condition in which it is found. The return of such property should not count as a credit against Germany’s reparation obligation nor should it be deducted from the reparation claim of the recipient.

d) All property transferred to Germany during the period of German occupation (except for current output) should be presumed to have been transferred under duress and accordingly treated as looted property.

e) The right to restitution is not absolute. The Allied authorities should have the discretionary right to prevent or postpone restitution of vital equipment (such as, e.g., rolling stock) whenever such equipment is deemed essential to assist the revival of a seriously disorganized country.

f) It has been suggested that, in addition to restitution and reparation, countries having suffered property losses be entitled to “replacement”, meaning the receipt of an equivalent piece of property for property lost or destroyed. It is believed that the “replacement” category would be a source of confusion and that it would serve no purpose that could not be served equally well by reparation in kind. It is, therefore, recommended that no claims for replacement be allowed except in the cases of (1) gold and (2) works of art and other cultural treasures, these exceptions being justified by the peculiar importance attached to those categories of goods.

g) Replacement of gold means that stocks of monetary gold found by the Allied authorities in Germany should be prorated in proportion to gold losses among the Allied countries whose gold stocks were looted. In no case, however, should there be transferred to any country gold in excess of its losses.

6. Labor Services (Tentative).

No final conclusion has been reached on this subject and it is receiving further study. In principle it is agreed that under appropriate conditions and to a limited extent labor services can be a proper and useful form of reparation. The chief problems relate to the method of selection of the laborers, their treatment and length of service, and the valuation of their services.

One suggestion receiving consideration is that there be two classes of laborers, one to consist of extreme Nazis such as members of the Gestapo, S.S., etc., and the other to be recruited, on a voluntary basis if possible, from the general German public. It is contemplated that the former class, which would receive punitive or semi-punitive treatment, would be selected on the basis of previous political affiliation or activity and not, like the latter class, on the basis of the needs of claimant countries for labor services. The latter class should be protected by more or less normal labor standards.

7. Reparation Commission.

It is believed that questions of policy such as those discussed in this summary are outside the proper scope of a Reparation Commission. The Commission should be an administrative body whose function, broadly speaking, would be the supervision and management of the program of reparation and restitution. Within the broad limits of policy laid down by the Allied governments, it would be granted wide discretionary powers to determine the amounts of reparation to be paid periodically, to schedule deliveries in kind, to make adjustments in the schedules of payments, to determine whether Germany is complying with the provisions of the reparation settlement, etc.

The Reparation Commission should act in cooperation with the supreme Allied control authorities in Germany, which authorities should have the power to review and veto any of the Commission’s acts.

The Commission should consist of representatives of all claimant states, but equal plural votes should be provided for the United States, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

iv. résumé of recommendations with respect to subjects closely related to reparation

1. Treatment of Property.

a) German Property Abroad.

Each member of the United Nations should reserve the right to retain and dispose of all German property and rights within its territories, and to use the proceeds to pay off reparation claims, and possibly pre-war debts owed by Germany or its nationals to the country in question or to its nationals. The value of property so retained or disposed of, regardless of the claims which it goes to satisfy, should be counted as payment against the reparation claim of the holding country. Germany can be left to compensate its nationals for property so retained.

The problem of obtaining control over German property in neutral countries is a much more difficult one, since from a strictly juridical point of view there is no way of compelling the neutrals to transfer ownership. The matter thus becomes one for treatment on the political level.

b) Allied Property in Germany.

The German Government should be required to return to the owners Allied property in Germany where such property was sequestered by German authorities or seized in any other manner. Such return shall not be deemed to prevent German authorities from subsequent exercise of the customary governmental rights over private property. In the event that industries in which foreign owners have an interest are required to be dismantled for security reasons or are subjected to other measures impairing the value of their assets, consideration shall be given to the question of appropriate compensation. Where the property consists of liquid funds, such return should not carry with it the right to transfer the funds out of the country except in accordance with the exchange regulations established by the Allied authorities.

Countries should have the right to present reparation claims for damage to or destruction of property in Germany belonging to them or their nationals.

2. Pre-War Debts and Claims.

American citizens have outstanding substantial amounts of pre-war claims against both the German Government, and German nationals. These claims consist of short-term, long-term, and commercial obligations. While the problem has not been thoroughly investigated, it is believed both politically impossible and economically undesirable to leave American creditors of Germany entirely to their own devices in protecting their interests. The matter should receive further study.

It is recommended, however, in view of the urgent need of reparation for reconstruction purposes, that pre-war debts and claims receive a priority below that of reparation.

3. Compensation for Injuries to Persecuted German Minority Groups.

It is considered appropriate for several reasons that the German Government be required in some way to compensate the minority groups persecuted by it. The moral basis for such compensation is self-evident. Moreover, it is now recognized that minority baiting and persecution is a potent weapon in the hands of totalitarian demagogues both for gaining political power at home and for spreading anti-democratic doctrines abroad. Finally, it is felt that since Germany was responsible for a situation in which many thousands of former German nationals needed to be rehabilitated or resettled, she should contribute to the solution of that problem and not be permitted to leave the entire burden to the outside world.

The restitution of property located in Germany is, on a number of grounds, regarded as an unsatisfactory answer to the problem: a) Most of the individuals involved are either dead or outside the country and many would not find it worthwhile to return in order to regain their property;

b) Large-scale transfers of funds abroad in full satisfaction of these claims would be out of the question;

c) The full return of property to members of these groups at a time when the general German public was passing through a period of great difficulty would tend to create strong social tension in Germany.

d) Lack of proof by claimants, and the varying circumstances under which property was lost or sold, would make the administrative problem of restitution extremely difficult.

A two-fold contribution by Germany is, accordingly recommended: (1) Resettlement Aid, i.e. payments in cash or in kind, to an international agency, to aid in the settlement of individuals belonging to persecuted minority groups. Such payments would be akin to reparation, but their amounts would be related to the needs of the resettlement schemes rather than to the property losses of the individuals concerned.

(2) Indemnity for Property Losses. In addition to the foregoing payments, Germany should also be obliged in lieu of restitution, to provide an indemnity, up to some moderate maximum per person, to individuals who have suffered property losses since the inception of the Nazi regime through discriminatory measures. Transfers of such indemnities abroad should be subject to the availability of foreign exchange but should receive a priority equal to that of other reparation payments.

The foregoing recommendations apply to German nationals, or former nationals, situated outside Germany§ who have been subjected to discriminatory laws by reason of their racial, religious or political status.

While the racial and religious categories are susceptible of fairly precise definition and do not involve unmanageable numbers, a moment’s reflection will show that the political category offers formidable difficulties in both respects. In spite of this fact, it is considered both impolitic and unjustifiable to deny compensation to those Germans who have suffered loss because of their political opposition to Nazism while granting it to persons discriminated against on other grounds. The problem of defining the political category so as to keep within reasonable bounds the number included is now receiving further attention.

28 For text of the letter, see Department of State, Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, 1939–1945 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1949), p. 218.

29 James V. Forrestal.

30 Filed separately under Lot 122 (Rev.) S/S–S Files, Box 20.

31 Cover sheet to this paper bears the following notation: “As finally revised and approved by the Executive Committee on Economic Foreign Policy at its meeting on August 4, 1944.”

32 See Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 513 ff.

33 Joint statement by President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill, August 14, 1941, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. i, p. 367.

* See Summary: Report on Reparation, Restitution and Property Rights—Germany. (ECEFP D–31/44, July 31, 1944). [Footnote in the original. In its final revised form this document was numbered ECEFP D–37/44; for text, see p. 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 151].]

34 Filed separately under Lot 122 (Rev.) S/S–S Files, Box 20.

35 Cover sheet to this paper bears the notation: “As finally revised and approved by the Executive Committee on Economic Foreign Policy at its meeting on August 4, 1944.”

* Based on General Objectives of United States Economic Policy with Respect to Germany. (ECEFP D–22/44) [Footnote in the original. In its final revised form this document was designated ECEFP D–36/44; for text see p. 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 151].]

† See ECEFP D–22/44, cited, p. 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]. [Footnote in the original.]

‡ Other than those subject to restitution which would not be credited against reparation. [Footnote in the original.]

‡ Other than those subject to restitution which would not be credited against reparation. [Footnote in the original.]

§ and to stateless persons resident in Germany on or before September 1, 1939. [Footnote in the original.]

Memorandum by the Representative of the Soviet Union to the European Advisory Commission (Gousev) 740.00119 EAC/8–2844

[Document 152]

Memorandum by the Representative of the Soviet Union to the European Advisory Commission (Gousev)36

E.A.C. (44) 25 London, 26 August, 1944.37

Control Machinery for Germany

At the present time, when it is still difficult to determine in every detail how events in Germany will develop after her surrender, the immediate problem is to decide what Allied agencies should be set up in Germany directly after the cessation of hostilities and the occupation of Germany by the armed forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom and the United States of America. The Soviet Delegation submits for the European Advisory Commission’s consideration a plan for the agencies of control and administration to cover the first period of the occupation of Germany immediately following her defeat, i.e. the period during which Germany will be carrying out the basic requirements of unconditional surrender.

The purposes of these agencies will be to control the execution by Germany of the Terms of Surrender and of any additional requirements which may be presented to Germany in accordance with those terms. The most important of these objectives are:—control of the disarmament of Germany, the abolition of the Nazi regime and the preparation of conditions for the creation in Germany of central and local organs based on democratic principles.

Accordingly, the following draft agreement between the Governments of the U.S.S.R., the U.K. and the U.S.A. regarding the structure of Allied organs in the territory of occupied Germany is submitted for discussion:— “1. Supreme authority in Germany will be exercised in its plenitude by the Commanders-in-Chief of the armed forces of the U.S.S.R., the U.K. and the U.S.A., each in his own zone of occupation.

2. Each Commander-in-Chief will have attached to him military representatives of the other two Commanders-in-Chief for liaison duties.

3. To ensure uniformity of action by the Commanders-in-Chief, and to secure the settlement of important problems common to the whole of Germany, namely the principal political and economic problems, e.g. trade, industry, transport, displaced persons, etc.; the chief military problems; and also in order to control the German Government and its central organs, the three Commanders-in-Chief will constitute a Control Council.

The German central Government and the German central organs will operate under the direction of the Control Council, and will be responsible to it for compliance with any demands made.

Meetings of the Control Council will be convened at least once in ten days and, if necessary, at any time on the initiative of any Commander-in-Chief. Decisions of the Control Council must be unanimous. The Chairmanship of the Control Council will be held in rotation.

4. A permanent ‘Co-ordinating Committee’ will be set up under the Control Council, consisting of representatives of the three Commanders-in-Chief not below General Officer’s rank. The structure of the committee should be determined accordingly.

5. The duties of the ‘Co-ordinating Committee’ will include:— (a) implementing the decisions of the Control Council;

(b) day-to-day supervision and control of the activities of the corresponding organs of the German Government and central institutions;

(c) co-ordination of current problems which call for uniform measures in all three zones;

(d) preliminary examination and preparation for the Control Council of all questions submitted by individual Comanders-in-Chief.

6. An Inter-Allied ‘Governing Authority’ (Komendatura) will be set up to administer the City of Berlin, consisting of three commandants, one from each Power. The Inter-Allied ‘Komendatura’ will be headed by a Chief Commandant, whose duties will be carried out by each Commandant in turn.

A Technical Staff will be set up under the Inter-Allied ‘Komendatura’ consisting of personnel of the three Allied Powers and organized to serve the purpose of controlling the activities of the local organs of Berlin responsible for various municipal services.

The Inter-Allied ‘Komendatura’ of ‘Greater Berlin’ will be subordinate to the Control Council.

7. The Allied organs for the control and administration of Germany outlined above will operate during the first period of the occupation of Germany immediately following surrender, that is, the period when Germany is carrying out the basic requirements of unconditional surrender.

8. The question of the Allied organs required for carrying out the functions of control and administration in Germany in the second period will be the subject of a separate agreement between the Governments of the U.S.S.R., the U.K. and the U.S.A.”

F[edor] G[ousev]

36 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 17726, August 28; received September 2.

37 Originally circulated in the European Advisory Commission by the Soviet representative on August 25.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00113 EW/8–2844: Telegram

[Document 153]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 28, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received August 28—11:25 a.m.]

6975. Department’s 6711, August 22, midnight. In accordance with your telegram I have raised informally with Gousev the question of having reparation discussed in Moscow. I explained that this was a personal suggestion of my own which I had made to my Government and was now making to him and that it was not to be regarded as a commitment or expression of definite view on the part of our Government.

Winant

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.00119 Control (Germany)/8–2844

[Document 154]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 38

[Washington,] August 28, 1944.

I am attaching a summary of recommendations prepared after careful study in the Department with regard to the treatment of Germany. I am also attaching for your consideration a longer paper giving the reasoning behind the recommendations and a memorandum on the present status of negotiations and discussions with regard to Germany.

This problem is, of course, of great importance and considerable urgency, for until an American policy has been decided upon with regard to the future treatment of Germany, we are not in a position to discuss the matter with the British or Russians. I hope, therefore, that you will be able to study the attached documents and let me have your comments thereon at an early date. The two former documents were transmitted39 to the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff about a month ago with a request for their views.

[Annex 1]40

Memorandum by the Committee on Post-War Programs

PWC–149c [Washington,] May 31, 1944.

The Treatment of Germany: Policy Recommendations

i. long-term interests and objectives of the united states

A. Frontiers

1. The Danish-German frontier should remain unchanged. (Recommended)

2. The water-boundary between the Netherlands and Germany should be moved from the western shore of the Ems Estuary to the main channel. The land-boundary should remain unchanged. (Recommended with request for further study of possible territorial compensation for the Netherlands for areas ruined by flooding.)

3. The Belgian-German frontier should be returned to the 1920–1940 line. (Recommended)

4. Alsace-Lorraine should be returned to France. (Recommended)

5. The transfer of the Sonthofen district from Austria to Germany should be recognized unless there is convincing evidence that the inhabitants wish to return to Austrian rule. (Recommended)

6. The pre-Munich frontiers of Czechoslovakia should in principle be restored, subject to any minor rectifications which the Czechoslovakian Government might wish to propose as part of a broader settlement of the issues in dispute between Czechoslovakia and Germany. (Recommended)

7. This Government should not oppose the annexation by Poland of East Prussia, Danzig, and in German Upper Silesia the industrial district and a rural hinterland to be determined primarily by ethnic considerations. The United States, however, would not be disposed to encourage the acquisition by Poland of additional German-populated territory in the trans-Oder region. (Recommended)

8. This Government should oppose the mass transfer to the Reich of Germanic people from neighboring countries immediately after the cessation of hostilities but should approve the removal of individuals and groups who constitute an especially difficult problem; the transfer should be made, so far as may be feasible, under humane conditions and without undue strain on Germany’s absorptive capacity. (Tentatively recommended; Inter-Divisional Committee on Germany to study further the question of (a) criteria for selecting populations for transfer, (b) an inter-allied occupation of East Prussia, and (c) establishment of an inter-allied commission to supervise transfers of population.)

B. Political and Economic Conditions

9. This Government should advocate (a) the prohibition for an indefinite period of a German military establishment, (b) the prohibition for an indefinite period of the manufacture and import of arms (except the importation of small arms for police purposes), ammunition and implements of war, together with the prohibition of the manufacture of aircraft and the prohibition of the importation of military aircraft, and (c) a system of international audit, inspection, and enforcement, extending over the whole of Germany, for insuring the observance of disarmament stipulations and for preventing the accumulation of war matériel. (Tentatively recommended subject to further study.)

10. The United States should encourage democratic self-government both at the local and national level as soon as security precautions make it feasible. (Recommended)

11. The German people should be assured that a democratic Germany can, by demonstrating its ability and intention to act as a peace-loving nation, earn an honorable place in the society of peace-loving nations. (Recommended)

12. A “war-guilt” clause should not be written into the surrender instrument or into the peace terms. (Recommended)

13. Partition should not be imposed upon Germany. (Referred to the Secretary for possible consideration with the President.)

14. The victors should make every feasible effort to promote a return to a federal system of government and a division of Prussia into a number of medium-sized states. The imposition of a degree of political decentralization more extensive than that which moderate Germans would be willing to support might defeat its purpose by creating internal confusion and by arousing a lasting antagonism even among liberal and democratic German groups.

15. It should be an ultimate objective of this Government to assimilate Germany into world economy without discrimination other than that necessary for security controls. (Recommended)

16. The large German landed estates should be broken up. (Recommended, with a request to the Inter-Divisional Committee on Germany to continue its study of means of implementation.)

17. The great concentration of power exercised by German industrial and financial concerns should be destroyed. (Referred to the Inter-Divisional Committee on Germany for further study.)

18. Free labor organizations possessing the power of collective bargaining should be revived. (Recommended)

19. The German people should be permitted, subject to security requirements, and to such international obligations as Germany may be required to assume, eventually to determine the nature of their economic system without foreign pressure or intervention. (Recommended)

C. German Foreign Relations

20. Germany should be admitted, as soon as its good faith is demonstrated, to participation without discrimination, other than for security objectives, in general political and economic arrangements. (Recommended)

21. Germany should not be permitted to use trade policy as an instrument of aggression. (Recommended)

ii. transitional procedures and arrangements

A. Surrender Terms

22. The victor powers should secure through a single surrender instrument an unequivocal delivery of unrestricted rights and powers over Germany rather than rely on the rights of occupation and conquest or on undefined unconditional surrender. (Recommended)

23. The surrender instrument should be authorized and ratified by whatever German Government is in existence at the time. It should be signed by properly authorized military plenipotentiaries and, if a Nazi or quasi-Nazi Government is in power, by authorized civilian agents. (Recommended)

24. The rights and powers surrendered by Germany should be acquired by the United States, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on behalf of the United Nations and should be exercised jointly by their three Governments acting in the interests of the United Nations. (Recommended)

B. Occupation

25. The three principal United Nations should set up a military government which, while making extensive use of German administrative machinery and personnel, should supplant any existing central political authority. (Recommended)

26. While the military occupation of Germany should be effected on a zonal basis, the principal instrumentality of military government should be a tripartite agency in Berlin possessing the power, under instructions from the three Governments, to direct a uniform administration over the whole of Germany and to maintain the unity of those essential administrative functions and economic processes now operated on a nation-wide basis. (Recommended)

27. As soon as military considerations cease to be paramount, the control of Germany should be transferred to an inter-allied civilian agency under whose authority military occupation would be continued. (Recommended)

28. This Government should favor the participation of the other United Nations in so far as would be compatible with the responsibility of the three major powers in planning and executing the measures for the treatment of Germany. (Recommended)

29. The German armed forces should be demobilized and disbanded as rapidly as considerations of internal order and the absorptive capacity of German economy will allow. (Recommended)

30. This Government is in principle opposed to the use in labor service for an indefinite period of large numbers of Army units, but should not oppose the employment of Waffen SS41 and other Nazi Party military formations in reconstruction work outside Germany. (Referred to the Inter-Divisional Committee on Germany with request for a separate study of this problem.)

31. German arms, ammunition and implements of war should be scrapped except as they are wanted for use in the war against Japan or are adaptable to peaceful uses. (Further study requested of the disposition of German armaments.)

32. All German military and para-military organizations, the General Staff, military training centers, supply services and all directly related groups should be promptly dissolved and permanently prohibited. (Recommended)

33. The manufacture and import of all arms, ammunition and implements of war should be forbidden, necessary security controls established over German economy, and those industrial plants dismantled which are not convertible to peace-time production or which otherwise present insuperable security problems. (Recommended)

34. The National Socialist Party and dependent organizations should be abolished and their records and assets seized. (Recommended)

35. The chief categories of Party “leaders”, both local and national, and other active Nazis, should be removed from governmental service and posts in cultural and economic enterprises. (Recommended)

36. All parties and groups reflecting National Socialist views should be rigorously suppressed, but non-Nazi parties based on democratic principles should be encouraged to organize and appeal for support in so far as their activities do not jeopardize public order. (Recommended)

37. In order to prevent an economic collapse the existing German administrative machinery of economic control should be utilized, with necessary adaptations. (Recommended)

38. The mark should not be deliberately undervalued on the foreign exchanges. (Recommended)

39. Reparation exacted from Germany should be directed mainly to furthering reconstruction. Even though it will not be large enough to meet the total cost, the payments should be confined to early years after the close of hostilities. The transfer of capital equipment should not be large enough seriously to cripple German economy. (Deferred for the consideration of the report of the Committee on Reparation.)

C. Establishment of Permanent Government

40. The direct inter-allied administration of Germany should terminate as soon as the prospects of order and the emergence of an acceptable German Government make it desirable. (Recommended)

41. The process of political reconstruction should begin with the establishment of democratic self-government in local communities and should be extended to larger units as the success of each step becomes apparent. (Recommended)

Original draft (CAC42 –181b) prepared and reviewed by the Inter-Divisional Committee on Germany.

Reviewed and revised by the Committee on Post-War Programs at meetings of May 11, 12, 18, 19, 25, 31.

[Annex 2]

43 Memorandum by the Committee on Post-War Programs

PWC–141b [Washington,] August 5, 1944.

The Treatment of Germany

i. introductory

The following discussion of the treatment of Germany makes a distinction between (1) long-range interests and objectives of the United States and (2) the problems of the occupation period.

The latter category embraces those immediate concerns of the victor powers from the moment of Germany’s surrender or collapse until a time when it will be safe to establish a permanent system of controls and to permit the organization of a constitutional German Government. The major tasks of this period will be (1) to secure through the surrender instrument and to exercise an unqualified authority over Germany, (2) to establish the machinery of an effective military government, (3) to destroy the National Socialist Party and uproot its influence from German life, (4) to disarm and demobilize the German military machine and establish controls over Germany’s war potential, (5) to institute a program of restitution and reparation, (6) to prevent an economic breakdown and to begin an economic reorganization which will destroy autarchy and eliminate, in so far as possible, the economic and social bases of ultra-nationalism and militarism, and (7) to make a start towards the creation of an acceptable and durable political structure in Germany.

If this program is to provide more than temporary security and is to prepare the way for continuing European stability and peace, it must be worked out and applied in the light of long-range objectives with respect to Germany and to Germany’s place in the projected world order.

ii. long-term interests and objectives of the united states

Axiomatically the basic long-term interest of the United States is peace, and so far as Germany is concerned, consequently, the basic objective is to see to it that that country does not disturb the peace.

Security against a renewal of German aggression must be guaranteed during the foreseeable future—not only during but beyond the occupation period—through a rigorously enforced prohibition of a German military establishment and through vigilant control of German war potential.

An indefinitely continued coercion of more than sixty million technically advanced people, however, would at best be an expensive undertaking that would afford the world little sense of real security and, more important still, there exists no convincing reason to anticipate that the victor powers would be willing and able indefinitely to apply coercion. In the long run, therefore, the best guarantee of security, and the least expensive, would be the German people’s repudiation of militaristic ambitions and their assimilation, as an equal partner, into a cooperative world society.

These considerations dictate the search for a policy which will prevent a renewal of German aggression and, at the same time, pave the way for the German people in the course of time to join willingly in the common enterprises of peace.

The long-range objectives which might best protect the interests of the United States include (1) the settlement of disturbing frontier problems, (2) the achievement of political and economic reform within Germany, and (3) a constructive role for Germany, both political and economic, in international relations.

A. Frontiers

In order to strengthen the forces of peace throughout the world, it is a continuing interest of the United States that the significance of frontiers be reduced through the development of international organization and of freer international economic relations. In the establishment of post-war boundaries, the objectives of the United States can be best served by territorial settlements which, by doing least injustice to the peoples of all the states concerned, offer the most reasonable prospect of general acceptance and stability. In the case of Germany the principles of minimum change and minimum grievance apply fairly well to her northern, western and southern boundaries.

1. With Denmark.—The existing Danish-German boundary has not been challenged by the Danes, and there is no apparent reason to propose a change.

2. With the Netherlands.—No adjustment of the Netherlands land boundary seems desirable since it has heretofore been no source of disturbance. The Netherlands Government, however, has a justified claim for the relocation of the boundary in the Ems Estuary in the main channel rather than along the western shore as has been maintained by Germany in contravention of an established principle of international law. Unofficial Netherlands spokesmen have recently threatened to claim compensation in adjacent German territory if the German army should destroy the dikes and flood the reclaimed lands of their country.

Further study is being given to the question of possible territorial compensation in such an event.

3. With Belgium.—There appears to be no convincing reason why the 1920 line should not be restored. The justice of the Belgian frontier as established in 1920 was attacked by the Germans, and the pre-1914 line was restored in 1940. Despite Belgian abuse of the open plebiscite, the inhabitants of the disputed region had generally become reconciled to Belgian authority.

4. With France.—The United States Government is committed to the restoration of Alsace-Lorraine to France. Since there are no strong forces, either political or economic, working toward the creation of a separate state, or federation, composed of French, German, Luxembourg, Belgian and other territories within the watershed of the Rhine River, it would be undesirable for this Government to support such a proposal.

5. With Austria.—It is recommended that the present administrative boundary be maintained as the international frontier. After the absorption of Austria, the German Government made a slight rectification of the old frontier—now an administrative boundary—for reasons of convenience rather than for political motives. There is no cause to restore the pre-1938 boundary unless that should be desired by the 2000 inhabitants of the small Sonthofen area, which is shut off by mountains from close contact with Austria.

6. With Czechoslovakia.—It is recommended that the pre-Munich frontier be restored without prejudice to any rectifications which the Czechoslovak Government might wish to propose as part of a broader settlement of the issues in dispute between Czechoslovakia and Germany.

Since a viable Czechoslovakia, to whose restoration this Government is committed, must include a substantial German population, it is believed that the pre-Munich frontier with Germany should in principle be restored on grounds of historic, legal and strategic considerations. Such a conclusion is without prejudice to any cessions in the six northern salients (area, 772 square miles; population, 320,000, about 96 percent German) which the Czechoslovak Government might wish to negotiate with Germany or to slight rectifications in favor of Czechoslovakia. If such rectifications should be arranged by the two Governments concerned, this settlement could be approved by this Government, which is not committed to support any specific boundaries.

7. With Poland.—The principle of minimum grievance will be fairly well attained by the dispositions indicated above. In the case of the Polish-German frontier that principle may have to be overridden. To strengthen Poland strategically and economically and to compensate it for prospective losses of territories in the East, the Polish Government urges, with Soviet and British support, that East Prussia, Danzig, and a portion of German Upper Silesia should be ceded to Poland, and will probably insist that the approximately 3.4 million German inhabitants of the ceded areas should be transferred to Germany. The Soviet Government with apparently some British support, has suggested the cession of additional German territory up to the Oder River.

A basic question which has arisen in acute form is whether this Government should enter into active negotiations with the British and Soviet Governments with a view to determining a new Polish-German boundary or whether it should disclaim interest in this question and refrain from expressing approval or disapproval of a settlement agreed upon by its two major allies and Poland. If it is determined that this Government should play an active role, two questions arise. The first is whether a settlement of the future Polish boundaries should be negotiated now or be treated as part of the final peace settlement.

The second is whether this Government should admit the principle of the acquisition by Poland of territories containing large blocs of ethnically German population as compensation for the loss of only partially Polish-inhabited territories to the Soviet Union or for strategic and economic reasons.

Regardless of whether the United States takes an active or passive role with respect to the disposition of East Prussia, Danzig and Upper Silesia, it is recommended that the United States not encourage the cession of German territory in the lower trans-Oder region. The strategic considerations advanced in support of such an annexation are difficult to justify since no frontier arrangement between the two states could of itself suffice to maintain Poland’s security against German aggression.

8. Transfer of Germanic Populations.—A problem closely related to that of establishment of equitable frontiers is presented by the presence of considerable German minorities in the various states of Eastern Europe. In particular, the Czechoslovak Government has indicated a desire to transfer a substantial number of the 3,200,000 Germans from that state; Poland will wish likewise to remove the Germans from Poznan, as well as from newly acquired territories; Yugoslavia may desire to take similar action.

These German minorities became the advance guard of National Socialist penetration, and the states which they helped to deliver to Hitler have a well-founded grievance against them. Their transfer to Germany would probably contribute to the tranquility of the countries concerned. Hitler himself has set an example by numerous forced migrations of the peoples of this region of Europe.

The problem, however, is one of enormous proportions. Serious economic injury would be done if these people should be summarily uprooted from their homes and thrown into Germany without compensation for their possessions and without provision for livelihood. By land reform in Germany it would be possible to absorb perhaps one million of the immigrants into agriculture. The great majority would have to enter urban life and would cause considerable strains unless there were an expanding German economy accompanied by an increase in foreign trade.

It is recommended, because of the above consideration, that this Government oppose the mass transfer of these peoples immediately upon the cessation of hostilities. It will perhaps be desirable, however, to sanction the relocation of individuals and groups who have constituted a special problem.

Further study is to be undertaken on the questions of (a) criteria for selecting populations to be transferred, (b) the establishment of an inter-allied commission to supervise transfers of populations, and (c) an inter-allied occupation of East Prussia.

B. Political and Economic Conditions

1. Disarmament.—This Government should advocate (a) the prohibition for an indefinite period of a German military establishment, (b) the prohibition for an indefinite period of the manufacture and import of arms (except the importation of small arms for police purposes), ammunition and implements of war, together with the prohibition of the manufacture of aircraft and the prohibition of the importation of military aircraft, and (c) a system of international audit, inspection, and enforcement, extending over the whole of Germany, for insuring the observance of disarmament stipulations and for preventing the accumulation of war material.

The details of this problem will be the subject of further study.

2. Democracy.—Since a peace maintained only by the continuous coercion of Germany would be a precarious and expensive one at best, it must be an objective of the United States to promote in Germany the largest degree possible of internal stability based on free institutions, on the psychological disarmament of the German people, and on tolerable economic conditions.

The most plausible hope for lasting political reconstruction and orderly development lies in the establishment of a democratic government, despite serious difficulties facing such an attempt. It is therefore recommended that the aim of American policy should be to prepare the German people for self-government as early as that may be compatible with the operation of security controls over Germany and with the functioning of a general system of international security.

The survival of a new democratic regime will depend in considerable measure on the psychological disarmament of the German people as well as on a tolerable standard of living. Although a democracy will labor under a heavy burden because of its necessary submission to the will of the victors, it must be able to offer some claim on German pride and patriotism purged of its aggressive content. In order to encourage a constructive fresh start in German political life, the United States should favor holding out the prospect that a democratic Germany, by demonstrating its ability and intention to act as a peace-loving nation, can earn an honorable place in the society of nations. In order to avoid raising an issue similar to that which, after 1919, was exploited by the nationalists to discredit and destroy all attempts to promote liberalism and international cooperation, this Government should oppose writing into the surrender terms or the peace settlement a verdict of moral guilt against the German people as a whole.

3. Partition.—It is recommended that this Government oppose the forcible partition of Germany. (Referred to the Secretary for possible consideration with the President.)

An imposed dismemberment of Germany into two or more separate states has been advocated as a practicable means of forestalling any renewal of German aggression. Such a measure, however drastic in itself, would not obviate the necessity of imposing and enforcing far-reaching security controls upon Germany for an indeterminate future, whether Germany is left united or is divided. Moreover, because of the high degree of economic, political and cultural integration in Germany, it must be anticipated that partition would not only have to be imposed but also maintained by force. Such a drastic interference in German life would evoke a vastly increased resentment over and above the inevitable discontent with defeat and its consequences. The victor powers, by imposing partition, would take on themselves a burdensome and never-ending task of preventing surreptitious collaboration between the partite states and of restraining the nationalistic determination to reunite, which would, in all probability, be the response of the German people. Finally, the disruption of German economic unity would carry with it grave dangers for the economic stability of Europe as a whole, and not merely to Germany.

4. Political Decentralization.—It is recommended that every feasible effort should be made to promote a return to a federal system of government and a division of Prussia into a number of medium-sized states.

In reaction to National Socialist over-centralization, the Germans will probably return, of their own accord, to a considerable degree of federal decentralization, including the breakup of Prussia, which in 1938 included 62 percent of the area and two-thirds of the population of Germany, into several states of moderate size.

Two risks may, however, be incurred by going beyond encouragement of decentralization. The first is that an imposed weakening of the governmental structure more sweeping than that favored by the moderate and liberal parties in Germany would, like an imposed dismemberment, provide a ready-made program for the nationalistic groups. The second risk is that a weak central authority would be unable to cope with the social and economic problems of post-war adjustment. In addition, a return to wide provincial autonomy might again offer to undesirable elements an advantageous means of penetrating the various state governments, as happened prior to 1933, when the National Socialists captured control of several of the smaller states. Finally, even the cumbersome federalism of the Bismarckian empire was no protection against the growth of German power and militarism. Too much importance should not be attached to movements for decentralization, in any case, for the democratic forces have generally favored greater unification of the Reich.

5. Economic Arrangements.—It is to the long-range interest of the United States that Germany be prosperous but that, at the same time, German economy should not again be directed to war-like purposes. A prime concern of this Government, therefore, is that Germany for the indefinite future be forbidden the manufacture and import of arms, ammunition and implements of war and be denied the right to develop an economically unsound productive capacity convertible to war purposes. This interest points to the termination of an autarchic policy and to the assimilation of Germany, without discrimination other than that necessary for security controls, into world economy, the maximum reduction of the economic significance of frontiers and the development of responsible international agencies for transportation, power, and other functions. It is equally to the interest of this Government that Germany eventually should participate fully in such international economic organizations and agencies, but should not be permitted to use foreign trade or commercial relations as an instrument of nationalistic policy.

In the interest of eliminating the social and economic bases of recurrent militarism, it is recommended that this Government approve a program for destroying the privileged positions of the Junker estate owners and of the great financial and industrial monopolies. The problem of the Junkers can be solved by breaking up the large landed estates; the problem of financial and industrial monopoly could be met in part through disestablishing the top financial structures of the great industrial combines and redistributing the ownership of constituent operating companies, and in part through some effective form of public control exercised through a democratic regime. It is also possible that nationalization of certain industries would contribute to the elimination of militarism and of political and economic abuses arising from the excessive concentration of economic power in private hands. Moreover, this Government should oppose the development of new forms of industrial combinations, whether on a German or international basis, which could contribute to renewed German economic and political aggression in Europe.

Further study is to be undertaken of ways and means of implementing these recommendations with respect to landed estates and industrial concentration.

It is recommended that this Government propose allowing the German people, subject to such requirements as those outlined above, to determine the nature of their economic system. It is to the interest of the United States to see in Germany the revival of free labor organizations enjoying ultimately the rights of association and of collective bargaining. (See also PWC–71a, “General Objectives of United States Economic Policy with Respect to Germany”.)44

C. German Foreign Relations

The position of post-war Germany in world affairs will be conditioned largely by the success or failure of international cooperation for security and prosperity and by the degree to which Germany demonstrates its abandonment of aggressive and totalitarian ambitions. Although deprived for an undefined future of all military power, Germany will remain the most populous and productive country in Europe to the west of Russia. Germany would present a danger to peace only if the victors should fall out among themselves and if either Russia or Great Britain should try to bring Germany into its orbit. The best guarantee against such a development would therefore lie in the continued cooperation of the three principal victors in their treatment of Germany and in the solution of other problems, and in the early establishment of a general international organization within which the security of Germany, like that of other nations, would be assured.

In the post-war period Germany will presumably be debarred by its own weakness and by the continuing resentment of its smaller neighbors from pursuing independently any regional policy in Europe. If, however, European economic interests can be served by promoting, on a non-discriminatory basis, commercial exchanges between Germany and its neighbors to their mutual benefit and without undue advantage to Germany, this Government should be prepared to view such a development with equanimity. It is probable, however, that Germany’s overseas trade will play a much larger part than before in an economy reoriented away from war and the pursuit of autarchy. Germany should not be permitted to use trade policy as an instrument of aggression.

It is recommended that the United States encourage the earliest possible integration of Germany into the community of peace-loving nations and into world commerce through holding out to a reconstructed Germany the prospect of early admission to the general international organization and of participation without discrimination in world trade.

iii. transitional procedures and arrangements

A. Surrender Terms

This Government, by public commitment, demands the unconditional surrender of Germany.

1. The Psychological Result.—The exaction of an admission of total defeat might prevent the invention of new legends about the alleged invincibility of German arms. Against this future advantage is to be weighed the immediate disadvantage of the fact that German propaganda, by misinterpreting the intentions of the United Nations to mean subjugation and destruction, is encouraging the resistance of the German people and is to that extent prolonging the war.

2. The Legal Basis for the Authority and the Acts of the Victor Powers.—The basic problem of the surrender is the establishment of a firm legal basis for the authority and acts of the victor powers. The traditional rights of military occupation do not give all the authority that is necessary for dealing with unforeseen contingencies and for effecting the reforms prescribed by long-term objectives. It is open to question whether an assertion of rights of conquest would provide a more satisfactory legal basis. In any case, unconditional surrender of a state is an innovation which requires exact definition before unusual rights can be derived incontestably from it.

It would seem essential, therefore, that the terms written into the surrender instrument, rather than conventional rights of occupation or the rights of conquest, be the source of the authority of the victors, provided there is a German Government capable of signing, and that the instrument contain a clear and comprehensive statement of that authority.

3. The Extent of the Rights to be Surrendered.—A further problem is the definition of unconditional surrender in terms of the extent of the rights to be surrendered by Germany. The alternatives are (a) that Germany should deliver all rights and powers to the victors, and (b) that the stipulations of the instrument be limited essentially to military terms.

Previous statements of American policy and the draft terms of the Joint Chiefs of Staff have adopted the former interpretation. The British draft likewise embodies this definition. The Soviet view, on the other hand, is that the surrender instrument should contain primarily the military terms designed to render Germany incapable of renewing hostilities with the understanding that other provisions relating to political and economic matters should subsequently be imposed on Germany. In Soviet opinion, German military leaders would more readily accept military terms and would, if confronted with the sweeping demands of the American draft, use them to spur the German people to renewed resistance. It may be said in criticism of the Soviet approach that it would not assure to the victors an adequate legal basis for such measures as the punishment of war criminals, the abolition of the Nazi dictatorship, the reordering of German economy, etc., which are among the aims of this country. Furthermore, the political after-effects of increasing the stringency of the surrender terms step by step would perhaps play into the hands of nationalistic agitators against the peace settlement, as that procedure did after the last war.

4. A Long versus a Short Surrender Document.—In the discussions of the European Advisory Commission, question has arisen over whether the surrender document should contain detailed provisions or be limited to a general acknowledgment of the comprehensive rights of the victors and the unqualified obligations of the vanquished. Proponents of the longer instrument argue that German acceptance would be more readily given to it than to a “blank-check” instrument and that it would expressly obligate Germany to a complete range of military, political, and economic stipulations without limiting the freedom of the victors. The Joint Chiefs of Staff in support of their short document argue, in turn, that a comprehensive surrender of powers makes specific provisions unnecessary and that an enumeration of detailed stipulations in the surrender document would carry with it the implication of a limitation of powers to the provisions specified. They attribute certain difficulties in Italy to the restrictive character of the long document used there and contend that the application of the broad authority can best be effected by ordinances of the occupation commanders. The American position is in favor of a short document, and it is probable that the British Government will accept one if there is agreement on proclamations and ordinances designed to give effect to the surrender terms.

5. Who Should Sign for Germany.—The transfer of the full powers implicit in unconditional surrender can be effected only by the German Government, and the signatory or signatories should be duly authorized, therefore, by the Government. For psychological reasons it is desirable that the instrument likewise be signed on behalf of the German High Command and by as important an officer as can be found. In case of the existence at the time of a Nazi or quasi-Nazi Government, the signature of a highly placed civilian representative would be equally desirable. If a moderate regime is in power at the time of surrender, it might well be advisable to compel the military alone to bear the onus of signing. A military signature, however, would have to be authorized by whatever government was in power at that time.

6. Ratification of the Signed Instrument.—A further problem already posed is whether the signed instrument should be ratified by the German Government. Since no official can sign away more authority than he legally possesses, the unqualified legality of the sweeping delivery of powers through surrender will depend in German eyes on whether it is properly authorized by the Government in power at the time. It is recommended that the surrender instrument be ratified by whatever German Government is in power at the time of surrender.

7. Who Should Acquire the Enemy’s Surrendered Rights.—Whatever arguments might be advanced for vesting the rights over Germany in all of the states at war with it, the practical necessities for prompt action, and the responsibilities of the three major powers, make such an arrangement impossible. The real issue, therefore, is whether the rights surrendered by Germany should be transferred to the United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Governments jointly, or to each of them separately. A provision in the surrender instrument explicitly naming the three powers as joint recipients would have the advantage of binding the three Governments to act jointly in the post-surrender treatment of Germany, and would help to avoid the confusions and suspicions which would arise if each had the right to deal separately with the defeated enemy. The disadvantage of vesting these powers in all three Governments jointly is that no one of them would, in theory at least, be allowed to act unless all three Governments were in agreement. On balance, however, the likelihood of bringing about a policy of uniform action towards Germany would be improved by vesting power over Germany in the three Governments jointly, and this alternative is consequently recommended.

The rights and powers accruing from the surrender of Germany are to be acquired and exercised jointly by the aforesaid powers in the interests of the United Nations.

B. Occupation

1. Administrative Machinery.—Since the main responsibility for the occupation of Germany must rest with the United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union, a basic problem arises as to how the interests and policies of the three powers are to be coordinated. The choice of a form of administrative machinery appears to lie between (a) a unified tripartite system, (b) a completely separate and independent administration in each of three zones, and (c) an intermediate arrangement.

Uniformity of procedure throughout Germany would be most easily obtained, and undue exercise of influence by any one of the occupation authorities would be most effectively forestalled, if there were a smoothly working unified tripartite control. Linguistic and other difficulties, however, appear to argue for separate zones to be administered by each of the three armies of occupation. Such an arrangement, while avoiding local friction, would pose the problems of uniform security measures and general coordination of policy in the treatment of Germany as a whole. A strict application of the second alternative, by suddenly breaking the normal unity of the land, might easily lead to economic and social catastrophe. If prolonged prostration is to be avoided, the essential administrative functions and economic processes now operated on a national basis will need to be left intact and a high degree of uniformity maintained in the administration of any separate zones that may be established.

This Government has recommended the creation of a tripartite civil affairs agency for Germany to coordinate the military government of the proposed three zones of occupation. This plan emphasizes the consultative and advisory role of the tripartite board and the reservation of full administrative powers to the commander of each zone acting under direction of his own military superior. A British plan, questioning the adequacy of a purely advisory agency for coping with the highly unified administration of so many aspects of German life, proposes the establishment of a tripartite administrative board possessing the authority, within the limits of the agreement of the three Governments, to direct the application of approved policies to Germany as a whole. This proposal would limit the duty of the zonal commanders primarily to that of enforcing the administrative regulations of the central tripartite organ.

The American plan, approved by the Department of State and presented to the European Advisory Commission, is general in character. Further clarification as to whether the tripartite agency should be primarily consultative or should constitute a genuine joint administrative authority will be needed.

It is recommended that this Government favor the establishment of a tripartite organization with authority to direct the uniform administration of the whole of Germany.

2. The Delimitation and Allocation of Zones.—It is recommended that, in case three zones of occupation are established, this Government accept the boundaries proposed by the British and Soviet Governments.

This recommendation is made on the grounds that (a) a tripartite governing machinery for the whole of Germany, in which the three powers would be equal partners, would tend to minimize the significance of the exact location of zonal boundary lines, (b) an arrangement which would make each zone contiguous to Berlin is not feasible because of the location of the capital.

A further problem is presented by the allocation of the zones. The plans hitherto advanced agree in assigning the eastern zone to Soviet command. The British and Soviet proposals assign the northwestern zone to British command and the southern to American control. The President has stated, however, that, because of convenience of access, American troops should control the northwestern zone.

3. Military Government and Subsequent Method of Control.—At the time of post-surrender occupation the victors may either (a) set up a direct military government which would supplant the German political authorities while using more or less fully the administrative machinery, or (b) govern Germany by means of directives to a central political regime.

Although a final decision should be made only after future developments are assessed, it is tentatively recommended that this Government favor the first alternative. Direct military government will probably be necessary because of prospective internal confusion and would, in any case, be an effective means of impressing the totality of defeat on the German mentality. If a quasi-Nazi or military group should be in power at the time of surrender, it would be desirable to have that regime bear the onus of admitting defeat and of executing the orders of the occupation forces, but the procedure would entail the political limitation of dealing with a regime repugnant to the peoples of the victor states. If a group of moderates should gain control of Germany, there might be advantages administratively in working through it. Such a method, however, would have a very heavy disadvantage of exposing the moderates to the charge of being the tools of the allied powers. The moderates would have a better chance of survival in the court of popular German opinion if they came into power as the successors and supplanters of direct military government than as its instrument.

On the assumption of the probability of direct military government, it is further recommended that, as soon as military considerations cease to be paramount, the control of Germany should be transferred to an inter-allied civilian agency.

The importance of strictly military dispositions will tend to recede when the German forces have been disarmed and order is established under allied military occupation. Progressively from the time of surrender, consequently, the major concern of the victors will be the inauguration of political and economic reforms within Germany looking to the uprooting of National Socialism and the eventual integration of Germany into the organized community of nations. It is believed that these functions are more logically the work of the civilian authorities of the Governments concerned and can more effectively be performed by them. This recommendation does not envisage the termination of military occupation at the time of the transfer of authority to the civilian agency, but merely the subordination of the military to the civilian.

The point at which civilian control should supplant the military cannot be determined now, but it is recommended that in principle the change be made as soon as the maintenance of orderly conditions in Germany is assured.

4. Participation of the Smaller United Nations in the Control of Germany.—The primary military responsibility of the three principal United Nations requires that they make the basic decisions regarding the treatment of Germany in the transitional period and bear the principal burden of enforcing them. At the same time the smaller United Nations in Europe have a vital interest in what is done to Germany as well as in future international organization. Questions therefore have arisen as to their participation in (a) the formulation of surrender terms, (b) the military occupation of Germany, (c) the joint military governmental body, and (d) the proposed civilian control agency.

The first question has been resolved by the offer of the European Advisory Commission to receive their proposals. The others remain unanswered. While it is impossible here to present a comprehensive program for the future, it is recommended that this Government favor the principle of the fullest participation of the smaller United Nations compatible with the major military responsibility of the three Great Powers. Some positive role for the smaller nations, although making decision a more cumbersome process, would help to forestall the formation of a bloc of the lesser states and the appearance of disruptive political maneuvers. It would likewise establish a pattern of cooperation looking forward to international organization.

5. Relation of Machinery for Control of Germany with Machinery for European Reconstruction.—The security political and economic dispositions relating to Germany affect in so many vital respects the general problem of the reconstruction of Europe that the British Government has raised a question as to the advisability of creating some kind of inter-allied body for coordinating policies and actions with respect to Europe as a whole.

Under such a plan an Allied Commission, or a similar body, for control of Germany would report to and receive directives from a European Council or similar body which would coordinate policies relating to Germany with those which affect Europe as a whole. In the absence of such an agency, the various governments and their intergovernmental agencies, such as those relating to economic disarmament, collection and allocation of reparation, regulation of property rights, and revival of international trade, may find themselves working at cross purposes. On the other hand, in view of the risk that the operations of such a regional organization might tend to jeopardize the willingness of the various countries to cooperate in the early establishment of a general international organization, this Government has hitherto tended to discourage establishment of such a European body.

6. Security Functions during Occupation.—The following problems, among others, will require immediate action by the occupation authorities:

a. Demobilization of German armed forces.—Immediately upon the acceptance of Germany’s surrender, the allies will be confronted with the problem of dealing with several million German soldiers. The alternative solutions will be (1) demobilization and disbandment carried out as expeditiously as considerations of internal order and, in so far as feasible, the absorptive capacity of German economy will allow, (2) a retention of the troops in their formations under some form of direct control, either to be held in restraint for security reasons or used for labor service until such time as their release will be expedient.

It is recommended that this Government favor in principle the first alternative because of the problems of control and maintenance involved in keeping so many troops in confinement. This recommendation would not exclude the use of Waffen SS and other Nazi military formations in performing labor service for the needs of European reconstruction but would oppose the use in labor service for an indefinite period of large numbers of Army units.

Further study is to be made of the problem of the employment of forced German labor in reconstruction work outside of Germany.

b. Disarmament and the disposition of surrendered German arms and military equipment.—It is recommended that German arms, ammunition and instruments of war be scrapped in so far as they are not wanted for use in the war against Japan or adaptable to peaceful uses.

Total and lasting disarmament of Germany is a formal commitment of the United States Government. Among the proposals for the disposition of German arms, ammunition and implements of war are (1) that they be given to the states overrun by Germany and (2) that they be scrapped in so far as they are not capable of conversion to peaceful purposes. While the first alternative might give Germany’s neighbors a temporary sense of added security, the measure is fraught with dangers. The rearming of European nations with surrendered German war matériel would complicate the problem of restoring political stability, render future disarmament more difficult, tend to make the countries concerned look to Germany for spare parts and replacements, and might inaugurate an armaments race detrimental to international peace and security.

Further study is to be made of the post-surrender disposition of German armaments.

c. Dissolution of military and para-military agencies.—It is recommended that, except for a civil police force adequate to maintain order, the occupation authorities proceed to the immediate dissolution of the army, the General Staff, party military and quasi-military organizations, reserve corps, military academies and military training, the administrative agencies performing military functions, together with all clubs and associations which serve to keep alive the military tradition. All such organizations should be permanently prohibited.

d. Immediate measures for the control of German war potential.—The essential first steps in the control of German war potential involve (1) the immediate cessation of the manufacture of war materiel and prohibition of resumption except in so far as it may be desired to make a limited use of German industrial capacity in the prosecution of the war against Japan, (2) the establishment of controls over industrial production, importation, and other economic activities, and (3) the dismantling of industrial machinery and plants not convertible to peace-time production or presenting an insuperable security problem. Likewise, the occupation authorities should proceed to the early inauguration of reforms designed to eliminate a policy of German autarchy and to integrate Germany into the world economy by increasing its dependence on foreign trade.

C. Political Dispositions

1. Use of German Agencies and Personnel during Military Government.—To the end that civilian life continue as smoothly as possible, it is recommended that the occupation authorities make maximum use of German administrative machinery in so far as it can serve the purposes of the occupation authorities and does not perpetuate Nazi control and abuses, and use of non-Nazi civil servants in so far as they are efficient and politically acceptable to the occupation authorities.

2. Treatment of National Socialist Party and Party Members.—The first act in the fulfillment of the commitment to eliminate National Socialism should be the abolition of the Party and the impounding of its assets and records. The numerous affiliated and supervised organizations should be dissolved promptly, although certain social services now performed by them should be transferred to state organs or to newly established voluntary associations.

It is recommended that the occupation authorities impose political and other restrictions on the categories of the more important leaders, both national and local, rather than on the whole membership of the Party. Theoretically the Party has probably more than 5 million members, about 2 million of whom are considered as “leaders”. To impose comprehensive disabilities upon all Party members would involve undertaking an enormous administrative task and giving the same treatment to the active and incorrigible nucleus of leadership as to a great mass of passive, and by then presumably disillusioned, followers. The punishment of war criminals will in itself serve to exclude a certain number of important Nazis. It consequently seems desirable to favor the exclusion from government office and from enjoyment of political rights of certain broad categories of Nazis, rather then of all nominal members of the Party. Careful attention will have to be given to the elimination of convinced Nazis and other politically objectionable elements from education, journalism, and from control of industrial and financial enterprises.

3. Political Activity and Association.—Upon the establishment of military government, the uncertainties of the first days will probably require a complete ban on political agitation and on the activities of political associations. Commitments require the lasting suppression of parties assuming the trappings of quasi-military organizations or espousing National Socialist ideals.

It is recommended, however, that as soon as military conditions permit, parties opposing Nazi and other kinds of ultra-nationalist ideology be permitted to organize and appeal for support. This recommendation is based on the conviction that the German people will need information, organization and public debate before they are prepared to decide their future form of government and that there is advantage in beginning these activities while National Socialism is under the immediate impact of defeat.

D. Economic Dispositions

1. The Prevention of Collapse.—A major concern of the victors at the time of occupation will of necessity be the prevention of an economic collapse or the revival of economic activity if a collapse has already occurred. A memorandum, which has been presented to the Committee on Post-War Programs (PWC–72a),45 has outlined a series of measures which appear essential to that end; they include the maintenance and strengthening of the existing machinery for price and credit control, for distribution of food and other civilian supplies, for the control of labor, for the allocation of raw materials and capital in the interest of maintaining production, and for reviving essential foreign trade.

2. Exchange Rate.—The rate of the mark for international transactions will need to be fixed with a view to both economic and political conditions, first consideration being given to stimulating confidence in the value of the currency. A rate which avoids undervaluation will be desirable in facilitating the best possible support for internal and external commerce.

3. Reparation.—The problem of reparation has been the subject of a separate report by the Committee on Reparation, Restitution and Property Eights (PWC–223, 224, 225, 226).46

4. Economic Reorganization.—While the immediate economic objective upon occupation is the prevention of collapse, the victor powers can hardly avoid dealing with many of the basic problems of the German economy. Among those problems are: creation of organizations designed to promote the unification of European transport and power and communication facilities; the prohibition or regulation of enduring international agreements between private firms; the breakup of the large landed estates; the reduction of over-concentration of financial and industrial control; the revival of international commerce by the reduction of trade barriers; the eventual development of multilateral trade and elimination of uneconomical enterprises developed under the banner of autarchy; finally, the definitive determination of the most effective means for the control of Germany’s economic war potential.

E. Establishment of Permanent Government

The establishment of military government over Germany will give the victors an opportunity to observe the new political conditions which may emerge before making a final decision with respect to a permanent German Government. Certain issues, however, merit consideration at this time.

1. Termination of Allied Government.—It is recommended that this Government favor the policy of terminating direct administration of the German governmental structure, whether by military or civilian agencies, as soon as prospects of order and the possibility of establishing an acceptable and competent German Government make its termination feasible. This recommendation would not affect the continued military occupation of Germany or the exercise of controls, by direct intervention if necessary, on the part of inter-allied agencies.

The duration of direct control, either military or civilian, will depend, among other things, on the continued need for order, on an assessment of the psychological effect of occupation government, and on an estimate of how ready the Germans are to organize a government. It may be anticipated that the major result of military government on German mentality will be achieved within a few months at the most. As they recover from the shock, the people may become progressively resentful over the delay in reviving their political activity, and friction would work to the advantage of the nationalistic elements. It is equally important, however, that the people should not give their decisive votes before an adequate period of public discussion has clarified the issues.

(2) Procedures for Restoration of Permanent Government.—There are three general alternatives of procedure: (1) restoration of the pre-Hitler Weimar constitution; (2) the convocation of a new constituent assembly; and (3) progressive extension of self-government from local units through the states to the federal Reich as the success of each step seemed assured. The principle of continuity would be observed by returning to the original Weimar text. Yet that document, while a good rational product, was not an organic part of German life, and it is doubtful if the mass of Germans would wish to go back to it. A new constitution drawn up after a decade of political sterility, however, might not prove a much more effect the instrument. Fear has been expressed that an election for a constituent assembly as the first political experience of the German people would revive the old bankrupt political parties and focus all political attention on the central government to the detriment of healthy local and provincial political life. The third alternative, by reviving free local self-government, would provide a transition period in which the German people could develop new leaders and gain experience in democratic practice, central governmental functions being carried on meanwhile by civil servants under allied control.

If there is a period of direct military government, it is recommended that democratic self-government be established in local communities as soon as military necessities permit. Decision as to when the next step should be taken could profitably be made in consultation with responsible local leaders.

3. The Exercise of External Influence.—In fidelity to their commitment to uproot National Socialism, the victor powers will need to intervene in the process of reconstructing government to the extent of denying political rights to those categories of Nazis adjudged dangerous. An attempt positively to influence political decisions of the German people might be successful if the intervention were the joint work of the major powers, but in the course of time [the] habit of intervention, if developed, would probably outlive joint action, and, if so, Germany would become the hunting ground of competing influences and would be able to play off one rival against another, with disastrous consequences for any system of controls and for the peace.

These considerations point to the desirability of limiting positive influence to the encouragement of popular self-government and not attempting to determine precisely the forms of government to be established. At the same time, however, it is a dictate of security that the victor powers, and after them the international organization, should reserve the right, and be prepared, to intervene in Germany to prevent the re-emergence of dangerous nationalistic activities and to hold Germany to the observance of the obligations imposed by the peace settlement and by the post-war security system.

Original draft (CAC–143b) prepared and reviewed by the Inter-Divisional Committee on Germany.

Reviewed and revised by the Committee on Post-War Programs at meetings of May 11, 12, 18, 19, 25, 31.

[Annex 3]

Memorandum by the Division of Central European Affairs

[Washington,] August 22, 1944.

Status of Negotiations and Discussions on Germany

negotiations in the e.a.c.

The European Advisory Commission, after six months of discussions, has formally recommended the surrender terms for Germany to the Governments of the U.S., the U.K. and the U.S.S.R. The American Government has notified Ambassador Winant of its formal approval of these terms. Approval by the U.K. and the U.S.S.R. is expected momentarily.

Attached to the recommendation of the Commission is a letter to the European United Nations inviting their views in writing on the question of the surrender of Germany. To date, we are not informed of what views have been submitted to the Commission.

Before the Commission at present are three other important matters: (a) the protocol on the occupation of Germany, (b) the protocol on the occupation of Austria,47 and (c) proposals for control machinery and military government in Germany.

With respect to the occupation of Germany, the boundaries of the three zones of occupation have been provisionally agreed upon, but the question of whether British or American troops will occupy the northwestern or southern zone is still undecided. The President has indicated he desires the American forces to occupy the northwestern zone and my information is to the effect that he is still awaiting Churchill’s agreement on this point. Acting on the authority of the President, Ambassador Winant has agreed to a tripartite occupation of Austria but the protocol on this has not as yet been formally recommended by the EAC.

With respect to control machinery for Germany, British and American proposals have been before the EAC for some months. The American proposal envisages a Supreme Authority consisting of the three Commanders-in-Chief and advised by a Control Council which would be established on a functional basis, (political, economic, military, transport, etc. sections).

Under this proposal the separate American, British and Soviet zonal administrations would retain their identity and operate separately in their respective zones. The policies pursued in the zones would be coordinated by the Control Council in Berlin, which would make recommendations on all policies to be executed throughout Germany.

The British have submitted a somewhat similar proposal, which has likewise been before the EAC for some months. The Russians have not submitted any proposal on control machinery and have recently indicated that they are unwilling to discuss any further questions in the EAC until the dispute between the British and Americans over their respective zones of occupation has been settled.

discussions in washington on treatment of germany

The Department has prepared, and the Committee on Post-War Programs has approved, a basic policy statement entitled “Treatment of Germany” to which is attached a summary of policy recommendations. This report was submitted to the Joint Chiefs of Staff about a month ago through the Working Security Committee. The JCS, however, have not as yet made known their approval to this document or the comments thereon. It is envisaged that as soon as the JCS have acted on it that it will be submitted to the President and, if he approves, will be transmitted to London for the guidance of Ambassador Winant in his negotiations on the EAC. A similar paper on Austria48 has been approved by the President and transmitted to Ambassador Winant.

In addition to the foregoing, a basic report on economic policy towards Germany49 and on reparations50 has been prepared in the Department and has been cleared by the Executive Committee on Foreign Economic Policy. These will be submitted to the Secretary in the near future with a suggestion as to how they should be taken up with the military authorities.

A vast amount of material has been prepared in the Department on a variety of problems which will arise from the occupation of Germany but it has not yet been approved. These papers cover a variety of subjects, of which a few are set forth below for the purpose of illustration: Abrogation of Nazi Laws

Disposition of Nazi Organizations

Displaced Persons

Control of Political Activities

Supervision of Education

Use of German Officials in Administration

Control of Communications

Control of Industry Potential for War

Disposition of Merchant Shipping, etc.

The Working Security Committee has now drafted a paper entitled “Statement of General Policies to be Followed in the Administration of Germany”.51 This report will lay down the general policies to be agreed upon by the U.S., the U.K. and the U.S.S.R. on most important matters requiring agreement by the three powers for the administration of Germany after occupation. It is based upon the assumption that agreement will be reached on zones of occupation and control machinery.

It is anticipated that this paper will be submitted to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for their approval. If this approval is given, it will be possible for the Department to send to London a vast amount of detailed information respecting the policies to be applied in Germany after occupation.

discussions with the british in London

The British authorities have prepared and submitted to the EAC a number of directives covering policies to be followed in Germany upon occupation. In general, they cover much the same subjects as those which have been prepared in Washington and which are briefly described in the preceding paragraph. On a number of them, our views are not very different from those submitted by the British, but a certain amount of negotiation will no doubt be necessary before complete agreement is reached on all directives submitted by them.

In addition, Ambassador Winant’s Planning Group has likewise drafted a number of directives for consideration by the American authorities. The Working Security Committee is prepared to correlate the various statements that have been prepared as soon as the military members have received authority from the Joint Chiefs of Staff to operate under the statement of general policies described above.

conclusion

The slowness in arriving at agreed policies on the treatment of Germany has resulted primarily from the unwillingness of the Russians to discuss the control machinery proposal until the zones of occupation are definitely decided. Without agreement on control machinery, it is difficult for the Department to make any real progress on the detailed planning. We have attempted through the Ambassador at Moscow to get the Russians to continue discussions, but without success to date.

[For documentation regarding the discussion within the executive branch of the Government during the months of September, October, and November 1944 of United States political and economic policies toward a defeated Germany, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, 1945, pages 134–197, and the records of the Second Quebec Conference which are scheduled for publication in a subsequent volume of Foreign Relations. See also The Memoirs of Cordell Hull, volume II, pages 1602–1622; Henry L. Stimson and McGeorge Bundy, On Active Service in Peace and War (Harper and Brothers, New York, 1947, 1948), pages 568–583; and Henry Morgenthau, Jr., Germany Is Our Problem (Harper and Brothers, New York, 1945).]

38 Not signed, but a handwritten marginal note reads: “Left with the President by the Secretary.”

39 In a memorandum dated July 22, p. 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133].

40 Filed separately under Lot 55 D–375, WS Document, vol. vii. When included in the documentation of the Working Security Committee, this memorandum carried the added designation of WS–220, July 21, 1944.

41 Military formations of the Schutzstaffel (Nazi Black Guards).

42 Designation for documents emanating from Department of State country and area committees on postwar policy research.

43 Filed separately under Lot 122 (Rev.) S/S–S, Box 13140.

44 Although originating in the Committee on Post-War Programs, this memorandum was later taken up in the Executive Committee on Foreign Economic Policy. In its final revised form it was identified as ECEFP D–36/44, August 14. For text, see p. 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 151].

45 Not printed.

46 Following consideration in the Executive Committee on Foreign Economic Policy, the final revised version of the report was prepared as a memorandum entitled: “Summary: Report on Reparation, Restitution, and Property Rights—Germany”, ECEFP D–37/44, August 12. For text, see p. 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 151].

47 For correspondence regarding the tripartite negotiations in the European Advisory Commission concerning the occupation and military government of Austria, see pp. 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228] ff.

48 For text of the document entitled “The Treatment of Austria”, see p. 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 231].

49  Ante, p. 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 151].

50  Ante, p. 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 151].

51 For text of the final, revised form of this paper, see p. 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/9–144: Telegram

[Document 155]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 1, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received September 1—7:25 p.m.]

7138. Comea 79. This afternoon Sir William Strang called on me and left a letter dated August 31 stating the British position on acceptance of the draft instrument of unconditional surrender of Germany. The delay in making reply to the recommendations of the European Advisory Commission, I know was due to their consulting with the Dominion Governments.

After reading the letter, I told Strang that as I understood it, the British acceptance of the text was a conditional acceptance. Strang argued that in paragraph 2 of the letter (paragraph 1 of my paraphrase), there was an acceptance of the terms but that from the British point of view, they still might be subject to amendment after consideration of the views expressed by the other Allied Governments. I also asked him what was meant by the phrase in paragraph (d) “without prejudice to France’s special position”. Strang told me that that was intended to put France in a more favored position and that his Government was going to support the claims advanced by the French in their reply of August 2252 to my letter of July 2553 as reported in my telegram 6953, August 26, 7 p.m. (Comea 77)54 and my despatch 17762, August 29,55 Paraphrase of Strang’s letter of August 31 follows omitting introductory first paragraph:56 1. United Kingdom Government approve draft instrument and assent to understanding with respect to article 2 (b) as recommended in section 2 of Commission’s report.

2. United Kingdom Government wish to make their approval of the draft terms subject to an understanding along following lines: (a) Instrument to be open to reconsideration as a result of replies made by European Allied authorities or Governments to EAC chairman’s letter of July 25;

(b) Instrument’s text to be communicated at earliest convenient date to United Nations Governments principally concerned, latter to be invited to concur in the terms and to authorize representatives of the three powers’ Supreme Commands to accept Germany’s unconditional surrender on their behalf; the other United Nations Governments to be informed regarding the terms at appropriate moment prior to Germany’s surrender;

(c) With respect to the exercise of the powers provided for under article 12 of surrender instrument, the three Governments to make appropriate provision for consulting with other members of United Nations as occasion requires.

(d) The above to be without prejudice to France’s special position. (End paraphrase.)

Winant

52 For text of the letter of August 22, from the Chargé of the Delegation of the French Committee of National Liberation in London to the American Ambassador in the United Kingdom, see p. 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56].

53 See the European Advisory Commission’s letter of July 25 inviting nine interested European Allied countries to submit written comments on surrender terms for Germany, p. 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44].

54 Not printed; it transmitted a summary of the letter of August 22 cited in footnote 52, above.

55 Not printed.

56 The complete text of this letter was transmitted to the Department by Ambassador Winant in his despatch 17832, September 2; neither printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00113 E.W./8–2644: Telegram

[Document 156]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)57

Washington, September 5, 1944—midnight.

7191. Re Embassy’s 6946 August 26, 6 p.m.58 In connection with Penrose’s59 talks with Coulson60 it seems desirable that the initiative on the question of discussions with the British and Soviets should come from some source other than the United States. Accordingly it is felt that you should not press further for an early conference but wait for such a suggestion to come from the British or some other government. This is not intended to alter any of the views expressed in the Department’s 6485 of August 16, and you should, in your talks, be guided by that cable in all other respects.

The Department is agreeable to dealing immediately with problems of restitution of identifiable objects as proposed by the British.

Regarding economic security, a memorandum61 outlining the Department’s general position on the subject has been approved by the Executive Committee on Economic Foreign Policy and is now to be discussed with War and Navy Departments. This document will be sent to you as soon as at least tentative agreement is reached.

Hull

57 Repeated as telegram 2136, September 5, 7 p.m., to Moscow.

58 Not printed; it reviewed some of the general views of British Foreign Office officials on the matter of reparations and asked for information regarding the position of the Department’s work on economic security (740.00113 EW/8–2644).

59 Ernest F. Penrose, Adviser and Special Assistant to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom.

60 John Eltringham Coulson, Acting First Secretary of the British Foreign Office, Acting Head of the Economic Relations Department.

61 Dated August 14, p. 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 151].

The Political Adviser to the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Mosely) to the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/9–544

[Document 157]

The Political Adviser to the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Mosely) to the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger)

[Extract]

London, September 5, 1944.

Dear Jimmie:

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

At present Control Machinery has been hanging fire for ten days, with no meetings. It is hard for us to judge exactly what is holding it up, although it may be the Polish matter.62 I think the Russian paper on Control Machinery63 is a promising one, although Wickersham seems to be much displeased at its failure to spell out the various sections under the Control Council. I shall let you know a little later about the extent to which my return should be influenced by the treatment of the question of Control Machinery. Meanwhile we might as well sit tight, especially as I have been able to help out quite a bit on the Bulgarian matter64 and the Hungarian65 may also be coming along.

I hope you will let us have some proposals or comments on Control Machinery for Austria. Having the British paper,66 you have all that we have on it. I hope the Department will consider carefully the question of disposition of German transport aircraft. There is no use putting forward an untenable claim, and one which looks completely selfish. I hope the JCS will clear the paper on “Principles of Military Government in Germany”,67 for I think it would be a very useful paper to put before the EAC or at least to have for our guidance in negotiation.…

Unless we can get some papers through the JCS our situation here is going to be desperate. As it is SHAEF has to go ahead planning for the first two months of joint Anglo-American occupation without any agreed tripartite policy to base its work on. One of these days we shall have to agree on a lot of policies with regard to Germany, and unless we can have some papers approved by the JCS we shall be in a position of merely commenting on the carefully prepared British papers or of charging with a feather duster at the carefully prepared but less elaborate Russian statements of policy. I am sure you are doing everything possible, but I think Jimmie68 and Doc69 ought to be reminded continually of the danger of a breakdown of tripartite understanding with respect to Germany if our EAC Delegation here cannot be provided in advance with statements of US Government policy. After all tripartite policy with regard to Germany is the real touchstone of Allied post-war cooperation. As far as the Russians express themselves their views fit in very well with ours, and I think the more we can show our policy to them the better we will get along. So far we are unable to show them anything except our WS–15c on Control Machinery,70 and the Russians are quite rightly more interested in policy than in machinery for its own sake. It was for this reason that I suggested to the Ambassador that it might be valuable to propose having reparation discussions in Moscow. By this flank attack we might work out some basic features of our economic policy toward Germany on the Russians’ home ground and thereby facilitate progress in the EAC work.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

With every best wish,
As ever,

Phil Mosely

62 For correspondence regarding the interest of the United States in the Polish Government in Exile, and in its relations with the Soviet Union, see vol. iii, pp. 1216 ff.

63  Ante, p. 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152].

64 For correspondence regarding the Allied armistice with Bulgaria, see vol. iii, pp. 300 ff.

65 For correspondence regarding the Allied armistice with Hungary, see ibid., pp. 847 ff.

66  Post, p. 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 238].

67  Ante, p. 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 129].

68 James C. Dunn, Director of the Office of European Affairs.

69 H. Freeman Matthews, Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs.

70  Ante, p. 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 98].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/9–1044: Telegram

[Document 158]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 10, 1944—3 p.m.
[Received September 10—12:30 p.m.]

7433. Comea 82. Reference “proclamations and general orders” forwarded in my despatch 17220, August 171 and circulated as JCS 291.71a Last April UK delegation on EAC agreed to short surrender instrument with understanding that subject matter in their 70-paragraph document (see EAC) 44 (1)72 not included in short form surrender instrument would in large measure be covered by proclamations and orders. Both the Russians and ourselves agreed in principle to this. Accordingly US draft proclamations and general orders follow in outline UK 70–paragraph document, and also include all provisions of US 27-paragraph document (see EAC) 44 (4)73 and Soviet surrender terms (see EAC) 44 (9)74 not covered in final surrender instrument. Copies of US drafts have been submitted informally to UK and Soviet delegations.

There is no difference between first two US and UK proclamations. Proclamation No. 3 submitted by UK dissolves National Socialist Party. It is very brief and we feel can be accepted without question.

General orders: UK submitted one general order, and US submitted three, covering military, political and economic matters. Main difference between single British general order and three US general orders is that British omitted some military features, thus abbreviating subject matter of their general order as compared to US general orders. My political and military advisers have reviewed and compared US and UK drafts of proclamations and general orders. They believe that most of military subjects are either already incorporated in surrender instrument or may more properly appear in “special orders” to be issued by supreme authority and zone commanders. They believe we could omit numerous subjects appearing in our General Order 1, these subjects to be covered elsewhere. We hope British will agree to insertion of certain general provisions taken from US General Order 1 and also from other two US general orders, to be added to their UK general order.

This study has served to clarify similarities and differences and should expedite business in EAC when matter of general orders and proclamations is discussed. Unless we receive directions from Washington there is no intention of US in London to rewrite proclamations and general orders in advance of EAC discussion. We believe this would be a mistake because of our consistent tripartite approach to all problems before EAC.

Time is critical and SHAEF urgently needs proclamations and general orders. Also as documents have been informally submitted to Soviet delegation as well as to UK presentation of detailed changes at this late period will complicate work of translation and will further delay attaining agreement.

In view of urgency of rapid review in Washington and of early presentation here, I hope our authorities in Washington will avoid detailed rewriting of proclamations and general orders and will provide us at earliest possible moment with comments and suggestions concerning the substance of the policies set forth therein.

Please provide copies of this message to General Hilldring and General Strong.75

Winant

[On September 12, 1944, the representatives of the United States the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union on the European Advisory Commission in London signed the Protocol on the Zones of Occupation in Germany and the Administration of Greater Berlin. For text, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, 1945, page 118, or Department of State, Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS) 3071, printed in Department of State, United States Treaties and Other International Agreements, volume 5, part 2 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1956), page 2078.]

71 Not printed.

71a Reference is to JCS Memorandum for Information No. 291.

72  Ante, p. 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79].

73 See footnote 40, p. 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76].

74 See footnote 1, p. 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93].

75 Maj. Gen. George V. Strong, senior Army representative on the Joint Postwar Committee of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00113 EW/9–1644: Telegram

[Document 159]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 16, 1944—3 p.m.
[Received September 16—11:22 a.m.]

7634. See our 6946, August 26, 6 p.m.,76 and previous. Hall-Patch77 informed us today that ministerial approval had been given for exploratory talks on reparations to take place on an “official” level, as distinct from ministerial level.

In giving us this information Hall-Patch explained that in the British view reparations could not be considered singly but that it was the British desire in these talks to cover the whole field of economic security along with reparations.

If we asked to hold these talks in Moscow, Hall-Patch continued, the British were prepared to support us, even though the sending of a British delegation from here would handicap the interested ministries. He added that if it should be decided to hold these exploratory talks in Moscow, the British would still want to see these talks take place under the aegis of the EAC. This, he said, might be done through the appointment of a sub-committee of the EAC.

Hall-Patch expressed a hope that these talks could be initiated as soon as possible.

We were also told by Hall-Patch that plans were now being prepared by the British for setting up machinery for dealing with the restitution of identifiable objects, the feeling being that this could and should be done without waiting for the exploratory talks on reparations to begin.

Winant

76 See footnote 58, p. 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156].

77 Leo Edmund Hall-Patch, Assistant Under Secretary of State in the British Foreign Office, Economic Relations Department.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 E.A.C./9–1644

[Document 160]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

No. 4538 Washington, September 16, 1944.

The Secretary of State refers to the Department’s telegram No. 6315, August 10, 3 p.m., Eacom 29, and encloses herewith a copy of the document (WS–254b) described in paragraph (2) thereof. This document is now awaiting action by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In the meantime it is being forwarded to the Ambassador for his guidance in as much as it has been cleared by the Department and represents its views with respect to the principal military and political policies to be followed in the administration of Germany.

Memorandum by the Working Security Committee [Enclosure]78

[Document 161]

Memorandum by the Working Security Committee

WS–254b [Washington,] August 30, 1944.

Military and Political Policies To Be Followed in Administration of Germany

(The following statement of policies is based on the assumption of prior agreement between the United States, the United Kingdom and Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on (a) surrender terms, (b) zones of occupation, and (c) control machinery:) 1. The administration of Germany will be firm but just. The occupation authorities will in particular punish fully and promptly any organization or individual who fails to render satisfactory cooperation with the military government or who fails to comply fully with any proclamations, orders, ordinances or instructions that will be issued.

2. All German armed forces and all German governmental officials, authorities and agents who are outside Germany at the time of surrender shall be returned as soon as practicable to such German territories as may be specified, subject to such arrangements as may be made with the authorities in the areas in which they are located and to such agreements as may be reached between the United States, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

3. As soon as practicable the Supreme Allied Authority shall dissolve the German armed forces and staff organizations, Nazi military, para-military and police organizations, reserve corps, military academies, the administrative agencies performing military functions, and all clubs and associations which serve to keep alive the military spirit. All such organizations shall be prohibited. The members of all such organizations shall be demobilized and disbanded as soon as practicable except that the respective commanding generals may retain any members of such organizations under their control for such purposes as may be authorized by the Supreme Allied Authority. All military training shall be forbidden and no secret organizations or societies shall be permitted. German civil police forces adequate to maintain order may be permitted.

4. All property acquired or coming under Allied control as a result of German defeat or surrender, including German resources in the respective zones of occupation, shall be disposed of only in accordance with principles established by the Supreme Allied Authority.

5. Prompt measures should be taken to seize and place under protective custody all important records whether governmental, party or private in character. All enemy information and records thus secured by virtue of the defeat and surrender of Germany will constitute a common pool and will be made available to the United States, United Kingdom and the U.S.S.R. and upon agreement by them to other United Nations without regard to the physical location or custody of such records.

6. All German arms, ammunition and implements of war shall be destroyed or scrapped except as otherwise agreed by the three Powers. All permanent and temporary land and coast fortifications, fortresses, and other fortified areas shall be destroyed.

7. The further manufacture in Germany of arms, ammunition and implements of war shall be prohibited.

8. The National Socialist Party and all organizations associated with it shall be dissolved. Provision may be made for the continuance by public agencies or voluntary associations of any desirable social services now performed by certain of these organizations. The activities of persons who have been active Nazis shall be restricted with a view to destroying their influence in Germany.

9. The key laws and decrees establishing the political structure of National Socialism and implementing its ideology and objectives shall be systematically abrogated.

10. To the extent possible, German administrative machinery and German personnel shall be used for the execution of Allied policies and for the routine administration of Germany. Active Nazis and persons suspected of being war criminals or otherwise unreliable shall not be employed in German administrative agencies.

11. Political activity shall be prohibited except as authorized by the Supreme Allied Authority. When considerations of military security permit, parties opposing Nazi and kindred ideologies shall be allowed to organize and appeal for popular support.

12. Subject to considerations of military security the Supreme Allied Authority shall authorize the formation of voluntary labor organizations possessing the rights of association and of collective bargaining.

13. The Supreme Allied Authority shall suspend all German laws discriminating against persons on grounds of race, color, creed or political opinion and shall take action necessary to annul such laws. In the absence of security objection persons detained under any such laws shall be released.

14. To the extent consistent with military security and the destruction of National Socialism freedom of speech and press and freedom of religious activity shall be permitted.

15. All information services (press, radio, cinema, etc.) and all channels of communication shall be administered under policies formulated by the Supreme Allied Authority and shall be subject to such censorship as will: insure against further dissemination of Nazi propaganda,

facilitate the revival of free expression so far as consistent with security needs and the destruction of National Socialism, and

implement other policies of the Supreme Allied Authority.

16. The following shall be arrested and held for investigation and subsequent disposition: (a) Adolf Hitler and his chief Nazi associates,

(b) the officials who have held ministerial and other important governmental positions under the Nazi regime,

(c) comparable officials of other governments which have been at war with any of the United Nations,

(d) persons suspected of having committed war crimes,

(e) nationals of any of the United Nations or associated states alleged to have committed offenses against their national laws, and

(f) any other persons designated by the United States, the United Kingdom or the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

17. Schools shall be re-opened as speedily as military considerations permit and as material and personnel requirements can be met. The entire educational system shall operate under the supervision of the Supreme Allied Authority with the fullest possible utilization of reliable German administrators and teachers. Active Nazis shall be removed from the staffs and all Nazi and kindred influences eliminated from the curricula. Positive educational reconstruction shall be left to competent and politically trustworthy German leadership.

18. The administration of justice by civilian courts shall be reestablished as speedily as will be compatible with the elimination of active Nazi personnel and replacement by qualified non-Nazis. Special party-created tribunals shall be abolished.

19. All possible aid consistent with the means at hand will be rendered to Allied prisoners of war, including those persons who have been deprived of this status involuntarily, to the end that their safety and well being is not jeopardized by the collapse of Germany, and such prisoners of war will be repatriated as soon as practicable upon the cessation of hostilities. The repatriation of prisoners of war will have priority over the repatriation of other displaced persons. No priority with respect to repatriation should be established in advance by which the prisoners of any nation or nations will be favored. The time and order in which prisoners will be repatriated must be determined in the light of the situation existing after the collapse of Germany.

20. Movement of all persons across German frontiers shall be regulated under policies laid down by the Supreme Allied Authority.

21. Relations between Germany and any states still at war with any of the United Nations and associated states shall be broken off. Relations between Germany and any other states shall be carried on to the extent and in the manner determined by the Supreme Allied Authority.

78 Filed separately under Lot 55 D 375, WS Documents Binder IX.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/9–1744: Telegram

[Document 162]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 17, 1944—9 p.m.
[Received 9:10 p.m.]

7679. Personal to the Secretary. I have received from the Soviet Ambassador a copy of a letter of September 14, (my despatch 18070, September 1679 ) addressed by him to Sir William Strang in reply to the latters August 31 letter (my despatch 17832 September 2;80 my telegram 7138, September 1, 8 p.m. Comea 79) of conditional acceptance of the German surrender instrument.

Translation of second paragraph of Gousev’s reply follows: “Inasmuch as the British Government has accompanied its confirmation of the above-mentioned terms by a series of reservations as set forth in your letter, I must state that the Soviet Government reserves to itself the right, in case important new circumstances appear, likewise to introduce corresponding changes into the terms of unconditional surrender of Germany.”

At the September 15 meeting of the European Advisory Commission, I raised with my colleagues the whole question of the effect of the conditional British and Soviet acceptances upon the status of the surrender instrument and of the further work of the Commission which must be based upon a firm understanding with regard to the surrender terms. I pointed out that by letters of August 9, I had accepted the surrender instrument on behalf of my Government,81 and that the Soviet Ambassador had done the same in letters of August 21 (my telegram 6763, August 21, 8 p.m., Comea 75). The British acceptance of August 31 had been given “subject to an understanding” on four points which went beyond the surrender instrument itself. And now the Soviet letter of September 14 left it open to serious question whether there was any tripartite agreement on the surrender terms themselves. I went on to point out that this left my Government as the only one which had approved the terms without reservation and which was bound by a firm commitment. This, I explained, was a disturbing fact because what applies to the main instrument can also apply to any of the other documents which derive from and are based on it. I went on to say that the value of the EAC lay in the possibility of arriving at agreements between the three Governments, but if every agreement reached was to be approved by the Governments only subject to numerous conditions and reservations the whole question of the utility of the work of the EAC was thereby jeopardized. I concluded by asking my colleagues to raise with their Governments the question of whether the United Kingdom Government could not accept the surrender terms without reservations and whether the Soviet Government might not then join with my Government in accepting the terms as stated in Gousev’s letter of August 21. Both agreed to do this.

That evening I had a long talk with the Soviet Ambassador and I have had several conversations with Strang. Gousev is personally sympathetic to my proposal that both British and Soviet Governments confirm the terms without reservations, but it is not certain whether his Government will withdraw from the position which they have already adopted because of the British letter. I was deeply disturbed by the British letter and warned them at that time of what the Russian reaction would be. When I went to Eden, he told me he would make clear that the stipulations set forth in the August 31 letter should be regarded as desiderata and not as conditions or reservations. The disturbing thing about the Soviet letter of September 14 is that it reserves the right to introduce new provisions into the terms, and not merely to introduce them into the Commission for discussion. If it is impossible to persuade the Soviet Government, which obviously resented greatly the British procedure of presenting reservations in its August 31 letter, to withdraw entirely its letter of September 14, I shall ask you to intervene on behalf of our Government. It seemed best to me to first raise the question in the Commission rather than taking it up on a governmental level. I still hope to get favorable action and will keep you informed.

I thought you personally ought to have this background and a report on the present status of the surrender instrument since so much is bound up with the successful maintenance of fully tripartite policy towards Germany, a policy which, at least potentially has been called into question by the conditions attached first by the British and now by the Russians to their acceptance of the surrender instrument agreed on in the Commission on July 25.

Winant

79 Not printed.

80 See footnote 56, p. 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 155].

81 See bracketed note, p. 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/9–2044: Telegram

[Document 163]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, September 20, 1944—7 p.m.

7670. Eacom 32. The President and the Prime Minister have approved a memorandum by the Combined Chiefs of Staff with regard to the allocation of the zones of occupation in Germany.83 The text thereof is quoted below for presentation in substance to the European Advisory Commission. (C.C.S. 320/27).

“Upon the collapse of organized resistance by the German Army the following subdivision of that part of Germany not allocated to the Soviet Government for disarmament, policing, and the preservation of order is acceptable from a military point of view by the Combined Chiefs of Staff.

For disarmament, policing and preservation of order: The British forces under a British Commander will occupy Germany west of the Rhine, and east of the Rhine north of the line from Koblenz following the northern border of Hessen and Nassau to the border of the area allocated to the Soviet Government.

The forces of the United States under a United States Commander will occupy Germany east of the Rhine, south of the line Koblenz—northern border of Hessen-Nassau and west of the area allocated to the Soviet Government.

Control of the ports of Bremen and Bremerhaven, and the necessary staging areas in that immediate vicinity will be vested in the Commander of the American Zone.

American area to have in addition access through the western and northwestern sea ports and passage through the British controlled area.

Accurate delineation of the above outlined British and American areas of control can be made at a later date.”

Copies of a map showing the zones will be forwarded as soon as possible.84

Hull

83 President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill conferred at the Second Quebec Conference, September 11–16, 1944. The records of this conference are scheduled for publication in a subsequent volume of Foreign Relations.

84 Map sent as an enclosure to Department’s instruction 4563, September 21, to London (not printed).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 E.A.C./9–2144: Telegram

[Document 164]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 21, 1944—11 p.m.
[Received September 21—8:23 p.m.]

7856. Comea 93. My 7679, September 17, 9 p.m. Today Strang delivered to me and the Soviet Ambassador letters withdrawing the reservations attached in his August 31 letters85 to the United Kingdom approval of the German surrender instrument. Text follows by air.86 I hope that the Soviet Government will now withdraw its reservation set forth in Gousev’s letter of September 14.87 If that is done, I believe that we shall have a much more solid tripartite basis of policy in Germany than if the reservations had been allowed to stand.

Winant

[As an enclosure to instruction 4583, September 27, 1944, the Department transmitted to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom for his information and guidance a “Directive to SCAEF [Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force] Regarding the Military Government of Germany in the Period Immediately Following the Cessation of Organized Resistance (Post-Defeat)”, dated September 22. This directive was prepared by the War and State Departments and concurred in by the Treasury Department. It was included as Enclosure C of Joint Chiefs of Staff document J.C.S. 1067, “Directive for Administration of Post-Defeat Military Government in Germany”, dated September 24, 1944. For texts of the instruction and directive, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, 1945, pages 142, 143.]

85 See telegram 7138, September 1, from London, p. 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 155].

86 Transmitted in despatch 18161, September 22, from London; neither printed.

87 See telegram 7679, September 17, from London, p. 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/9–2944: Telegram

[Document 165]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 29, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received September 29—2:41 p.m.]

8237. Comea 102. This is in answer to Department’s 7892, September 27, midnight.88 After the action of the President and the Prime Minister at Quebec and upon receipt of Department’s 7670 (September 20, 7 p.m. Eacom 32), I took up with Gousev and Strang question of amending the protocol as it relates to the allocation of the northwestern and southwestern zones in Germany. I explained to Gousev that in accepting the southwestern zone for occupation by United States troops, we had asked the British to make certain concessions in order to insure support of our troops from North Sea ports and that we had further simplified the line of division between the United States and British zones. I pointed out to him that these adjustments did not affect the Russian zone of occupation. We plan to discuss formal amendment of the protocol in the European Advisory Commission.

The British Government has drawn up and approved detailed amendments for insertion in the protocol. Strang has asked that I send these proposed amendments to you to get the approval of our Government before formally presenting them in the EAC. The proposed changes are as follows: Under paragraph 2, the Northwestern Zone would be described as follows: “The territory of Germany situated to the west of the line defined above and bounded on the south by a line drawn from the point where the frontier between the Prussian Provinces of Hanover and Hessen Nassau meets the western frontier of the Prussian Province of Saxony; thence along the southern frontier of Hanover; thence along the northwestern, western and southern frontiers of Hessen Nassau to the point where the River Rhine leaves the latter; thence along the center of the navigable channel of the River Rhine to the point where it leaves Hessen Darmstadt; thence along the western frontier of Baden to the point where this frontier becomes the Franco German frontier will be occupied by armed forces of the United Kingdom”.

The Southwestern Zone would be described as follows: “All the remaining territory of western Germany to the south of the lines defined in the descriptions of the Eastern and Northwestern Zones will be occupied by armed forces of the United States.”

The following paragraph would be inserted after the description of the Southwestern Zone: “Nevertheless, for the purpose of facilitating communications between the Southwestern Zone and the sea, the Commander-in-Chief of the forces in the Southwestern zone will: (1) Control the ports of Bremen and Bremerhaven and the necessary staging areas in the immediate vicinity thereof;

(2) Enjoy necessary transit facilities through the Northwestern zone”.

The names of the United Kingdom and United States would be inserted at the conclusion of the descriptions of the northwestern and southern parts of Berlin respectively.

Winant

88 Not printed; it asked whether it was the intention of the European Advisory Commission to draw up a protocol embodying the alterations in the northwestern and southwestern zones of occupation in Germany agreed upon at the Second Quebec Conference (740.00119EAC/9–2744).

The Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/9–2944

[Document 166]

The Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of State

Washington, September 29, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: The Joint Chiefs of Staff have given careful consideration to your memorandum of 22 July 1944 enclosing a policy memorandum and a summary statement on the subject of the Treatment of Germany.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the subject matter of these papers contains important considerations of military interest but that these are so involved with important political considerations as not to be separable into sections. Furthermore, certain portions of these two memoranda are so outmoded by policy decisions made since their preparation as to require over-all revision before forwarding to the United States representative on the European Advisory Commission for his guidance.

In view of this necessity for revision, due to intervening decisions and the involved military considerations, it is suggested that the matter might be handled most expeditiously by assigning the task of reworking the papers to the Working Security Committee on which there is military representation.

Sincerely yours,

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
William D. Leahy ,
Admiral, U.S. Navy,
Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 2057: Matthews Files

[Document 167]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington, September 29, 1944.]88a

The Cabinet Committee has not been able to agree upon a statement of American policy for the post-war treatment of Germany.88b The memorandum presented by the Secretary of the Treasury88c is decidedly at variance with the views developed in the State Department. In the meantime, I have received your memorandum of September 15,88d with the statements of views respecting the Ruhr, Saar, etc., and the conversion of Germany into an agricultural and pastoral country, which was formulated at Quebec. This memorandum seems to reflect largely the opinions of the Secretary of the Treasury in the treatment to be accorded Germany. I feel that I should therefore submit to you the line of thought that has been developing in the State Department on this matter.

1. Status of Negotiations With the British and Russians

The instrument of unconditional surrender of Germany88e has been recommended by the European Advisory Commission and has been formally approved by this Government. It is anticipated that British and Russian approval will be forthcoming. The question of the American and British zones of occupation was, according to your memorandum, worked out at Quebec and there will presumably be no more difficulty over this matter. In the meantime, the European Advisory Commission is going ahead on plans for a tripartite control machinery and military government for Germany during the occupation period. All three governments have submitted proposals which are similar in their general outline. The American proposal contemplates a Supreme Authority consisting of the three Commanding Generals of the U.S., the U.K. and the U.S.S.R., which would coordinate Allied control of Germany and supervise such centralized governmental functions and economic activities as the three powers deem essential. A Control Council, composed of representatives in equal numbers from each of the three Allied Governments, would be established by the Supreme Allied Authority and will coordinate the administration of military government throughout Germany, including detailed planning for the execution of directives received from the three governments. We expect to have a recommended plan on this from the European Advisory Commission in the near future.

2. Important Problems For Which High Policy Decisions Must Be Worked Out by the Three Governments

The fundamental question to be decided is what kind of a Germany we want and what policy should be put into effect during occupation to attain our objectives. The most important of these problems are set forth below with an explanation of the State Department’s views. It should be emphasized, however, that these objectives will have to be worked out with our principal Allies if they are to be applied throughout the German Reich. (a) Demilitarization of Germany. The complete dissolution of all German armed forces and all Nazi military, para-military and police organizations, and the destruction or scrapping of all arms, ammunition and implements of war should be effected. Further manufacture in Germany of arms, ammunition and implements of war should be prohibited.

(b) Dissolution of the Nazi party and all affiliated organizations. The Nazi Party should be immediately dissolved. Large groups of particularly objectionable elements, especially the SS and the Gestapo, should be arrested and interned and war criminals should be tried and, if found guilty, executed. Active party members should be excluded from political or civil activity and subject to a number of restrictions. All laws discriminating against persons on grounds of race, color, creed or political opinion should be annulled.

(c) Extensive controls should be maintained over communications, press and propaganda for the purpose of eliminating Nazi doctrines or similar teachings.

(d) Extensive controls over German educational system should be established for the purpose of eliminating all Nazi influence and propaganda.

(e) No decision should be taken on the possible partition of Germany (as distinguished from territorial amputations) until we see what the internal situation is and what is the attitude of our principal Allies on this question. We should encourage a decentralization of the German governmental structure and if any tendencies toward spontaneous partition of Germany arise they should not be discouraged.

(f) Economic Objectives. The primary and continuing objectives of our economic policy are: (1) to render Germany incapable of waging war, and (2) to eliminate permanently German economic domination of Europe. A shorter term objective is to require the performance by Germany of acts of restitution and reparation for injuries done to the United Nations.

To achieve the first two objectives, it will be essential (1) to destroy all factories incapable of conversion to peaceful purposes and to prevent their reconstruction, (2) to enforce the conversion of all other plants, (3) to eliminate self-sufficiency by imposing reforms that will make Germany dependent upon world markets, (4) to establish controls over foreign trade and key industries for the purpose of preventing German rearmament, and (5) to eliminate the position of power of large industrialists and land-owners.

This Government has little direct interest in obtaining reparations from Germany and no interest in building up German economy in order to collect continuing reparations. However, the U.S.S.R. and a number of other states which have been victims of German destruction and exploitation may press claims for German production and labor service for rehabilitation and construction.

Extensive controls over industry and foreign trade will be essential during the immediate period of demilitarization and dismantlement, as well as during the period of reparations. After this phase, a system of control and supervision of German industry and trade will have to be worked out in the light of world security developments. This system should be of such a character that the victor powers will be able and willing to enforce it over a considerable period.

It is of the highest importance that the standard of living of the German people in the early years be such as to bring home to them that they have lost the war and to impress on them that they must abandon all their pretentious theories that they are a superior race created to govern the world. Through lack of luxuries we may teach them that war does not pay.

88a The file copy indicates that the memorandum was drafted on September 29, 1944. It was presented to the President on October 1, 1944.

88b Documentation regarding the meetings of the Cabinet Committee as well as the other discussions within the executive branch of the Government during September 1944 of United States political and economic policies toward a defeated Germany is scheduled for publication in a subsequent volume of Foreign Relations containing the records of the Second Quebec Conference and related papers.

88c Henry Morgenthau, Jr.; memorandum not printed, but to be included in the documentation referred to in the previous footnote.

88d Not printed, but to be included in the volume referred to in footnote 88b, above.

88e  Ante, p. 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 134].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/10–344: Telegram

[Document 168]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 3, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received October 3—5:30 p.m.]

8274. Comea 105. For your information in considering the British draft amendments to the protocol on occupation of Germany (my 8137 [8237], September 29, 5 p.m.) there is some uncertainty among my advisers as to the meaning of “control of the ports of Bremen and Bremerhaven” (Department’s 7670, September 20, 7 p.m.). One interpretation of this provision is that the American Commander-in-Chief will have jurisdiction over port facilities, warehouses, barracks, hotels, etc., required for the transit of American forces and materials and that military government these ports and cities will be in the hands of the British occupying authorities. I believe this a practical and useful interpretation. Another view is that the American Commander must also have full responsibility for military government in Bremen and Bremerhaven. If the second interpretation is valid it will be necessary to define territorially the American zone around Bremen and its relations to the Commander-in-Chief in the British Zone. This interpretation may create difficulties with the Russians, who, I believe, will recognize exceptions involving transport facilities but may question extension of political control in an Allied Zone. I should appreciate clarification on this point prior to discussing with the British and Russians the proposed amendment to the protocol on occupation.

Winant

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 E.A.C./10–344: Telegram

[Document 169]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 3, 1944—midnight.

8098. Eacom 33. Reference is made to your telegram of September 29, Comea 102.

1. The Combined Chiefs of Staff have now under consideration the accurate delineation of the British and American areas of control which is essentially the same as that set forth in your telegram under reference. The text of the delineation will be immediately communicated to you as soon as a decision is reached.

2. The preamble of the protocol indicates that the division of Germany into zones is for the purpose of executing Article 11 of the instrument of surrender. Consideration should be given to the fact that there may be no formal German surrender. It is important that there be agreement on zones irrespective of a formal German surrender. The preamble should be changed, therefore, to provide that the protocol shall be effective either (a) upon the formal surrender of Germany or (b) upon the defeat of Germany, whether by formal surrender or otherwise, following the cessation of organized resistance. Paragraph 6 of the protocol should likewise be appropriately modified.

3. Reiterating the view stated in Eacom 24,89 it is our opinion that no provision should be made in this protocol for the division of Berlin into zones of occupation. The condition in which Berlin will be found at the time of Germany’s defeat cannot now be determined and it would be unduly restrictive upon the several military commanders to divide Berlin into zones of occupation at this time. For example, one section of Berlin may be found to have no installations of use to the military whereas another section may be relatively much better off from the standpoint of communications facilities and the like. Moreover, if Berlin is to be administered by the three powers, all portions of the City, all German facilities and functions, etc., should be subject to this unified control. If Berlin should be divided into zones, such division should be for billeting and police purposes only. It is our belief that the question of dividing Berlin into zones should not be raised at this time but should be left for consideration and decision by the three military commanders on the spot at the time of occupation. It is suggested that you request your military adviser to consult General Eisenhower and obtain his views on this subject.

Hull

89 Telegram 5314, July 6, 10 a.m., to London, p. 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/10–744: Telegram

[Document 170]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 7, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received 8:10 p.m.]

8485. Comea 108. I am glad to have Department’s 8047 (October 2, 11 p.m.).90 When the question of censorship and public information control is raised in the EAC, I shall be able to comment informally on it in the spirit of the directives. However, lacking formal clearance, no written statement of United States policy on these subjects can be put before the Commission. In this, as in many other questions pending before the EAC, continued delay in clearing United States policy places the American viewpoint and American interests at a decided disadvantage.

I have noticed in EAC discussions that the Soviet delegate is well informed even in rather small details of the provisions which have been outlined in the 29 British draft directives on Germany which have been informally circulated. If we wish American policy to be similarly studied and given due weight by the other two Governments and, particularly, by the Soviet Government, it is necessary to circulate authoritative policy papers without further delay. Speed is imperative for mechanical reasons also. Each document when submitted has to be laboriously translated into Russian, then transmitted to Moscow for study and comment by the interested departments of the Soviet Government and returned to London for negotiation by the Soviet delegation in the EAC.

Our experience so far shows that although the Russians may be slow in presenting their own proposals, they meanwhile make a close study of United States and United Kingdom papers and their positions when presented are well thought out and well supported. When the Russians do formally introduce a paper into the EAC or state their conclusions, the policy presented has been completely cleared by their Government and can be considered authoritative. I have found in negotiating that advancing papers which have not had full clearance by our Government and on which, I am not, therefore, able to take a definite position simply confuses our relationship with the other two delegations, and particularly with the Russian delegation, and retards business rather than expediting it.

I feel it my duty to call your attention most urgently to the tremendous lag in clearing our documentation on Germany. Since the first meeting of the EAC in January nine months ago, I have received only five fully cleared policy papers relating to Germany. By Department’s instruction 3667 (January 28)91 I received WS–10a and WS–12.92 By Department’s instruction 3735 (February 12) I received a draft instrument of surrender and a commentary thereon. By Department’s instruction 3784 (February 26) I received the United States paper on control machinery (WS–15c),93 By Department’s instruction 4347 (July 25)91 I received the Working Security Committee’s comments on the British directive on control of German inland transport. Since March 1 I have received only one United States policy paper with authoritative clearances.

From time to time in answer to my specific requests, I have received telegraphic comments on urgent matters under immediate negotiation. I have also received a substantial number of memoranda prepared in the Department. These latter studies are helpful to the United States delegation but lacking clearance by the Working Security Committee, they cannot be used effectively in discussions of the EAC. Despite the promises contained in Eacom 29 (Department’s 6315, August 10) I have not received any fully cleared materials of the type urgently requested in Comea 68 (my 5412, July 8, 8 p.m.) and Comea 82, (my 7433, September 10, 3 p.m.).

I request first priority consideration and clearance for the following documents: (1) Proclamations and general orders transmitted by my despatch 17222 [17220] (August 1);91 (2) United States directives prepared by Army Planning Committee and reviewed by my advisers of which 21 have been transmitted to date.96

Except for one or two minor details which have been fully reported in my despatches, the proclamations, general orders and draft directives have been approved unanimously by my EAC delegation which includes representatives of State, Army, Navy and Air Force. In organizing the United States delegation on the EAC, it was understood that the Departments and the services concerned would coordinate policy in joint recommendations and I have done my utmost to see that all their points of view are fully taken into account in preparing the directives which I have forwarded to the Department. Since the establishment of the United States Group Control Council (Germany)97 under General Wickersham, its sections and representatives have also participated actively in drafting and approving these directives.

Comments on British directives of which 29 have been transmitted to date should also be helpful; so far I have received Working Security comments on only one of the United Kingdom draft directives.98

If, as mentioned in Department’s 8047 (October 2, 11 p.m.) certain general decisions are still pending, this factor should not delay consideration and clearance of our draft directives which it will be noted do not prejudge such long range problems as for example, partition and de-industrialization but deal with practical questions requiring immediate tripartite handling after Germany’s collapse or surrender.

If, on the other hand, these delays have occurred because of the present cumbersome machinery for inter-departmental clearance in Washington, I must urge that the Department examine most seriously means for expediting the consideration of these questions and for providing me with the materials which I have been promised for several months if negotiations are to be carried on successfully in the EAC. The responsibility for these delays should be ascertained, but what is even more important, the present arrangements including the procedures of the Working Security Committee as set forth in Department’s instruction 3667, (January 28)99 should be reviewed and revised.

In recent years I have tried to study the negotiations which have shaped the relationships among the great powers. I would like to say that I do not think that any conference or commission created by governments for a serious purpose has had less support from the governments creating it than the European Advisory Commission. At least I do not know of any like example in recorded history.

Please show this telegram to the President, to the Secretary of State, and to the Secretary of War.

Winant

90 Not printed; it authorized Ambassador Winant to begin negotiations in the European Advisory Commission at once on the question of control of public information and censorship in occupied Germany (740.00119 EAC/9–3044).

91 Not printed.

92  Ante, pp. 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76] and 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], respectively.

93  Ante, p. 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 98].

91 Not printed.

91 Not printed.

96  The subjects of these draft directives and the dates of their transmittal to Washington are as follows: General Directive for Germany (July 11); “United Nations Prisoners of War (July 11); Censorship of Civilian Communications (July 19); Disposal of German Armed Forces Subsequent to Surrender (July 20); Primary Disarmament of the German Armed Forces Subsequent to Surrender (July 27); Disposition of German Officials and Civilians in Occupied Territory (August 2); Control of Merchant Shipping Subsequent to Surrender (August 10); Control of Post, Telegraph and Telephone Services in Germany (August 17); Control of Inland Transport (August 16); Control and Disposal of Nationals, Armed Forces and Property of Enemy Countries Other than Germany (August 24); Securing and Examining Information and Archives (August 25); Disposition and Control of the German Police (September 5); Disposition of German or German Controlled Aircraft, Aeronautical Equipment and Facilities (September 6); Control of Public Information in Germany (September 6); Control of Educational Institutions in Germany (September 14); Control of Works of Art and Monuments (September 14); Administration of Justice (September 22); Disposition of German and German-Controlled Naval Craft, Equipment and Facilities (September 22); Elimination and Prohibition of Military Training in Germany (September 28); Property Control (October 7); Religious Affairs (October 6).

Of these draft directives, only the draft General Directive for Germany and a revised version of the draft directive for Control of Works of Art and Monuments have been printed (ante, p. 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 128] and vol. ii, p. 1060.) The remaining documents are in the Department of State’s European Advisory Commission files (740.00119 EAC).

97 Established in August 1944 to provide and train cadres for post-hostilities work in occupied Germany and act in liaison with similar British and Soviet groups.

98 Regarding British draft directives for Germany, see footnote 21, p. 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 178].

99 Not printed; for substance of the arrangements and procedures set forth in this instruction, see Department’s telegram 392, January 15, to London, p. 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/10–944: Telegram

[Document 171]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 9, 1944—1 p.m.
[Received October 9—9:14 a.m.]

8491. Comea 109. Through its acting representative on the European Advisory Commission, Sobolev,1 the Soviet Government has agreed to amend the draft protocol on zones of occupation in Germany in accordance with the arrangement worked out at Quebec three weeks ago between the United States and United Kingdom Governments. The text advanced by the British delegation and amendments to incorporate these changes in the protocol was forwarded in my 8137 [8237], (September 29, 5 p.m., Comea 102). Department’s 8098 October 3, midnight, Eacom 33, reported that the text of the delineation of the United States and United Kingdom zones had not yet been approved by the Combined Chiefs of Staff. Lacking clearance on these amendments, action in the EAC is at a standstill because the United States delegation is not in a position to present its proposals for amendment and thus to complete the essential tripartite agreement on zones of occupation. Gousev is temporarily absent.

Winant

1 Arkady Aleksandrovich Sobolev, Soviet Minister-Counselor in the United Kingdom.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/10–1044: Telegram

[Document 172]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 10, 1944—midnight.

8343. This is not an Eacom message. We are very glad to have your telegram no. 8495 [8485], October 7, 8 p.m., Comea 108, presenting us with a frank and forceful statement of the problem with which you are now confronted as a result of the failure thus far to provide you with essential official documentation for negotiation in the EAC.

We agree fully with your arguments showing the urgent necessity for such documentation and profoundly regret the series of circumstances which has resulted in placing you in this very difficult position. We believe that your telegram will be of great assistance in furthering our unceasing efforts to eliminate the stalemate which has developed here. In the meantime, we feel that you are entitled both to congratulations on the expeditious manner in which you have pushed forward the work of drafting the proclamations, general orders and directives, as well as to an explanation of the situation on this end as it now stands.

After carefully reviewing the proclamations and general orders, the Department some time ago completed its comment with regard to them and placed it before the WSC.2 In the case of the directives, papers have already been prepared independently in the Department on many of the same subjects for submission to WSC and in those instances where no such parallel papers existed direct comment on the draft directives was ready.

The Department’s representatives on WSC were thus prepared to act promptly on all the documents submitted by your Planning Committee. Unfortunately the Army and Navy members of WSC were not in the same position. They stated that they had no authorization to take any decisions, that each individual paper must be cleared through the various branches of the War and Navy Departments before it could be presented to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for their clearance and ultimate dispatch to you as a WS document.

In an effort to circumvent the inevitably long delay involved in such procedure, the WSC devised the program of work outlined in Eacom 29.3 We hoped that once the Joint Chiefs of Staff had approved the basic documents cited therein, laying down the broad lines of American policy, it would not be necessary for them to pass on the mass of detailed documents necessary to implement these policies and that documents falling into this category could be transmitted to you for guidance in your conduct and negotiations in the EAC after summary approval by State, War and Navy.

This procedure had the advance approval of the War and Navy Departments, which officially cleared Eacom 29. In the latter part of August, however, the President as you know sent to the Secretary of War a sharply adverse criticism of parts of the Civil Affairs Handbook on Germany prepared by SHAEF, indicating that it envisaged an undeservedly lenient treatment of Germany and calling for its revision. The War Department and the Chiefs of Staff interpreted the President’s instruction as calling for a major revision of policy all along the line and felt they could not act on any documentation submitted by WSC until certain definite policy decisions had been obtained from the President.

At about this time the Secretary of the Treasury4 submitted a plan for Germany which, among other things, called for the complete de-industrialization of Germany and its reversion to a pastoral and agricultural country. This proposal conflicted in certain fundamental respects with the views of both the State and War Departments and, at the instance of the President, a Cabinet Committee, consisting of the three Secretaries, was informally set up to attempt to find agreement on a common policy. No agreed plan was forthcoming, however.

After a number of meetings with high officials of the War and Navy Departments, and the Joint Chiefs postwar planning group, however, they have now agreed to take up and endeavor to obtain Joint Chiefs of Staff clearance on the proclamations and general orders and on the 21 draft directives.5 We have all worked out a new procedure which we have agreed to try on the assurance by the military that it will expedite the clearing for transmission to you of officially-approved documents for negotiations in the EAC. We need hardly assure you that the Department will cooperate in every possible way with the military in order to achieve this result.

In the meantime, the interim directive forwarded to you informally as enclosure to instruction no. 4583, September 27,6 has been approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Department and represents the views of this Government regarding the military government of Germany in the period immediately following the cessation of organized resistance. The final document is now on the way by air pouch.7 Although we realize that this interim directive by no means answers all outstanding questions, it should be used in your negotiations in EAC, as expressing additional official policy views of this government.

We hope to get full clearance on the first three directives, namely, draft proclamations and general orders, control of public information, and censorship of civilian communications within a few days.7a

Hull

2 Working Security Committee.

3 Telegram 6315, August 10, to London, p. 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142].

4 Henry Morgenthau, Jr.

5 See footnote 96, p. 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 170].

6 See bracketed note, p. 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164].

7 Transmitted in instruction 4621, October 10, to London; neither printed.

7a  Telegram 8641, October 18, to London, stated that comments had been prepared on the General Order and on 12 directives, that these directives were before the Joint Chiefs of Staff for clearance, and that the review and clearance were proceeding actively (740.00119 EAC/10–1844).

By mid-November 1944, comments on 14 draft directives had been cleared by the Department of State and the Joint Chiefs of Staff and had been sent to the United States Delegation in London. These directives were promptly circulated by the Delegation to the European Advisory Commission.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/10–1844: Telegram

[Document 173]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 18, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received October 18—2 p.m.]

8885. See your 8514, October 14, 10 p.m.8 My military adviser9 conferred yesterday Tuesday at SHAEF with Lt. General Bedell Smith.10 Also present Maj. General Hilldring and Brigadier General Julius Holmes.11 General Smith speaking for General Eisenhower, stated definitely that Etousa11a would accept delineation of boundaries in Germany as agreed at Quebec and as stated in paragraph 3 CCS 320/28, October 2,12 subject: Allocation of Zones of Occupation in Germany. General Smith also stated Etousa would accept the condition in the protocol of occupation of Germany whereby “Greater Berlin” is divided into three parts. General Smith further stated the Etousa would agree to the language contained in paragraphs 3(a) and 3(b) of CCS 320/28 with one qualification viz., that a clause be added to paragraph 3(b) as follows: “As the Commanding General of the U. S. Forces, Southwest Zone, may require”. Paragraph 3(b) as modified would thus read: “Enjoy necessary transit facilities through the Northwestern Zone as the Commanding General U. S. Forces Southwest Zone may require”.

As soon as I receive answer to this cable from Washington I propose to introduce into the E.A.C. the exact wording of paragraph 3 (a) and 3 (b) of CCS 320/28 with the above modification. This wording if approved by you will be proposed by me in accordance with express desire of General Smith and General Hilldring.

General Smith and General Hilldring both state that the wording “Control the ports of Bremen and Bremerhaven” means full control and administration of both these cities, including military government. This means working out a bilateral agreement with U. K. as to positive delimitation of city areas of Bremen and Bremerhaven which I am planning to do.

Winant

8 Not printed; it reported that the draft amendments to be inserted in the protocol on zones of occupation had not yet been formally approved, and it urged that Ambassador Winant’s military advisers request informal guidance from Etousa pending final clearance (740.00119 EAC/10–1444).

9 Brig. Gen. Vincent Meyer, who succeeded Brigadier General Wickersham in June 1944.

10 Lt. Gen. Walter Bedell Smith, Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force.

11 Deputy Chief, G–5 Division (Civil Affairs), SHAEF.

11a European Theater of Operations, United States Army.

12 Not printed; the substance of the British proposals which constituted the document were transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his telegram 8237, Comea 102, September 29, p. 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 165].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 E W/10–1344

[Document 174]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

No. 4649 Washington, October 19, 1944.

The Secretary of State encloses a letter under date of September 4, 1944 from the Joint Chiefs of Staff giving their views with respect to the ultimate disposition of the German fleet. This communication was submitted to the President for his consideration before transmission to the Embassy. The Ambassador will observe that the President has now approved the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in his memorandum of October 13, 1944, a copy of which is attached hereto.

In negotiations within the European Advisory Commission on this subject, the Ambassador will be guided by the two enclosures to this instruction.

[Enclosure 1]

The Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of State

Washington, 4 September 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: It is understood that the immediate disposition of units of the German fleet in connection with the imposition of surrender terms upon the defeat of Germany is presently under advisement in the European Advisory Commission, and that it has been tentatively agreed that the ultimate disposition of the units of the German fleet will be a matter for decision by the governments of the United Nations concerned.

It is the view of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that, except for the retention of a limited number of ships for experimental and test purposes, the German fleet should be completely destroyed.

In the event that agreement cannot be reached with the Russians and the British on this basis, the United States should press for either: a. A one-third share of each category of ships in the German fleet; or

b. Agreement that all capital ships, such as battleships, pocket battleships and heavy cruisers, and submarines be destroyed, while smaller craft and more lightly armed vessels be shared equally by the United States, Russia, and Great Britain.

Sincerely yours,

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
William D. Leahy ,
Admiral, U. S. Navy
Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy

[Enclosure 2]

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

Washington, October 13, 1944.

I agree with the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in regard to the complete destruction of the German fleet.

I have one amendment to make. Destruction in the past has meant taking the ships to sea and sinking them. I think that in some cases surrendered ships have been destroyed by converting them into scrap metal. I do not like the idea of the complete destruction by sinking of thousands of tons of steel.

Recently a new use for such ships has been discovered. We have used sunken ships as breakwaters for the formation of new harbors. This has been done in Italy and has been done on the coast of Normandy. It is a relatively cheap way to build a breakwater. I think that the United Nations should be in a position to pass on applications by the Allied nations for these ships for the definite and specific purpose of sinking them as breakwaters to improve or create safe anchorages. It is rather a nice thought to use them for such peaceful purposes.

In any such cases, the ships should be sunk at a designated place as quickly as possible and under the eyes of a United Nations’ Committee. Once sunk it would be practically impossible to raise them and restore them to war purposes.

F[ranklin] D. R[oosevelt]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00113 EW/9–1644: Telegram

[Document 175]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)13

Washington, October 19, 1944—midnight.

8689. In view of the delays which have been encountered since the Department’s original proposal in June to undertake discussions with the British and Soviets on reparations (reDepts 6485, August 16, reEmbs 6946, August 2614 and reEmbs 7634, September 16) we agree that it is desirable to include in such discussions the question of economic security. Such discussions should commence before the collapse of Germany. We cannot count on adequate time for discussions on these two subjects independently and therefore favor their being merged. The inclusion of reparation clauses of a highly specific sort in the Roumanian and Finnish armistice agreements15 underscores the need for early tripartite agreement on principles and procedures governing reparation settlements.

Unless you perceive some objection please inform the appropriate British authorities that we consider it desirable to fix a date, in early November if possible, for the commencement of discussions on economic security, reparations and restitution. We are agreeable that such discussions should take place in Moscow provided the Soviet Government so desires. We agree with your suggestion as reported by Penrose that such a proposal has tactical advantages. Ambassador Harriman in Moscow is being requested to make a similar approach to the Soviet Authorities.

Since the subject of economic security is involved the discussions should certainly take place within the framework of EAC and recommendations and reports should be made through EAC. Upon reaching agreement by the representatives on EAC similar discussions should be instituted with the other European Allies still within the framework of EAC.

Hull

13 Repeated with the exception of the last two sentences of paragraph 2 as Department’s 2477 to Moscow, October 19, midnight.

14 Telegram 6946, August 26, not printed.

15 For correspondence regarding United States interest in the Allied armistice wth Finland of September 19, 1944, see vol. iii, pp. 608 ff. For correspondence regarding the 1944 Allied armistice with Rumania, see vol. iv, pp. 133 ff.

The Secretary of State to Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy 740.00119 EAC/9–2944

[Document 176]

The Secretary of State to Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy

Washington, October 19, 1944.

My Dear Admiral Leahy: This Department has given consideration to your letter of September 29, 1944 with reference to the Department’s policy statement on the treatment of Germany. In view of the procedures which have subsequently been developed for the consideration of German questions, I think it is not necessary to request the Working Security Committee to rewrite this paper at this time.

Much of the subject matter of this paper is now being considered in the form of draft directives or other instructions to London for the guidance of the American representative on the European Advisory Commission, and the Department of State is therefore satisfied to present its views through the current work of the Working Security Committee. Unless the Joint Chiefs of Staff specifically desire to have this paper reworked, I shall not ask the Chairman of the Committee to place it on the agenda.

Sincerely yours,

Cordell Hull

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2044

[Document 177]

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

Washington, October 20, 1944.

In regard to your memorandum of September twenty-ninth, I think it is all very well for us to make all kinds of preparations for the treatment of Germany but there are some matters in regard to such treatment that lead me to believe that speed on these matters is not an essential at the present moment. It may be in a week, or it may be in a month, or it may be several months hence. I dislike making detailed plans for a country which we do not yet occupy.

Your memorandum paragraph No. 1.

I agree except for going into too much detail and directives at the present moment, and we must emphasize the fact that the European Advisory Commission is “Advisory” and that you and I are not bound by this advice. This is something which is sometimes overlooked and if we do not remember that word “advisory” they may go ahead and execute some of the advice, which, when the time comes, we may not like at all.

Your memorandum paragraph No. 2.

In view of the fact that we have not occupied Germany, I cannot agree at this moment as to what kind of a Germany we want in every detail.

In regard to the problems involved, there are some which are perfectly clear and which can be approved now.

Sub-paragraph (a) on the Demilitarization of Germany is, of course, correct but should include everything to do with aircraft. This should be made specific. It must apply not merely to the assembly of aircraft but to everything that goes into an aircraft. We must remember that somebody may claim that the aircraft is for non-military purposes, such as a transport plane. Germany must be prevented from making any aircraft of any type in the future.

I am in hearty agreement with Sub-paragraph (b) Dissolution of the Nazi Party and all affiliated organizations.

In the same way, I agree with Sub-paragraph (c) Extensive controls should be maintained over communications, press, and propaganda.

Sub-paragraph (d) Extensive controls over German educational system. I should like to talk with your experts in regard to just what this means.

I agree with Sub-paragraph (e) No decision should be taken on the possible partition of Germany.

Sub-paragraph (f) Economic Objectives. I should like to discuss this with the State Department in regard to some of the language. I agree with it in principle, but I do not know what part of it means. Much of this sub-head is dependent on what we and the Allies find when we get into Germany—and we are not there yet.

F[ranklin] D. R[oosevelt]

Memorandum by the Political Adviser to the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Mosely) of Conversation With the British Representative (Strang) 740.0011 EW/10–2144

[Document 178]

Memorandum by the Political Adviser to the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Mosely) of Conversation With the British Representative (Strang)

[London,] October 21, 1944.

Subject: UK Attitude to JCS 1067,16 Directive on Post-surrender Military Government in Germany.

I. UK telegram to Military Mission, Washington, October 7.

In this telegram the British authorities express their objections to JCS 1067, a directive drafted in JCS as a proposed guide to SCAEF in the period between the cessation of hostilities in Germany and the establishment of tripartite control. The telegram objected strongly to the proposed publication of this directive as well as to a number of matters of substance.16a It pointed out that tripartite control was to begin in Germany as soon as the Instrument of Surrender had been signed or, in case of collapse, proclaimed. It maintained that the pre-surrender directive to SCAEF would be adequate for military government needs until such time as SCAEF disbanded. Any special post-surrender directive, it pointed out, would have to be agreed upon jointly with the Russians in order to preserve the basis of tripartite policy in post-surrender Germany.

The telegram went on to maintain that it was wrong to publish such a plan before it begins to operate since the Germans might then use that knowledge in order to frustrate our plans; it might also have the effect of stiffening German resistance. If the US Government needed to publish some statement on German policy because of political pressure, it might publish a unilateral statement, not in the form of a directive.

The telegram pointed out finally that the draft directive would require considerable amendment before the UK Government could accept it, as well as discussion with the Russians. The US draft directive was open, it stated, to many questions. To issue it would prejudice the application of the directives for the post-surrender period which had been prepared in draft form by the UK Government and distributed informally during the preceding six months.

II. Telegram from the British Military Mission in Washington to the UK Government, October 10.

Mr. Harry Hopkins had stated that he was sure that the idea of publishing the US post-surrender directive, JCS 1067, would be dropped. He thought the draft directive should be placed before the EAC, to be considered along with the UK directives. Mr. Hopkins had consulted Mr. Matthews and Mr. McCloy,17 and both agreed that any post-surrender directive would have to be discussed with the Russians.

III. Foreign Office to Mr. Eden in Moscow, October 10.

This telegram relayed a telegram from Mr. Harry Hopkins to the Prime Minister dated October 9.18 In it Mr. Hopkins assured the Prime Minister that there would be no publication of the US directive, JCS 1067, and no publication, even unilateral, of a policy statement relating to Germany. In conclusion this short telegram stated: “At any rate we have sent to Winant as member EAC the American proposal for post-war directives to our respective military commanders.”

IV. UK Government to British Mission, Washington, October 12.

This telegram approved the proposal to table the US draft, JCS 1067, in the EAC, for agreement on a tripartite basis and later issuance to the three Commanders-in-Chief in Germany.

V. British Mission in Washington to London, October 14.

Following the CCAC19 meeting of October 12, Mr. McCloy and General Macready20 had an informal discussion of JCS 1067. General Macready asked for early consideration in the US Government of the UK collected and bound draft directives21 in order to provide Mr. Winant with instructions for discussing them in the EAC. The US officials showed great interest in learning about these directives and agreed to consider them.

General Macready went on to report informally that JCS 1067 had received the backing of Mr. Hull, Mr. Stimson, Mr. Morgenthau and the President. The Americans maintained that the pre-surrender SHAEF directive was suitable only for use in “the wake of battle”. The treatment of Germany after its surrender must be harsher, they maintained, than during the course of hostilities. The Americans further argued that many months may elapse between the collapse of Germany and the occupation of the three zones and that in this period of transition Anglo-American command was unavoidable.

The Americans (apparently Mr. McCloy) expressed a hope that instructions could now be sent more rapidly to Mr. Winant, but went on to point out that the EAC may not have produced tripartite policy prior to German surrender and that the JCS and the US Government would then be severely criticized.

Mr. McCloy proposed that, therefore, the CCAC should consider the post-surrender directive in Washington through an ad hoc working party, for use in case Germany collapsed before the EAC had done its work. General Macready informed McCloy that London was opposed to such a procedure. In the first place, JCS 1067 was not of much use to SCAEF. In the second place, JCS 1067 would require many amendments before it would be acceptable to the UK Government. Mr. McCloy proposed that as an alternative SCAEF should be directed to act on the British handbook of directives in the period following German surrender or collapse and until the establishment of tripartite government. McCloy pointed out that detailed study of the British handbook of directives was needed in order to brief Mr. Winant; hence it would be desirable for the members of an ad hoc committee under the CCAC to arrive at an informal combined (Anglo-American) agreement concerning the post-surrender directive.

In conclusion General Macready reported that Mr. McCloy objected to the detailed provisions of the British objectives and preferred broad, simple directives.

VI. UK Government to British Mission, Washington, October 20.

The UK Government feels strongly that a post-surrender directive should not be issued by the CCS to SCAEF. It would be better to use the pre-surrender directive in order to tide over to the period when the effective tripartite control would begin.

The telegram went on to urge the need for speedy action in the EAC on post-surrender directives for Germany. The UK Government would be willing to discuss the JCS post-surrender directive informally with the US on two conditions: (1) Such discussion must be on the basis of documents circulated in advance to the EAC, since otherwise the tripartite basis of Allied policy in Germany would be prejudiced. The first step would be for the US Government to circulate its draft directive to the EAC, or else to accept as a basis of discussion the documents already before the EAC (i.e., the British draft directives). (2) Such discussion should take place in London between the US and UK Delegations to the EAC, since otherwise great confusion would arise from discussing the same subject simultaneously in two capitals and likewise the two Governments would be placed in an impossible position vis-à-vis the Russians.

Accordingly, the telegram proposes that any such bilateral discussions be conducted informally in London, preferably on the basis of the UK directives, dropping the proposed US directive 1067 to SCAEF. The proposed short US directive on general policy towards Germany could, if desired, be circulated to the EAC as equivalent to directive No. 1 of the UK handbook of directives.

If the US Government should decide to circulate in the EAC its post-defeat directive (JCS 1067), that directive would, in the UK view, require substantial amendments. If its discussion is taken up in London, the UK Government will also introduce its own draft directives for consideration in the EAC.

The telegram concludes that while the UK directives are long, they leave great discretion to the Commanders-in-Chief and do not go too far into detail; it points out that in the post-surrender period much more detailed instructions to the Commanders-in-Chief will be needed than in the pre-surrender period.

VII. In our conversation about these messages, from which Sir William21a allowed me to make detailed notes, Sir William stated confidentially that our authorities in Washington (meaning apparently Mr. McCloy) had stated that they knew nothing of the British directives until the complete set was presented to the CCAC on October 12. I informed Sir William that each UK directive had been forwarded immediately to Washington through State Department channels, and that during my time in Washington they had been immediately multiplied and distributed to all interested divisions in the State, War and Navy Departments. I said I could not vouch for the procedure in Washington since the last week of June, but that I assumed the same procedure had been continued. Apparently, I added, the War Department was so huge that the UK directives had never been brought to the attention of Mr. McCloy until that was done by General Macready.

Sir William expressed some anxiety as to whether this discussion in Washington had not caused some confusion in US procedures. I told him that, on the contrary, I was glad to see that UK [US?] thinking here about procedure was closely parallel to that of the UK authorities. I told him confidentially that we had prepared about 24 directives here on the basis of all materials available from different agencies of our own Government, and that these directives were awaiting clearance in Washington in order to be circulated informally to the EAC.

I further explained that from the point of view of speed in negotiation we would have had no real objection to taking the British draft directives as a basis for discussion and then making our own comments and proposing our own amendments to them. We felt, however, that from the point of view of expediting tripartite negotiation there was a psychological advantage in our producing our own directives, even though they were close in many respects to the British ones. I said that, in general, our directives were somewhat less detailed and might be easier to negotiate.

I added for Sir William’s information that we were now promised more rapid consideration of our directives in Washington and that we hoped to be able before long to circulate them informally, since it would be valuable to have the US ideas, independently stated, placed before the Russians, as it was clear that they had already made a careful study of many of the British directives. I said that I agreed with him that it would be very confusing and very dangerous to the tripartite basis of our negotiations if consideration of post-surrender directives were suddenly transferred to Washington and placed on an Anglo-American basis. I said that if, after we had circulated the US directives to the Russians, and if the Russians showed no inclination to move on to that phase—which I thought rather unlikely—we could then review the directives informally on an Anglo-American basis, as we had done to advantage in the case of the Proclamations and General Orders.

Sir William seemed much relieved to find that the handling of this question of JCS 1067 by the British Mission in Washington corresponded so closely to the Ambassador’s own approach.

Philip E. Mosely

16 See bracketed note, p. 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164].

16a In a message to Prime Minister Churchill on September 29, 1944, not printed, Hopkins said that it would be very much to President Roosevelt’s interest to publish J.C.S. 1067. Hopkins expressed the conviction that the directive, with minor amendments, would be approved by the Combined Chiefs of Staff (Hopkins Papers, Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.). In a message which Hopkins received on October 9, not printed, Churchill replied that there was much in J.C.S. 1067 which the British liked but that agreement to its issue or publication could not be made until certain important considerations had been discussed. Churchill emphasized that the unilateral American issuance of a directive to Eisenhower would violate the principle of tripartite post-surrender control of Germany. (Hopkins Papers)

17 John J. McCloy, Assistant Secretary of War.

18 Hopkins’ message (not printed) was in reply to Churchill’s message described in footnote 16a, p. 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178].

19 Combined Civil Affairs Committee.

20 Lt. Gen. G. N. Macready, Head of the Army Delegation, British Joint Staff Mission in Washington.

21 Thirty-six United Kingdom draft directives for Germany and Austria previously introduced in the European Advisory Commission were collected in a bound volume entitled: “Germany and Austria in the Post-Surrender Period—Policy Directives for the Allied Commanders-in-Chief”, dated September 1944. Subsequently, the volume was enlarged to include thirty-eight draft directives and was circulated in the European Advisory Commission by the United Kingdom Representative as document E.A.C. (44) 26, dated October 27, transmitted to the Department in despatch 19155, November 10, from London (not printed). The following is a list of the draft directives included in the volume: 1. Germany in the post-surrender period

2. Austria in the post-surrender period

3. Relations of Germany with countries at war with any of the United Nations

4. Neutral missions in Germany, and communication with German missions to neutral countries

5. Treaties, conventions and other international agreements

6. Reform of Nazi law and release of political prisoners in Germany

7. Dissolution and disbandment of Nazi organizations, etc.

8. Re-education of Germany

9. Recall of German and Austrian nationals resident abroad

10. Prevention of German nationals from leaving German territory

11. Prisoners of war and internees in German hands

12. Nationals of the United Nations interned in neutral countries

13. Displaced persons

14. German records and archives

15. The German police

16. Preservation of law and order, and guard duties: use of German forces

17. Definitions of “German armed forces”, “forces under German command”, etc.

18. Discharge and disbandment of the German armed forces

19. Control of German aircraft movements and disposal of German aircraft in German service

20. Disposal of ships, aircraft and personnel of other enemy countries found in Germany at the time of her surrender

21. Evacuation of territory by the German armed forces, officials and civilian population

22. Surrender of arms and war material by forces under German command in contact with United Nations forces

23. Surrender of arms and war material by forces under German command not in contact with United Nations forces

24. Information regarding German war material

25. Ownership and disposal of German war material

26. Control of broadcasting

27. Control and censorship of public information and means of intercommunication

28. Regulation of movement and travel

29. Control by the United Nations of inland transport

30. Exercise of German rights in international transport bodies

31. Shipping and associated matters

32. Establishment and control of the frontier between Germany and Austria

33. Finance and property in Germany (excluding Austria)

34. Food and agriculture

35. Rationing and distribution of textiles

36. Building and housing

37. Leather and footwear

38. Determination of Austrian nationality

21a Sir William Strang.

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/10–2244: Telegram

[Document 179]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, October 22, 1944—2 p.m.
[Received 3:22 p.m.]

4037. I am not quite sure how to reconcile the last sentence of the second paragraph of the Department’s 2477, October 19, 12 p.m.22 with the first sentence of the last paragraph. In case Soviet Government desires that discussions should take place in Moscow, does the Department envisage that technical experts from our delegation on EAC would come here for this purpose, or would discussions take place on regular diplomatic level with the idea that recommendations and reports would subsequently be submitted to EAC for final clearance and for discussion with the other Allies?

In his letter of August 2823 to Molotov, Ambassador Harriman proposed as a first step toward the arrival at an interim arrangement, discussions on a technical level either through EAC or independently, to be followed by policy discussions in EAC. This letter has not yet been answered. In proposing the inauguration of discussions in early November, it should be made clear to the Russians whether it is the technical or the policy discussions, or both, that we have in mind.

Sent to Department as 4037, October 22, 2 p.m.; repeated to London as 232.

Kennan

22 See footnote 13, p. 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176].

23 Not found in Department files.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/10–2444

[Document 180]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

No. 4665 Washington, October 24, 1944.

The Secretary of State encloses herewith a copy of a letter received from the Joint Chiefs of Staff and a copy of its enclosure consisting of comments on the United States draft of proclamations and general orders for Germany.24

These comments, prepared by the Working Security Committee, have now been approved by the Department and the Joint Chiefs of Staff and are submitted to the Ambassador for his guidance.

[Enclosure]

The Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of State 25

Washington, 20 October, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: The Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed the United States draft of proclamations and general orders (Germany) prepared by the United States Advisers, European Advisory Commission. They have also examined the appended comments thereon prepared by the Working Security Committee.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff, from a military point of view, concur with the comments of the Working Security Committee and with the proposal to transmit them to the United States Representative on the European Advisory Commission.

Sincerely yours,

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
William D. Leahy ,
Admiral, U.S. Navy,
Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy

[Subenclosure]

Comments by the Working Security Committee on Draft of Proclamations and General Orders

[Washington, undated.]

1. In the proclamations and general orders there are numerous references to the Unconditional Surrender Instrument. It should be agreed by the three governments that, in the event there is not a formal signing of this instrument, the terms thereof will nevertheless be implemented.

2. With respect to the proclamations, it is believed that the substance of Proclamations 1 and 2 could well be incorporated into a single proclamation subject to the following alterations: a. The opening paragraph of the proclamation should read: “The undersigned Allied Representatives, acting on behalf of their respective governments and in the interests of the United Nations, hereby assume supreme legislative, judicial and executive authority and power over all of Germany.”

This paragraph is believed to be desirable in that as presently drafted neither proclamation specifically provides for assumption of these powers.

b. Paragraph 3 of Proclamation No. 2. Paragraph 3 is susceptible to construction by the Germans that they will be permitted to carry on their own administration to a greater extent than intended. It would seem desirable to recast this paragraph in the light of J.C.S. 1067, particularly paragraph 1 of Appendix “C” of that document.

c. It is believed that an early proclamation published to the Germans should outline to them the system of government under which they will be initially controlled, including a description of the zones of occupation.

3. As to the general orders, it has been our view that those orders should not be utilized for the purpose of formulating policies, but rather to implement the surrender terms and the policies agreed upon as set forth in recommendations prepared by the European Advisory Commission. It is further believed that the drafting of the general orders to carry out the recommendations, being a function of the commander concerned, might for the sake of uniformity be accomplished at a working military level such as in the Control Council nucleus in order not to consume the time of the commission with detailed planning. Whatever may be the decision of the European Advisory Commission in this matter, our general observations on the orders as submitted are: a. The reference in the preamble of each order to the provisions of paragraph 12 (b) of the surrender instrument should be eliminated. It is our belief that orders issued to the Germans should not be based on the Unconditional Surrender or on any particular paragraph of the surrender instrument, particularly in view of the fact that general orders will be required following the defeat of Germany, whether or not a surrender instrument has been signed.

b. It is our view that orders issued to the German people should be direct and specific, i.e., they should order the Germans to do certain specific things or specifically prohibit certain activities on their part. Many of the paragraphs of the general orders as submitted are not of this character and should, therefore, in our opinion, be modified or eliminated. Examples are paragraphs 4 and 5 of Article 4, General Order No. 1 wherein it is indicated that we plan to take certain action, but no direct and specific action is taken. An order on a particular subject should not be issued until the occupational authorities are ready to take specific action. It will be extremely difficult to punish Germans for violations of orders unless they are direct and clear-cut. Other examples are: General Order No. 1, subparagraphs (b) and (c) of paragraph 8, Article 7 and subparagraphs (a) and (c) of paragraph 14, Article 10; General Order No. 2, Article 8; General Order No. 3, paragraph 11, Article 5. These paragraphs appear to serve no useful purpose, but would disclose our future plans and would enable the Germans to take such measures as might be within their power to prevent the later accomplishment of our purposes. Another reason why it would seem desirable to avoid publicizing a future course of action is that, in the light of developing conditions, it may prove necessary to alter the proposed action before it is made effective.

c. References to the German Government and German High Command, such as are included in paragraph 11, Article 9, General Order No. 1, should be eliminated because such references might imply a continuance in power of the German Government and German High Command. The phrase “German authorities” as used elsewhere in the document would appear to be preferable.

d. Throughout the general orders are included paragraphs which seem to have been included merely for the purpose of stating the authority and powers possessed by the occupation authorities. It is our view that all such provisions should be eliminated from the general orders. Any powers which we may possess in Germany will be derived either (1) from the surrender instrument itself, or (2) from the total defeat of Germany by our armed forces, and we do not believe that any attempt should be made to define these powers in general orders.

4. In the preparation of proclamations and orders you will doubtless wish to bear in mind the proclamations and orders which may from time to time have been issued by the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force and the Soviet High Command, insofar as the latter proclamations and orders are not inconsistent with the current United States views.

5. All proclamations and general orders should be signed by the military commanders of the occupying forces as supreme commanders of their respective forces.

[Here follow suggestions for changes in the texts of a number of articles in the draft orders.]

24 The draft of proclamations and general orders for Germany had been transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 17220, August 1; received August 9 (not printed). Proclamation No. 1 called upon all Germans to comply with the orders of the occupation authorities. Proclamation No. 2 outlined the authority of the occupation powers. General Order No. 1, Military and Naval, had articles dealing with: (1) evacuation of occupied territory, (2) protection to United Nations forces and agencies, (3) advance parties, (4) control of military agencies, (5) facilities for movement of personnel and equipment, (6) abolition of military training, (7) war production and research, (8) new defense construction prohibited, (9) prisoners of war and internees, (10) information and inspection. General Order No. 2, Political, had articles dealing with: (1) protection of United Nations personnel and property, (2) movement of persons in Germany and across German frontiers, (3) censorship, control of press, radio, telecommunications and mail; (4) control of German relations with other countries, (5) political prisoners, (6) foreign workers, property and displaced persons, (7) war criminals, (8) Nazi organizations, laws etc., (9) cultural agencies. General Order No. 3, Economic, had articles dealing with: (1) merchant shipping, (2) German inland transport and power systems, (3) communications, (4) restitution, reparation, currencies and relief, (5) German economy and assets.

25 This letter and the appended comments by the Working Security Committee (Subenclosure) were the appendix and annex, respectively, of document J.C.S. 1103, dated October 13.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/10–1844: Telegram

[Document 181]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 25, 1944—10 p.m.

8902. Eacom 37. See your 8274, October 3, 6 p.m., Comea 105, and 8885, October 18, 4 p.m. With regard to the definition of the phrase “control of the ports of Bremen and Bremerhaven” a statement has been received from the Joint Chiefs of Staff reading in substance as follows: It is contemplated that rehabilitation and operation of the ports of Bremen and Bremerhaven will require the use of large forces of local labor and of available local facilities such as power plants, communication facilities, and the like.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff are therefore of the opinion that, from a military point of view, it will be essential that the United States commander have exclusive control of the port area of Bremen and Bremerhaven, with the necessary contiguous areas essential to the logistical support of the American forces of occupation, to the extent that the entire region in question should be made a part of the American Zone of Occupation. An exact delineation of boundaries is under study by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and cannot be furnished at this time.

Stettinius

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/10–2644: Telegram

[Document 182]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, October 26, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received October 26—5:55 p.m.]

9227. For the Secretary, Under Secretary and Mr. Winant.25a On October 16 Eden handed Molotov a memorandum on the work of the EAC reported in Embassy’s despatch 18844, October 26.26 Summary follows: It is urgent to prepare joint plans as quickly as possible for post-surrender control of Germany and Austria. Risks of confusion and misunderstanding might arise if such joint planning were unduly delayed. Five main points remain to be settled in the EAC: (1) Machinery of control in Germany, more particularly military missions of the Allied powers;

(2) Proclamations and general orders, to be issued jointly by the three Commanders in Chief;

(3) Directives, to be similarly issued;

(4) Agreement on plans for the occupation and control of Austria;

(5) Urgent setting up tripartite nucleus control groups for Germany and for Austria by sending Soviet nucleus group to London to join with United States and United Kingdom groups now being formed. In conclusion, EAC should be enabled to make greater use of expert committees on particular problems, for sake of greater speed. End summary.

Today Soviet Chargé Kukin27 handed Jebb28 of Foreign Office following memorandum in reply, dated October 25. Since Foreign Office insists that even knowledge of existence of this memorandum be held strictly secret pending Gousev’s return to London, knowledge of it here will be restricted to Mosely and General Meyer and telegram sealed. Summary of Soviet memorandum follows: (1) With respect to remaining point regarding control machinery in Germany, Soviet Government agrees that principally interested European Allies should send military missions for contact with Control Council and to ensure representation of their interests with respect to Germany without prejudice to the principle of control by the three Allied powers.

(2) Since EAC has completed instrument of surrender and protocol on occupation and is completing draft protocol on control machinery, Soviet Government considers opportune for EAC to start work on additional requirements to be presented to Germany in development of article 12 of surrender instrument, particularly following questions of prime importance: (Sub 1) Repatriation of prisoners of war, internees and displaced persons of the United Nations;

(Sub 2) Additional military requirements for disarmament and demilitarization of Germany;

(Sub 3) Requirements for abolition of Hitler regime and surrender of war criminals;

(Sub 4) Provisions concerning control over German economy.

On completion of these questions and as far as possible simultaneously with that, EAC could draft other orders and proclamations to the German people and authorities and also directives to the three Commanders in Chief for their guidance in carrying out surrender terms.

(3) In view of urgency of agreement of plan of occupation of Austria, Soviet Government has instructed its delegate on the EAC to begin discussion on this matter.

(4) Soviet Government recognizes advisability of immediately beginning preparation of personnel for control machinery so that, by moment of Germany’s surrender and of organization of Allied control machinery, the three Governments would possess prepared cadres for this machinery. Soviet Government is now selecting necessary personnel and will send it in nearest future to London to start, together with their British and American colleagues, more detailed preparation of plans and instructions for the work of the Allied control machinery in Germany.

(5) While sharing British view on slow tempo of EAC, Soviet Government points out that delays in its work have been due to British and United States delegations as well. It hopes that its future work will proceed without further delays. Soviet Government has instructed Gousev to propose consideration in EAC of questions according to priority set forth above and hopes British Government will give similar instructions to Strang. End of summary.

Much elation over this attitude of Soviet Government expressed by Strang who feels British are fully prepared to follow this priority of treatment.

Following are Mosely’s comments: (1) Soviet proposals for more rapid procedure in EAC indicate that they now have fully formulated policies ready to present on these questions; if we are not similarly equipped to speak in name of our Government, onus for delays will fall on us alone.

(2) Soviet willingness to speed up EAC work makes it all the more imperative to secure immediate clearance of United States directives on the four subjects listed under Part II of the Soviet memorandum, including particularly control of the German economy, in addition to our other directives.

(3) If Moscow Embassy has not yet approached Soviet Government with proposal to set up reparation and economic security discussions in Moscow, fresh thought should perhaps be given to whether this subject should not now be treated in London since Soviet delegate will apparently be prepared to discuss economic and reparation problems in the EAC or in a subcommittee thereof.

Gallman

25a Ambassador Winant was in Washington for consultation between October 26 and November 18.

26 Not printed.

27 Konstantin Mikhailovich Kukin, Counselor of the Soviet Embassy in London.

28 Hubert Miles Gladwyn Jebb, Counselor of the British Foreign Office.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) 740.00119 EAC/10–2644: Telegram

[Document 183]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, October 27, 1944—midnight.

8995. The developments between the British and Russians on the work of the EAC, as reported in your 9227, October 26, 8 p.m., are most encouraging and indicate that real progress can now be made on many important questions with respect to Germany. You can count upon the full support of the Department, which will attempt to expedite this work in every way.

We hope that the following information will be helpful to you: 1. With respect to control machinery for Germany, the Working Security Committee has prepared a supplemental paper which has been approved in the Department and is now awaiting action by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. This paper elaborates upon WS–15c29 and will give you the authoritative American position on control machinery. It contains a paragraph respecting contact by other United Nations and associated states with the proposed Control Council. Action on this paper by the Joint Chiefs of Staff is expected momentarily and as soon as received the full text will be telegraphed to you.30

2. U.S. comment on the following draft directives is under way by air pouch: (a) Draft proclamations and general orders; (b) censorship and civilian communications; (c) disposition of German or German-controlled aircraft, aeronautical equipment and facilities; (d) disposition of German or German-controlled naval craft, equipment and facilities; (e) primary disarmament of German armed forces subsequent to surrender; (f) control of public information in Germany; (g) control of inland transport; (h) elimination and prohibition of military training; and (i) control of post, telegraph and telephone services.

3. The Working Security Committee has completed its consideration of all U.S. draft directives now before it with the exception of those on education and United Nations prisoners of war. The draft directive on United Nations prisoners of war is temporarily held up pending the arrival of your redraft of this directive. It will be given immediate attention. The other directives in question are now before the Joint Chiefs of Staff and presumably the U.S. position can be made known to you rapidly. An outline plan for refugees and displaced persons has also been sent to you by air pouch.

4. With respect to provisions concerning control over German economy, you will recall that there is an economic section in the “Directive to SCAEF regarding Military Government of Germany in the Period immediately following the Cessation of Organized Resistance”, which is limited but might be useful.

5. The Department has submitted to the President a statement of certain basic economic objectives and has received his approval in principle.31 However, the President desires additional information on certain phases of this problem which is now being prepared for submission to him. The Department will keep you advised in this field as rapidly as decisions can be made.

Ambassador Winant has seen this telegram.

Stettinius

29  Ante, p. 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 98].

30 See redraft prepared by the Working Security Committee, p. 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 187].

31 The reference is to the Secretary’s memorandum of September 29 to President Roosevelt and the President’s memorandum of October 20 to the Secretary, pp. 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 167] and 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], respectively.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State 740.00113 E.W./10–2744: Telegram

[Document 184]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, October 27, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 10:44 p.m.]

9261. Replying to the representations that we made to the Foreign Office on the subject matter of paragraph 2 of Department’s 8689, October 12 [19], Hall-Patch has informed us that the British are willing to take part in talks on reparation and economic security. As regards the date they are not quite ready but hope to be in a position to begin in 2 or 3 weeks time. They assume that the timing will depend largely on the sort of reply we receive from the Soviet. In this connection please note the proposal in paragraph (1) of section IV of the memorandum on reparation and economic security32 which Ambassador Winant has taken with him to Washington. Please refer also to Embassy’s 9227, October 26.

Gallman

32 Not found in Department files.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) 740.00113 E.W./9–1644: Telegram

[Document 185]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, October 30, 1944—7 p.m.

9052. Department’s 6485 of August 16. In view of absence of any official British or Russian response to our proposal and questions posed in 4037 from Moscow33 (repeated to London from Moscow as 232, October 22) please defer further action along lines of Department’s 8689 of October 19 until decisions have been reached here on these questions.

Similar instructions have been sent to Moscow.

Stettinius

33 Dated October 22, p. 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180].

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State 740.00113 E.W./9–1644: Telegram

[Document 186]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 1, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received November 1—4:25 p.m.]

9442. Department’s 9052, October 30. In a written communication to the Embassy from Hall-Patch, the substance of which was given in Embassy’s 9261, October 27, the British replied to the proposals contained in Department’s 6485, August 16, and 8689, October 19.

Regarding the questions raised in 4037 from Moscow to the Department33 we wish to call attention again to the memorandum and message referred to in the last two sentences of Embassy’s 9261, October 27.

We believe that the best procedure would be as follows: 1. The subject should be raised in EAC on the basis of the following proposals: (a) That reparation and economic disarmament should be discussed together.

(b) That US–UK–USSR discussions on reparation and economic security should take place as soon as possible within the framework of EAC by delegations of experts.

(c) That the experts should make recommendations to EAC.

(d) That these recommendations should be examined by the three representatives of EAC and submitted with or without modifications to the three Governments concerned. In this form the recommendations would have similar status to those made at Dumbarton Oaks35 or Bretton Woods.36

(e) That when tripartite agreement has been reached discussions should take place with the European Allies within the framework of EAC.

2. When agreement has been reached on EAC as a procedure along the above lines or some modifications of them, the next step would be to appoint experts to carry out technical discussions as provided in 1(b).

These discussions might be held in London or Moscow according to the wishes of the Soviet. Wherever they might be held they would still be within the framework of EAC.

We believe that this arrangement would satisfactorily meet the points raised in 4037 from Moscow to the Department. We do not think it worthwhile to attempt a very rigorous distinction between technical and policy matters. It seems clear that the experts of each country will take positions within the general lines of policies laid down tentatively in each country. The important thing is that the general policies within which they operate should be flexible enough to permit some give and take.

Please show this to Mr. Winant.

Gallman

33 Dated October 22, p. 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180].

35 For correspondence regarding conversations at Dumbarton Oaks, August 21–October 7, 1944, on international organization, see pp. 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419] ff.

36 United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, July 1–22, 1944; for correspondence, see vol. ii, pp. 106 ff.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/10–2844

[Document 187]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

No. 4704 Washington, November 2, 1944.

The Secretary of State encloses for submission to the European Advisory Commission a U.S. draft paper on “Allied Control Machinery in Germany.” This paper is a redraft of the paper on “Principles of Allied Military Government in Germany,” prepared by the U.S. Advisers, European Advisory Commission.37

The Department of State has approved this redraft. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have given their approval in the manner indicated in the letter from Admiral Leahy to the Secretary of State under date of October 28, 1944. A copy of this communication is also enclosed.

[Enclosure]

The Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of State

Washington, October 28, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: The Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed the United States draft paper on “Principles of Allied Military Government in Germany” prepared by the U.S. Advisers, European Advisory Commission. They have also examined the comments thereon, appended hereto, including a redraft of the paper which is re-titled “Allied Control Machinery in Germany” as prepared by the Working Security Committee.

In Article III, paragraph 2, of the redrafted paper, it is stated that “subject to agreed de-Nazification policies” German administrative machinery and German personnel shall be used for the routine administration of Germany to the extent deemed desirable by the occupation authorities.

It is understood that, with a view to expediting agreement on this paper in London, the Working Security Committee intentionally omitted a specific statement of these de-Nazification policies from this paper, preferring that such policies be stated in another directive.

In sub-paragraphs 8 a and b of Appendix “A” to the “Directive for Administration of Post-Defeat Military Government in Germany” (J.C.S. 1067),38 there is stated the policy in respect of the elimination of Nazis and Nazi influence from the German Government and administrative system. This is not only understood to reflect the views of the other Government agencies which passed upon J.C.S. 1067, but also accords with considerations of military security. Approval of the present paper, therefore, is given with the understanding that this policy is being transmitted to the United States Representative on the European Advisory Commission, and that it will be carried out through other appropriate directives.

With the above reservation, the Joint Chiefs of Staff from a military point of view, concur in the comments of the Working Security Committee, including its redraft of the paper, and in the proposal to transmit them to the United States Representative on the European Advisory Commission.

Sincerely yours,

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
William D. Leahy ,
Admiral, U.S. Navy
Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy

[Subenclosure 1]

Interdepartmental Working Security Committee Comments on U.S. Draft Paper on “Principles of Allied Military Government in Germany”

1. The draft paper on the subject of “Principles of Allied Military Government in Germany,” prepared by the Planning Committee, U.S. Advisers to Ambassador Winant, for submission to the European Advisory Commission, has been considered by the Interdepartmental Working Security Committee. The following comments have been prepared for transmittal to Ambassador Winant as the official U.S. views on the subject draft for his information and guidance.

2. The paper has been redrafted and a copy of the redraft, as approved by the Working Security Committee, is attached hereto as a Tab.

3. The paper, as redrafted, deals only with the mechanics and machinery of the military government in Germany, and the title has accordingly been changed to read “Allied Control Machinery in Germany.”

4. All references to the objectives of military government contained in the previous draft have been eliminated. Comments on those objectives are withheld for the present.

[Subenclosure 2]

Redraft Prepared by Working Security Committee

Allied Control Machinery in Germany

I. Supreme Allied Authority

1. The United States, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics shall possess supreme authority with respect to Germany. The Commanders in Chief of the forces of these three powers shall comprise the Supreme Allied Authority which shall direct a military government in Germany in accordance with the instructions of the three Governments. Decisions of the Supreme Allied Authority will be by unanimous action of the representatives of the three Powers.

2. Subject to the absolute power over Germany possessed by the United States, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and subject to the Supreme Allied Authority’s supervision of those functions and activities maintained on a nation-wide basis, the administration of military government in each of the three zones of occupation shall be the sole responsibility of the Commanders in Chief of the forces occupying each zone.

II. The Control Council

1. The Supreme Allied Authority shall establish a Control Council composed of representatives in equal numbers from each of the three Allied Governments. The three commanding generals, or their representatives, shall serve in agreed upon rotation in the offices of president, vice-president and deputy president of the Control Council.

2. The functions of the Control Council shall be to a. Supervise those functions and activities maintained on a centralized and nation-wide basis.

b. Coordinate the administration of military government throughout Germany, including detailed planning for the implementation of directives received from the three Governments.

c. Consider matters of policy involving the whole of Germany, and

d. Exercise direct control over the administration of Greater Berlin.

III. Administrative Machinery

1. For the performance of its assigned functions the Control Council shall establish administrative sections on which each of the three Governments will be represented and such sub-sections as are necessary to insure comprehensive and efficient controls.

2. To the extent deemed desirable by the occupation authorities, and subject to agreed de-Nazification policies, German administrative machinery and German personnel shall be used for the routine administration of Germany. The occupation authorities will decide whether the objectives of military government are better served by the appointment of officers of the occupation forces or by the use of the services of Germans who have been cleared by the security branches of the Allied armies.

3. The military government personnel in each zone, including those in regional and local branches of the departments of the central German administrative machinery, shall be selected by the commander-in-chief of that zone except that liaison officers of other nationality may be furnished by the commanders of the other two zones. The respective commander-in-chief shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the members of the armed forces under their command and over the civilians who accompany them throughout the whole of Germany. All directives, proclamations and orders pertaining to the administration of national zones shall be issued by the respective commander-in-chief in each zone.

4. The administration of each zone and of the regional and local branches of centrally directed German agencies shall be such as to insure that all policies formulated by the Supreme Allied Authority will be uniformly put into effect throughout Germany.

IV. Participation of Other United Nations and Associated States

The Supreme Allied Authority shall make such arrangements as it shall deem necessary for representation in Berlin and access to the Control Council of other United Nations and associated states.

37  Ante, p. 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 129].

38 See bracketed note, p. 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164].

The Secretary of the Treasury (Morgenthau) to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) 740.00119 E.W./11–344

[Document 188]

The Secretary of the Treasury (Morgenthau) to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Washington, November 3, 1944.

Dear Ed: I am sending you herewith Memorandum on the British Draft of Policy Directive for Germany.

This was shown to the War Department, and with their approval I gave a copy of it to Lord Cher well39 just before he left.40

Sincerely yours,

Henry

[Enclosure]

Memorandum on the British Draft of Policy Directive for Germany *

[Washington,] November 1, 1944.

1. Examination of the British document suggests that it was intended as a long range program. We are not prepared to make decisions on these long range issues at this time. Moreover, the British document does not cover the major questions involved. If, on the other hand, the British document is only intended as an interim program it prejudices the long range decision on important issues. In any event, its 97 pages of detailed instructions, often on unimportant points, is not a satisfactory medium for a high level policy determination. The document confuses principles with details of administration, and thus does not provide a basis on which decisions can be readily reached through the exchange of views. We feel strongly that we should confine our discussions now to the major policy decisions needed for the interim period and leave the details to be worked out at a staff level.

2. The appropriate document for immediate discussion is the American interim directive document. This document is to the large part a statement of principles which after agreement would provide the basis for the preparation of handbooks containing full details for administration. The failure of the British Government to present its views on this document is preventing further progress of combined discussions on the treatment to be accorded Germany. We are faced with the danger that the prolongation of the period in which the military directive operates will seriously prejudice the situation within Germany and limit the effectiveness of long range policies which may be found to be desirable by the three governments.

3. The following are some of the major policy issues which the British document fails to deal with adequately and which must be dealt with in any long range program: (a) The elimination or destruction of heavy industry in Germany, specifically the metallurgical, chemical and electrical industries in Germany.

(b) Future boundaries of Germany.

(c) Partitioning of Germany.

(d) Disposition of the Ruhr through internationalization or otherwise.

(e) Restitution.

(f) Reparations, including whether there will be reparations in the form of recurring payments.

(g) A comprehensive educational program.

(h) A positive program for political decentralization.

(i) The character of controls to be employed in preventing re-emergence of a powerful industrial Germany.

(j) Agrarian reform including the breaking up of the Junker estates.

(k) The punishment of war crimes and the apprehension of war criminals.

(l) The extradition of war criminals to the scene of their crimes.

4. While it is difficult to evaluate the significance of the detailed policy questions without an understanding of the underlying objectives, the following comments on the British group of directives may indicate the difference in approach: (a) Administrative convenience is frequently placed above principle in dealing with problems of German occupation.

(b) In defining specifically certain of the powers which the Occupation Commander will have, the document tends to obscure the fact that the Commander-in-Chief will have all the powers of government and has the power to do whatever is necessary to carry out the program determined by the Allies.

(c) In connection with the punishment of infractions of regulations and instructions of the occupying forces, there is a tendency in the directive to rely on inadequate and indirect punishments and sanctions when there is no occasion for avoiding direct penalties.

(d) The Allied Commanders are given too much responsibility for the well functioning of the German economy.

(e) The list of persons to be detained and placed under guard for political and security reasons is totally inadequate and vests too much discretion in the Allied Commander-in-Chief. It gives an appearance of an attempt to shift responsibility.

(f) There is too much political freedom given to the Germans.

(g) The program for keeping the German schools and universities open at any cost ignores the need for a fundamental reorientation of German educational institutions.

(h) We see no point in giving the Allied Military Commander discretion in making it possible for the German “police” to be able to retain tanks and heavy weapons. This sounds like the beginning of the rearmament of Germany.

(i) If Austria is to be given substantially better treatment than Germany, the treatment to be accorded Austria should be dealt with in a separate set of directives.

39 British Paymaster General and Personal Adviser to the Prime Minister.

40 For London.

* Germany and Austria in the Post-Surrender Period—Sept., 1944. [Footnote in the original; see footnote 21, p. 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 178].]

The Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy) to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) 740.00119 E.W./11–444

[Document 189]

The Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy) to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Washington, 4 November, 1944.

Dear Ed: The enclosed is the memorandum which I delivered to Secretary Morgenthau as our general views on the British draft directives for Germany.

The first memorandum I saw which the Treasury had prepared I objected to primarily on the ground that it brought up long range considerations which, in accordance with the government policy, should not be dealt with now. I then delivered the enclosed memorandum to Mr. Morgenthau as representative of the War Department’s views on the British directives. Apparently Mr. Morgenthau went on and delivered a somewhat modified version of his earlier memorandum to Lord Cherwell, but one which did not eliminate the long range points that were included in his first draft. Whether he also delivered the War Department’s views I have not been able to find out.

I do not know that the matter is of any great moment, but I think that pretty soon we had better get together, particularly while Winant is here, to crystallize our position in respect of these British directives.

I have kept Dunn and Matthews informed of my discussions with Mr. Morgenthau and they know the background. I think you may want to pass this memorandum on to them.

Sincerely,

J[ohn] J. M[cCloy]

[Enclosure]

Memorandum Regarding British Draft Policy Directives for Germany

[Washington,] 1 November, 1944.

1. Examination of the British document does not disclose whether it was intended as a long-range program or for the immediate period after the surrender and occupation of Germany.

2. It is the U.S. view that this is not the moment to discuss a long-range view. The wishes of other United Nations must be considered before the long-range policy toward Germany can be crystallized. Until we have entered a considerable portion of Germany and know the conditions that are existent there, it is impossible to formulate final policy with respect to the treatment of Germany.

3. Further, the directives as presently written are too detailed to be considered on a governmental level. As written these directives would be protocol between the U.S., U.K. and U.S.S.R., and it would be most difficult to modify, change or vary such agreements as conditions require.

4. The substance of the British directives are matters of detail primarily to be considered on an operational level such as the Control Council for Germany or at SCAEF. It is desirable that EAC consideration should be given on a broad overall level providing guidance to the military commanders to enable them to formulate detailed plans.

5. The British approach treats Germany on the basis of an armistice rather than unconditional surrender or complete military defeat, and retains German administrative structures and organs to an extent greater than is desired.

6. Conditions throughout Germany may not be uniform and in the light of this consideration the British document does not insure to the zone commanders the full freedom of action which in the U.S. view is essential.

7. It is considered that JCS 1067 is the proper approach to the immediate requirements in that it will provide the zone commanders with all the guidance necessary at this time.

Memorandum by the Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs (Matthews) to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) 740.00119 E.W./11–344

[Document 190]

Memorandum by the Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs (Matthews) to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

[Washington,] November 4, 1944.

Mr. Stettinius: The attached enclosure41 to Secretary Morgenthau’s letter to you of November 3 could be most disturbing if there were any danger of its being taken seriously by the British, but I do not believe that this is likely. Incidentally, Mr. McCloy tells me he did his best to dissuade Mr. Morgenthau from giving any such paper to Lord Cherwell. Hence the assertion that his action was with War Department “approval” does not seem to be entirely accurate.

Mr. McCloy tells me that Mr. Morgenthau indicated to him at dinner the other night that after the elections he intended to get back into the German picture in a big way. I very much fear that he will do just that unless the President calls him off.

H. Freeman Matthews

41 Memorandum on the British draft of policy directive for Germany, November 1, p. 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188].

Draft Memorandum 740.00119 E.W./11–444

[Document 191]

Draft Memorandum 42

undated

With reference to the War Department memo of November 1, 1944, on British draft directives for Germany, the following views of the State Department are submitted in reply: 1. It is the considered opinion of the Department of State that in all political questions it is highly advisable to have as many German policies as possible agreed upon in advance with the Soviet Government. The Soviet Government has recently indicated that it is willing to go ahead on a number of these German questions through discussions in the EAC. In our judgment, we should proceed as rapidly as possible in the EAC to formulate policies for the treatment of Germany which will be applied uniformly by the three Powers after Germany’s surrender or defeat.

2. It is recognized that there are a number of problems on which policy cannot be finally formulated until the views of the United Nations are considered or until conditions inside Germany are better known. Under its terms of reference, the EAC can consult with and arrange for the participation of other United Nations. Furthermore, we should not refrain from seeking as wide a field of agreement as possible with the British and Russian Governments on such problems as the disarmament of Germany, the dissolution of the Nazi party, war criminals, the nature of the control machinery and other questions on which there seems to be general agreement in principle and which will have to be worked out irrespective of the internal conditions of Germany. To refuse to discuss such questions would remove any reason for the continuation of the EAC.

3. The Department of State is surprised to observe that the War Department memorandum of November 1, as was the case with Mr. Morgenthau’s memorandum to Lord Cherwell, expresses what purport to be the U.S. views on the treatment of Germany without any reference to the Department of State.

4. With respect to consideration of the detailed British directives in the EAC, it should be indicated that when the so-called “short surrender instrument” was recommended by the EAC, both the American and Soviet Representatives agreed that the numerous questions discussed in the original British proposal on surrender terms should subsequently be considered by the EAC. The War Department memorandum seems to ignore this commitment. Furthermore, a number of American directives of the same detailed character have now been approved by the State, War and Navy Departments and by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and have been presumably presented to the EAC for discussion therein. Consequently, we are well embarked upon this line of action in the EAC with the full approval of the War Department.

5. Several months ago, the Working Security Committee, at the suggestion of the War Department, drafted a general policy statement on the treatment of Germany for presentation to the EAC with the intent that detailed directives should flow from such a statement and would be drafted on an operational level. This statement was subsequently withdrawn at the request of the War Department. It could be revived and there is probably no objection thereto, but there is probably sufficient time now to continue the work on directives and to obtain agreement on a number of them.

6. The United States Government has, like the British Government, approved the plan of utilizing German administrative machinery and German personnel in the administration of Germany in a paper on control machinery recently approved by all competent agencies. The extent to which this machinery and personnel should be used is a matter for discussion in the EAC.

7. The reference in paragraph 6 of the War Department memo to the “full freedom of action of the zone commanders” does not correspond to the plan of Supreme Allied Authority and Control Council for nationwide functions and activities as set forth in the American paper entitled “Allied Control Machinery in Germany” which is now presumably before the EAC.

8. It is specifically stated at the outset of JCS 1067 that the directive is for use “before you have received a directive containing policies agreed upon by the three Governments.” This directive has never been agreed to by the British and Soviet Governments. The Department of State has always considered it as an interim directive for use pending decisions reached in the EAC and has never considered it as supplanting policies to be negotiated in the EAC. The Department of State does not concur in the statement in paragraph 7 of the War Department memorandum that it will provide “the zone commanders with all the guidance necessary at this time.” The State Department, furthermore, has no information indicating that either the British or Soviet Governments would share this view of the War Department.

42 File copy not signed or dated. Marginal handwritten note reads as follows: “Used by Riddleberger [Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs] at meeting in McCloy’s office at War Dept, Nov. 6. J[ames] W. R[iddleberger]”. Regarding the meeting of November 6, see undated memorandum, p. 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208].

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/11–644: Telegram

[Document 192]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]43

London, November 6, 1944—11 p.m.
[Received November 6—9:10 p.m.]

9643. For the Secretary and Under Secretary.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Agreement was also reached tonight on the Protocol on Control Machinery in Germany, except for one minor point which may be settled informally tomorrow. The protocol may be signed on Wednesday or Thursday.44 Because of this factor, and evidently also because of expected appearance of a French representative within one week, both Soviet and British representatives pressed most emphatically tonight for earliest possible presentation of the United States amendment to the Protocol on Zones of Occupation, in order to complete that protocol at once.

The Soviet representative,45 newly returned from Moscow, was particularly outspoken in urging the immediate insertion of a general provision regarding the United States control of port and transit facilities within the United Kingdom zone, leaving detailed arrangements to later agreement between either the Governments or the Commanders concerned, or to the Tripartite Control Council in Germany. Gousev stressed the cogent point that similar arrangements for transit facilities will be made, providing United States and United Kingdom forces and control personnel full access to the Berlin zone across Soviet-occupied territory.

The eagerness of the Soviet and United Kingdom representatives to complete this with the Protocol on Zones is most obvious. Their firm stand tonight has the effect of shifting to the United States representative responsibility for consequences of further delay in amending this protocol. If the French representative should demand a French zone of occupation prior to completion of the Protocol on Zones, either acceptance or rejection of such a demand would probably result in serious difficulties, perhaps in prolonged deadlock, in the work of the EAC. Such difficulties might be lessened or even avoided completely if an agreed United States–United Kingdom amendment concerning the use of Bremen and Bremerhaven could be presented this week in the EAC, or if, alternatively, United States and United Kingdom authorities agreed to make general provision now for port and transit facilities to be used by United States forces in United Kingdom zone, leaving detailed arrangements to later agreement between the Governments or the Commanders-in-Chief (see conclusion of Embassy’s 9552, November 3, 7 p.m.).46

United States delegation EAC has assumed that the question of control of Bremen was under active negotiation in the Combined Chiefs of Staff and has refrained from discussing it here. The United States Military Adviser is also wiring General Marshall47 urgently tonight, suggesting an interim wording which appears to fully protect United States interests and which might be acceptable to the British.

Gallman

43 The first paragraph of this telegram is printed on p. 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69].

44 November 8 or 9.

45 Fedor Tarasovich Gousev.

46  Ante, p. 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 67].

47 Gen. George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff, U.S. Army.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) 740.00119 EAC/11–644: Telegram

[Document 193]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, November 7, 1944—8 p.m.

9320. Referring to your telegram number 9643, November 6, 11 p.m., there is quoted below the text of a memorandum regarding the allocation of zones of occupation in Germany. This document has been approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and by the Department and therefore represents the official views of this Government. It is now before the Combined Chiefs of Staff where final action is delayed pending the receipt of instructions from London by the British Chiefs of Staff.

“Memorandum by the United States Chiefs of Staff

1. The United States Chiefs of Staff have considered the suggestion of the British Chiefs of Staff in CCS. 320/28.48 They consider it desirable to delineate the boundaries of the United States and British Zones of Occupation in more complete detail than is given in C.C.S. 320/28. They recommend therefore that the Combined Chiefs of Staff approve the delineation of the United States and British Zones of Occupation set out below. a. U.S. Zones of Occupation should be delineated as follows: (1) The Southwestern Zone: That portion of Germany east of the Rhine inclosed within a line commencing at the junction of the boundaries of Saxony, Bavaria (Bayern) and Czechoslovakia and extending southeast, along the 1937 Czechoslovakian frontier thence southwest, south, and west along the Austrian-German and Swiss-German frontiers to the junction of the Swiss, French, and German frontiers (near Basel, Switzerland) thence north along the international boundary of the river Rhine to the southern boundary of Pfalz (Palatinate of Bavaria) thence continuing to follow the Rhine along the center of the navigable channel to the extreme western boundary of the Prussian province of Hessen-Nassau (near Koblenz) thence along northern boundaries of Hessen-Nassau to the junction of the boundaries of the Prussian provinces of Hessen-Nassau, Hanover, and Sachsen (Saxony); thence south along the western boundary of Sachsen and the western and southern boundary of Thuringia (Thuringen) and the northern boundary of Bavaria to the point of beginning at the Czechoslovakian frontier.

Attention is invited to the fact that the divisions of the State of Hesse whereby the Province of Rhinehessen and the Government District of Pfalz (Palatinate) of the State of Bavaria are included in the British zone follow existing lines of provincial/government district lines and hence do not give rise to important administrative difficulties.

(2) The Bremen Area (See map in Annex, page 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 80]):49 (a) The Land (State) of Bremen in its entirety, including the Stadt (City) of Bremerhaven.

(b) The Landkreis of Wesermunde and the Stadtkreis of Wesermunde and the Kreis of Osterholz, all in the government district of Stade, Province of Hanover.

(c) The Kreis of Wesermarsch in the division of Oldenburg, State of Oldenburg.

b. The British Zone of Occupation should be delineated as follows: western or northwestern Germany (except exclusions expressed in paragraph a (2) above to include that area bounded by a line drawn through the town of Heiligenhafen (inclusive) along the western shore of Lubeck Bay to the town of Lubeck (inclusive) thence along the western boundary of Mecklenburg to the extreme western point of Mark Brandenburg thence southeast along the boundary of Mark Brandenburg to its junction with the boundary of the Prussian province of Sachsen (Saxony), thence west and south along the northern and western boundary of the province of Sachsen, thence east to the junction of Brunswick (Braunschweig), Anhalt and the northern portion of the province of Sachsen, thence south along the boundary between Anhalt and Brunswick to the southern portion of the province of Sachsen thence west along the northwest boundary of the province of Sachsen to the junction of the boundaries of the Prussian provinces of Hessen-Nassau, Hanover and Sachsen; thence west, north, southwest and south along the Hessen-Nassau boundary to the river Rhine thence south along the center of the navigable channel of the Rhine to the northwest corner of the State of Hesse thence continuing to follow the Rhine along the center of the navigable channel between the provinces of Rhinehessen and Starkenburg, both of the State of Hesse and continuing south along the center of the navigable channel of the Rhine between the government district of Pfalz (Palatinate of Bavaria) and the State of Bavaria to the southernmost point of Pfalz thence west and north along the French-German, Luxemburg-German, Belgian-German and Dutch-German frontiers to the North Sea.

c. The delineations of boundaries between the Soviet-British Zones and the Soviet-U.S. Zones are set forth above for planning purposes only, are considered to conform to the tripartite agreement reached by the European Advisory Commission in EAC (44) 9th Meeting, 12 September 1944, and are subject to changes or detailed delineations by tripartite agreement.

2. Problems requiring cooperation and coordination, such as access by the British to the Ordnance Group Headquarters in Kassel, are bound to arise. It is the view of the United States Chiefs of Staff that these problems should be resolved between the appropriate commanders under the policy that there should be an equitable interchange of German material and personnel resources among all zones of occupation.

3. The United States Chiefs of Staff consider that the logistical arrangements regarding transit facilities as between the U.S. and British zones are not a matter for communication to the Russians.

4. The entire subject of complete requirements for logistical support of the zones of occupation in Germany is now under study by the Combined Administrative Committee.”

Stettinius

48 Not printed; the substance of the British proposals which constituted the document were transmitted in telegram 8237, Comea 102, September 29, from London, p. 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 165].

49 A map of the Bremen and Bremerhaven enclave is printed in Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, 1945, facing p. 200.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) 740.00119 EAC/11–744: Telegram

[Document 194]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, November 7, 1944—11 p.m.

9325. Reurtels 9442 and 9261.50 As you are aware, questions of economic policy occupied a major place in Cabinet Committee deliberations regarding treatment of Germany, but full clarification of policy was not obtained. Following these deliberations, the Department was recently asked to furnish an amplification of its views regarding economic policy toward Germany. Material along these lines is now in course of preparation and will be submitted shortly. In this way we hope to obtain sufficient clarification of basic policy on economic treatment of Germany to enable us to begin discussions with British and Russians on reparation and economic security. At this stage, however, we do not believe that any workable distinction between policy matters and technical matters can be drawn. Consequently, we wish, despite our earlier proposals, to defer tripartite conversations until we have obtained definite clearance on basic lines of policy. We appreciate present urgency of getting ahead on conversations on these subjects, and we believe that necessary policy clearance can be obtained in a few weeks.

Sent to London, repeated to Moscow re its tel 4037.51

Stettinius

50 Dated November 1 and October 27, pp. 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 184, Doc. 185, and Doc. 186] and 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], respectively.

51 Dated October 22, p. 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180].

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/11–944: Telegram

[Document 195]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 9, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received November 9—6:31 p.m.]

9776. For the Under Secretary and Mr. Dunn. In accordance with Department’s 9320 (November 7, 8 p.m.) supplemented by Mr. Dunn’s telephone instructions, Mosely discussed at length with Strang question of amending the Protocol on Zones of Occupation in Germany. He presented one draft amendment describing the Southwest Zone and a second draft amendment describing the Bremen Zone, both based on JCS memorandum transmitted in Department’s 9320. Mosely emphasized strongly the official character of this proposal. Strang reported that his Government had received a preliminary summary of the JCS memorandum in question and expressed strong personal doubt that the British Chiefs of Staff would agree to establishment of a United States Military Government enclave within the United Kingdom Zone.

In accordance with his telephone instruction, Mosely then presented the alternative interim draft amendment regarding the Bremen area. As worded for possible insertion in the protocol, this draft reads as follows: “Nevertheless, for the purpose of facilitating communications between the Southwestern Zone and the sea, the Commander-in-Chief of the United States Forces in the Southwestern Zone will (a) exercise such control of the ports of Bremen and Bremerhaven and the necessary staging areas in the vicinity thereof as he determines to be necessary to meet his requirements; (b) enjoy such transit facilities through the Northwestern Zone as he determines to be necessary to meet his requirements.”

Mosely emphasized to Strang that this interim draft amendment does not represent any departure from the official view expressed in the JCS memorandum but is designed as a possible means for securing immediate completion of the Protocol on Zones, leaving detailed arrangements regarding the Bremen area to later elaboration by the military authorities. Mosely made it plain that he is not empowered to modify the wording of the proposed interim amendment.

Subsequent to this discussion, Strang had preliminary consultations with high United Kingdom military authorities regarding the proposed amendments and will consult the Chiefs of Staff tomorrow. His preliminary reaction tonight regarding the interim amendment on Bremen is that his authorities might accept this draft provided the words “he determines” were changed to “may be agreed” in the two relevant places.

Mosely’s preliminary impression is that it is very unlikely that the British will accept the words “he determines”. The effect of inserting “may be agreed” would, in his opinion, be to return the question of arriving at an agreement concerning the Bremen area to the Combined Chiefs of Staff, where it will in any case have to be decided, meanwhile permitting the EAC to complete the Protocol on Zones prior to appearance of the permanent French representative. (End of Mosely’s comment).

Following is separate opinion of the military, naval and military air advisers, EAC delegation. In their view the words “as may be agreed” furnish the British a leverage in future negotiations in the Combined Chiefs of Staff, which may weaken the necessary control of Bremen and Bremerhaven and the contiguous areas by the United States Commander, Southwest Zone. Furthermore, they desire to point out that the wording “may be agreed” might result in the matter having to be decided by the Commanders in the field, which, they feel, is something to be avoided.

Gallman

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/11–1044: Telegram

[Document 196]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 10, 1944—2 p.m.
[Received November 10—11:15 a.m.]

9785. For the Under Secretary and Mr. Dunn. Reference Embassy’s 9776, November 9, 8 p.m. British Chiefs of Staff have today officially stated their opinion, reported to Mosely by Strang, that the interim amendment regarding Bremen is acceptable for inclusion in the Protocol on Zones provided the words “he determines” can be changed to “may be agreed”. As this question was presented fully in 9776 the Department’s comments and instructions will be awaited.

Gallman

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) 740.0011 European War/11–1044

[Document 197]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Washington, 10 November, 1944.

My Dear Ed: As you will know, a draft directive to Eisenhower on the post-defeat military government of Germany was laid by the United States Chiefs of Staff before the Combined Chiefs of Staff for approval and referred by the latter to the Combined Civil Affairs Committee (CCAC 119/4).

This matter has been discussed off the record between Macready and Jack McCloy. Ministers have given it full consideration in London and I have now been instructed to give you their views.

By agreement between the three Governments at the Moscow Conference,52 the treatment of Germany was remitted to the E.A.C. for tripartite study. The object of this was, of course, to secure, if possible, the co-ordination of Soviet policy towards Germany with British and United States policies as well as co-ordination between the two latter. As the E.A.C. had not yet got around to this increasingly urgent question, Anthony, as you know, during his recent visit to Moscow53 urged the Soviet Government to instruct the Soviet representative on the E.A.C. to agree to begin discussions on this subject. In reply the Soviet Government have agreed to give first priority in the Commission’s work to German questions, and the way appears to be clear for immediate discussion by the E.A.C. of the ground covered by the draft directive.

Our suggestion is that Winant should now circulate the draft directive to the E.A.C. The Foreign Office tell me that Strang would join the United States Delegation in pressing the Soviet Delegation to discuss it without delay together with the British papers on the subject, and to make early recommendations to the three governments. Pending such discussion in the Commission, the British Delegation would be willing to communicate their observations on the United States draft informally to the United States Delegation and to try to clarify their respective points of view. If the three-Power discussion in the Commission itself were long delayed, the British Delegation would be willing to try to reach an informal understanding with the United States Delegation on a single document which could, in an emergency, be conveyed to the United States and British Commanders-in-Chief. We could justify such a course to the Russians, since it would only be adopted if they unreasonably delayed discussion in the Commission.

Having got the Russians to the point of agreeing to immediate discussions in the E.A.C. of post-defeat policy, London feel that there are considerable dangers in starting separate Anglo-American discussions in Washington on the same subject, however informally. They very much hope, therefore, that the above alternative procedure will commend itself; it provides, as you see, for an agreed Anglo-American emergency directive should the Russians not come up to scratch on the E.A.C. after all.

Macready and I would be very ready to discuss this matter with you and Jack McCloy if you so desired.

I have sent a copy of this letter to Jack.

Yours ever,

Halifax

52 Tripartite Conference of Foreign Ministers at Moscow, October 18–November 1, 1943: for correspondence, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 513 ff.

53 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, accompanied Prime Minister Churchill to Moscow for the meetings with Premier Stalin between October 9 and 18. For correspondence relating to these meetings, see vol. iv, pp. 1002–1024.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/11–1144: Telegram

[Document 198]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 11, 1944—10 a.m.
[Received November 11—9:36 a.m.]

9832. For the Under Secretary and Mr. Dunn from Mosely. Embassy’s 9776, November 9, 8 p.m., 9785, November 10, 2 p.m. It has become evident that the Russians are stalling on signature of the Control Machinery Protocol until they are sure we are going to complete the Protocol on Zones of Occupation in Germany.

At Monday’s54 meeting Gousev settled all but one outstanding point both in the protocol and the transmitting report with a cordiality and flexibility which he had seldom shown before; and at the close he made his statement on the necessity for completing the Protocol on Zones, with great earnestness. By Tuesday evening the one outstanding minor point had also been settled. The texts have been agreed for signature. But the Russians have carefully avoided setting a definite time for signing the Control Machinery Protocol, while offering to meet even on Sunday55 if that will speed up our business. The only conclusion is that they have instructions not to sign one protocol without the other. They have applied this pressure in a most tactful and indirect way and are not doing it in concert with the British, for Strang has not caught on to this tactic. Naturally I have refrained from pointing it out to Strang for the reason that if the Russians were brought into the question of whether to use the words “he determines” or “may be agreed” they would undoubtedly prefer the latter, in view of their reference on Monday to the need for arriving at similar agreements regarding transit across the Soviet zone (Embassy’s 9643, November 6, 11 p.m.).

The Russian stand is a logical one. The two protocols stand or fall together. If the occupation is shifted from a tripartite to a four party basis as a result of French membership in the EAC, it will obviously be necessary to change the control machinery to a four power basis two [too]. In view of this logic, the Russians may possibly suspect that the British and we are stalling on a relatively minor point in the Protocol on Zones in order to bring in the French as full partners in both occupation and control, since this would actually be the effect of failing to complete both protocols before the French join the European Advisory Commission. I do not believe that this is the present British desire, and Strang himself has urged Dejean56 and Massigli57 not to upset the tripartite arrangements already made through injecting demands of their own. In any case, if we do not complete the Protocol on Zones now, we must be prepared to assume that the Russians will believe that we did so deliberately in order to change the whole basis of the control of Germany to a four power basis and that they may draw far-reaching conclusions from that with regard to American support for a British led west European bloc. [Mosely.]

Gallman

54 November 6.

55 November 12.

56 Maurice Dejean, Director General in charge of political affairs, French Ministry for Foreign Affairs.

57 René Massigli, French Ambassador in the United Kingdom and Representative on the European Advisory Commission.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) 740.00119 EAC/11–944: Telegram

[Document 199]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, November 11, 1944—noon.

9466. Reurtel 9776, November 9, 8 p.m. The Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Department agree to the substitution of the words “may be agreed” for “pre-determines” [“he determines”] in the Protocol on zones of occupation in Germany.57a

Stettinius

57a The Department of Defense has supplied information to the effect that the files of the Joint Chiefs of Staff contain no record of JCS agreement to the substitution referred to in this telegram. The views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff at this time were in general agreement with those of the United States military advisers to the Delegation at the European Advisory Commission, stated in telegram 9776, November 9, from London, p. 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 195], but also included an eventual solution to the problem, in case negotiations became deadlocked, similar to the wording in the final protocol and to that in telegram 9471, November 11, to London, infra.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) 740.00119 EAC/11–944: Telegram

[Document 200]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, November 11, 1944, 4 p.m.

9471. As conveyed by telephone (Matthews to Mosely), the War Department desires to add after the words “may be agreed” the following “hereafter by U.K. and U.S. military authorities (Combined Chiefs of Staff)” in the protocol on zones of occupation. (Deptel 9466).

Stettinius

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/11–1144: Telegram

[Document 201]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Acting Secretary of State

London, November 11, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received November 11—6:55 p.m.]

9851. Comea 126. For the Acting Secretary, Mr. Matthews and Mr. Winant. United States delegation EAC is very appreciative of JCS and State Department comments on a substantial number of United States draft directives,58 which are now ready for circulation to other two delegations and to SHAEF.

Joint advisers, however, understand serious consideration is presently being given in high military quarters in Washington to new plan which if adopted would require United States delegation to abandon procedure agreed on last June for presenting United States draft directives in EAC for tripartite negotiation and, instead, to present in EAC single omnibus directive along lines of JCS 1067.59 This apparently is based on belief, which joint advisers consider erroneous, that British and Soviet delegates on EAC would agree to limit EAC action on policy directives to adoption of single broad policy paper, leaving all further implementation of that paper to tripartite military government groups.

United States delegation will naturally advocate such a plan in EAC if instructed to do so, but advisers are convinced British and Soviet delegations will not be willing to follow such a procedure. British have circulated their directives which it is obvious have been carefully studied by the Soviets. Soviet delegate has from the beginning handled personally all questions of policy. While he might agree to delegate authority to EAC subcommittees for work on directives, there is nothing in our experience in dealing with the Russians to support belief that they will entrust to their nucleus control group, when set up, negotiation of important policy matters with parallel United States British groups.

As has been demonstrated, Soviets can move fast in EAC negotiations when they wish and they have recently expressed informally desire to have EAC consider following subjects at early date: (1) United Nations prisoners of war and displaced persons; (2) disarmament and demobilization; (3) abolition of Hitler regime and war criminals; and (4) economic questions. Presentation of United States views on these questions obviously cannot be limited to a few sweeping policy statements such as those contained in JCS 1067. Unless United States delegation has approved draft directives to present, discussions will have to be based on British directives and possibly on Soviet directives if any are presented by the Soviet delegation. Furthermore, failure to circulate United States directives in the EAC means that Soviet and British negotiators will have no opportunity to study United States views in advance of actual discussions in EAC and that United States negotiators will start out with a very great handicap.

Joint advisers consider British directives too detailed; they spell out unnecessary instructions on how to accomplish objectives. United States drafts were prepared with that criticism in mind. It is felt that practically all points covered in United States directives are important policy requiring tripartite agreement on EAC level.

Joint advisers strongly recommend that remaining United States draft directives continue to be cleared by JCS and Department as expressions of United States policy for negotiation in EAC, regardless of or in addition to any new over-all policy paper which may also be submitted for possible negotiation. This recommendation is strongly approved by the principal officers of United States Group CC60 as well as by the joint advisers.

Gallman

58 Between October 24 and November 10 comments on the following draft directives were cleared by the Department of State and Joint Chiefs of Staff and sent to the Embassy in London: Disposition of German or German-Controlled Aircraft, Aeronautical Equipment and Facilities; Primary Disarmament of the German Armed Forces Subsequent to Surrender; Disposition of German and German-Controlled Naval Craft, Equipment and Facilities; Control of Public Information in Germany; Censorship of Civilian Communications; Control of Post, Telegraph and Telephone Services in Germany; Elimination and Prohibition of Military Training in Germany; Control of Merchant Shipping Subsequent to Surrender; Control of Works of Art and Monuments; Securing and Examining Information and Archives; Administration of Justice; Control and Disposal of National Armed Forces and Property of Enemy Countries other than Germany; Religious Affairs; Disposition and Control of the German Police. During December, comments on one other draft directive, Disposal of German Armed Forces, were cleared by Department of State and the Joint Chiefs of Staff and sent to Ambassador Winant.

59 See bracketed note, p. 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164].

60 United States Group Control Council (Germany).

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/11–1144: Telegram

[Document 202]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 11, 1944—11 p.m.
[Received November 11—8:10 p.m.]

9878. For the Under Secretary and Mr. Matthews from Mosely. Deeply appreciate prompt action and full support in securing an agreed text of protocol on zones in Germany. (Department’s 9466 November 11, noon; 9471, November 11, 4 p.m.) Strang and high British military authorities consulted this evening objected to reference “(Combined Chiefs of Staff)”. To avoid further delay in consulting Russians, this omission was accepted. That part of text therefore reads “may be agreed hereafter by United Kingdom and United States military authorities.” British objection, which I had not foreseen during telephone instruction,61 was to mention of a specific bilateral institution in a tripartite document. British assume CCS will continue and complete agreement on this point. Tonight I discussed the completed amendments in detail with Gousev and found him greatly pleased that the protocol on zones could now be completed. Signature of both protocols planned for Monday.62 [Mosely.]

Gallman

61 The reference is presumably to the transatlantic telephone conversation mentioned in telegram 9471, November 11, to London, p. 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 198, Doc. 199, and Doc. 200].

62 The agreements on control machinery and zones of occupation were actually signed on Tuesday, November 14, 1944; see bracketed note, p. 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206].

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.00119 European Advisory Commission/11–1144

[Document 203]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 63

Washington, November 11, 1944.

The following paragraphs present an outline of the present status of plans for Germany and Austria.

1. The instrument of unconditional surrender for Germany64 recommended by the European Advisory Commission has been approved by the American, British and Soviet Governments without reservation.

2. A protocol delineating the three zones of occupation in Germany coinciding with your memorandum prepared on the basis of the Quebec agreement65 has been tentatively agreed upon in the European Advisory Commission. Final agreement awaits the clearing up of certain minor points between the British and the Americans, principally in connection with the ports of Bremen and Bremerhaven and is expected momentarily.

3. Agreement is anticipated by the end of this week on a plan for tripartite control machinery and military government of Germany to be submitted to the three Governments. The plan contemplates the establishment of a Supreme Authority, consisting of the Commanding Generals of the U.S., the U.K., and the U.S.S.R. forces, which would coordinate allied control of Germany and supervise such centralized administrative functions and economic activities as the three Powers deemed essential. A Control Council, composed of representatives in equal numbers from each of the three Allied Governments, would be established by the Supreme Allied Authority and would coordinate the administration of military government throughout Germany.

4. Mr. Robert D. Murphy has been appointed with the personal rank of Ambassador as Political Adviser for Germany to General Eisenhower and is now dividing his time between London and Versailles. A staff of experts to assist him is now being built up.

5. A directive outlining the policies to be followed in German territory during the period prior to surrender or the collapse of armed resistance was transmitted to General Eisenhower some time ago by the Combined Chiefs of Staff.67

6. An interim directive for the post-hostilities period, designed for use pending agreement with the Russians and British on the policies for the period of tripartite control, was approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and, after receiving the concurrence of the State Department, was informally brought to the attention of the Combined Chiefs of Staff. Acting upon instructions from their Government the British members thereof declined to consider formally this directive on the ground that the policies set forth therein were subjects for tripartite negotiation in EAC and that it was in many respects incompatible with the program contained in a series of British draft directives already submitted to EAC.

7. The Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Department of State have approved a number of United States draft proclamations and general orders to the Germans and directives to the Allied Commander. These papers have been submitted to Ambassador Winant to be placed before the European Advisory Commission. The subjects dealt with include among others the following: Control of Merchant Shipping; Administration of Justice; Religious Affairs; Control of Public Information; Control of Inland Transport; Prohibition of Military Training; Control of Communications; Censorship; Disposition of Aircraft and Aeronautical Equipment; Disposition of Naval Vessels and Equipment.

Further directives are under study for submission to EAC.

8. No international agreements have been made respecting the postwar economic treatment of Germany, beyond the “basket clause” in the agreed surrender terms committing Germany to “any further requirements” the Allies may decide to impose.

British policy has been formulated to a considerable degree in directives which have been placed before EAC for consideration not yet concluded.

No U.S. draft directives on economic matters have been submitted to the EAC pending clarification of the views of this Government on the economic treatment of Germany. The initiative with respect to these matters therefore remains in the hands of the British and the Russians.

The present stage of U.S. policy is represented primarily by Secretary Hull’s memorandum of September 29, 1944, outlining the views of the Department of State, and your memorandum of October 20, 1944 in reply, copies of which are attached for your convenience.68

A memorandum setting forth suggestions for American economic policy is being submitted separately.69

9. Austria: The tripartite Moscow Declaration of November 1, 1943,70 expresses the intention of the three Powers to reestablish an independent Austria, whose eventual treatment by them will take account of the Austrians’ own contribution to their liberation from Germany.

The Combined Chiefs of Staff have instructed the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean, pending agreement among the three Governments, to make his own plans for occupation and military government of as much of Austria as his forces may take, including all of Austria if necessary, and to make appropriate arrangements direct with the Soviet Commander if both British and Soviet forces should take parts of Austria initially.

The United States with your approval has expressed in EAC its agreement in principle to tripartite occupation and control of Austria provided the United States contributes only token forces, to be stationed in Vienna. EAC is now working towards agreement on control machinery for Austria on this basis, and an early recommendation is expected. Vienna would be occupied by British, Soviet, and (token) American troops; the Gaus of Upper and Lower Danube would be occupied by Soviet troops; and the rest of Austria (the southern provinces) by British troops. Control and administration machinery of Austria would be tripartite, with full participation by the United States.

British personnel is already being assembled and prepared for this in London and in Italy. The War Department has been informed of this in connection with its plans for military personnel, and plans will now be initiated for American civilian personnel pursuant to your memorandum of November 4 approving the designation of Mr. Erhardt71 as Political Adviser to the American Commanding General in Austria.

63 Not signed, but a covering memorandum is signed by Acting Secretary of State Stettinius.

64  Ante, p. 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 134].

65 For the agreement reached at the Second Quebec Conference regarding the zones of occupation in Germany, see telegram 7670, September 20, to London, p. 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163].

67 “Directive for Military Government in Germany Prior to Defeat or Surrender” was approved by the Combined Chiefs of Staff and dispatched to the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force, on April 28, 1944. The directive was annexed to a memorandum (E.A.C. (44) 18) dated May 15, circulated in the European Advisory Commission jointly by the United States and United Kingdom representatives, ante, p. 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 112].

68  Ante, pp. 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 167] and 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], respectively.

69 Dated November 11, 1944, infra.

70  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 749.

71 John G. Erhardt.

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 862.50/11–1144

[Document 204]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, November 11, 1944.

Subject: Economic Treatment of Germany.

As agreed in our conversation yesterday afternoon, I am sending to you herewith, as you requested in your memorandum to the Secretary of October 20, a draft copy of a memorandum on the economic treatment of Germany. You will note as I promised, it is only seven pages. I wish, however, to call particular attention to Section 3, beginning on page 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3] which, I am sure, you will wish to study with great care.

If this draft does not accurately set forth your views, perhaps you will let us talk to you again in order that the memorandum may be redone in accordance with your desires.

As I stated yesterday, it is rather important that we give the European Advisory Commission our views on this matter promptly since the treatment of Germany must be coordinated with our British and Russian allies.

E. R. Stettinius, Jr.

[Annex]

Washington, November 10, 1944.

Draft

Memorandum for the President

There are presented in the following paragraphs the recommendations of the Department of State for American policy with regard to economic treatment of Germany:

1. Urgency of Tripartite Agreement

It is essential that economic policies with respect to Germany be directed toward the central aim of disarming Germany and keeping her disarmed through an effective international security organization. To achieve this aim, preliminary agreement is necessary among the United States, Great Britain and the Soviet Union on certain basic policies governing economic treatment of Germany.

The matter is urgent because present British, Russian and American attitudes on the question show major divergencies which, if allowed to persist, would begin to be reflected in widely different policies at an early stage in the occupation of Germany. Such differences, in turn, would lay the basis for new European rivalries and endanger the effectiveness of an international security organization. Without effective security organization, no economic program alone can be relied upon to keep Germany disarmed. It is of urgent importance, therefore, that a substantial measure of agreement be obtained in advance on economic policies toward Germany, and that such policies be so framed as to remove this potential source of new European rivalries.

Complete identity of methods and objectives in the several zones of occupation is unnecessary and unattainable; it is essential, however, in the economic as in other fields, that the policies carried out in each zone be such as to facilitate a solution of the German problem in a fashion which is acceptable to all major powers and to Germany’s neighbors.

The need for such compatibility of policies has been accepted in principle by the three powers. It is probable, therefore, that existing divergences in attitude concerning economic treatment of Germany can be progressively narrowed through discussion and negotiation, if the subject is taken up promptly.

2. Present Tendencies of British and Russian Policy

Policies with respect to economic treatment of Germany are not definitely fixed but will progressively crystallize over a period of years. Moreover, our knowledge of the present tendencies of British and Russian policy is largely inferential, owing to the absence, so far, of any official discussion of these questions. Nevertheless, available information is sufficient to reveal certain general tendencies of policy which should be taken into account in determining our own course of action.

In the economic field, the principal differences between present British and Russian attitudes are as follows: a) The Russians apparently intend to go much farther than the British in removing industrial executives and large landowners from their present positions of control.

b) The British are more interested in restraining future German competition with British exports than in collecting large reparation. The Russians apparently wish to extract from the German economy, as reparation, the largest practicable contribution to Russian reconstruction and industrial development, and this contribution, although including labor services and transfers of existing capital equipment, is expected to come largely from current German production.

British policy envisages the retention, during the occupation period, of as large a part of the existing organization and structure of the German economy as is compatible with the destruction of the Nazi regime. The main elements of the present machinery of economic control would, so far as conditions permit, be held together after eliminating their discriminatory, Nazi feature; the existing executive and managerial personnel of private industry would continue in their positions, after removal of active Nazis who had held governmental or party posts. The aims of this policy are to prevent economic breakdown and to preserve a situation in which control over the economy can be exercised.

One important British objective in controlling the German economy is to limit German competition with British exports. In relation to this objective Britain’s interest as a reparation claimant is distinctly secondary. Britain’s program for accomplishing this objective is, however, moderate and restrained, relying primarily upon controls rather than upon basic economic impairment of Germany. There have been no proposals, even from the “hard peace” group, for elimination of German heavy industry, since Britain would necessarily have to bear the chief onus for enforcement of such a policy. Apart from specialized facilities for the manufacture of land and naval armament and all types of aircraft, the British are apparently considering dismantling of productive facilities in only a few other industries, such as synthetic oil and rubber. Destruction of a few such industries would neither significantly weaken the German economy nor lengthen appreciably the time required for war preparation if enforcement of disarmament broke down. Such destruction would, however, restore the German market for important British products. Britain is also prepared to support a program of restitution and of reparation in kind, confined to a specified list of export commodities, but is justifiably interested in preventing Germany from getting a head start, through reparation, in export markets of crucial importance to the British.

Britain appears to envisage a continuation of certain indirect controls over the German economy, primarily through exports and imports, beyond the period of military government. Such controls, although proposed partly as a means of enforcing disarmament, are also desired as a method of regulating German competition. A leading British industrialist has suggested that in the long run this problem of restraining German competition might best be handled through cartel-type arrangements with German industry on terms which would assure British goods a larger share of common markets than before the war but would still leave Germany sufficient export opportunities to meet her essential requirements.

Russian policy seems to envisage removal from positions of control of most industrialists and large landowners. The legal basis for such action is provided in the Russian declaration that Germans who employed Russian labor are war criminals. This will open the way for designation of new managers to operate under direction of the occupation authority. While the British look to the retention of much of the existing organization and personnel as a means of exercising control over the German economy, the Soviet Union intends to effect its control by selection of new German personnel for managerial posts in industry. Both powers apparently intend to exercise comprehensive control over the German economy.

One major Russian objective of economic control will be energetic exploitation of the German economy for Russian reconstruction and development. Russia has no economic interest in restraining German competition. Although reparation will be collected in part through transfer to Russia of usable German capital equipment and through labor services, Russian semi-official statements have indicated that Russia intends to rely primarily on reparation from current production. Russia would doubtless join in a policy of destroying specialized facilities for the manufacture of armaments (including all aircraft) and would perhaps consent to carrying this policy somewhat farther—to synthetic oil and rubber, for example. It is pretty clear, however, that sweeping deindustrialization would be regarded by Russia as incompatible with her interest in Germany as a source of supply of industrial goods.

It is apparent that these divergent tendencies of policy could result in markedly different economic developments in the British and Russian zones of occupation. a) The Russian zone—a food surplus area, with little bomb damage, and under energetic Russian exploitation—might have relatively moderate unemployment and tolerable food conditions. The British zone—a food deficit area, with extensive bomb damage, and with limited markets—might have much unemployment, and very bad conditions of food and shelter.

b) The Russian zone might witness a sweeping out of present economic ruling groups; in the British zone these groups might be largely retained in positions of control.

It is difficult to foresee the final results of these divergent tendencies, but it is clear that they seriously endanger long-run cooperation between Britain and the U.S.S.R.

In addition to the basic interest of both countries in sustaining cooperation, certain economic factors are present which increase the prospects for adoption of compatible policies.

First, there appears to be agreement on important points of economic policy.

a) Both Britain and Russia favor exercise of extensive responsibility by the occupation authorities for control of the German economy.

b) Both countries seem to oppose sweeping deindustrialization of Germany. Agreement could probably be reached on a program of industrial dismantling—to include specialized facilities for production of munitions and aircraft and, perhaps, a few synthetic materials.

In the second place, both countries have an important interest in maintaining inter-zonal movement of goods during the occupation period. The British zone is heavily deficient in foodstuffs, and the industries of the Russian zone can be operated only at a reduced level without imports of basic industrial materials, notably coal and steel.

3. United States Policy Toward Economic Treatment of Germany

The foregoing analysis of present tendencies in British and Russian policies has important implications for American policy toward economic treatment of Germany. In addition to thorough disarmament, it is essential that we strive for such an orientation of the German economy as will remove the danger of new rivalries from this source. Sustained enforcement of disarmament depends upon the avoidance of such rivalries.

A program of sweeping deindustrialization does not provide an adequate basis for sustained international security cooperation, nor does it provide a satisfactory alternative to such cooperation. A program designed to impose lasting restraint on Germany’s industrial exports to Western markets also involves the danger of generating serious, new rivalries in Europe and of weakening the basis for international security cooperation.

In the Department’s view, our long-term objectives with respect to economic treatment of Germany must be (1) abolition of German self-sufficiency, and (2) elimination of German economic domination over Europe. These two objectives conform to the general economic foreign policy of the United States. More important, however, it is only through the kind of orientation of the German economy which is envisaged in these objectives that the basis for international security organization can be protected.

These two objectives are closely related. Abolition of self-sufficiency requires the removal of all protection and subsidies to high-cost domestic production. Elimination of German economic domination over Europe requires the prohibition of all discriminatory trade controls, clearing agreements and international cartel arrangements.

The basic objectives can be carried out only gradually, and in short-run they will have to be qualified to conform to the immediate requirements of the occupation and transition period. Their adoption, even over the longer term, will be dependent upon our general success in achieving world trade expansion under liberal conditions of trade.

It is recommended that in discussion with the British and Russians, we should adopt the policies given below as a basis for agreed action during the period of Allied control.

a) We shall be obliged to go along with the British and Russians in accepting large responsibilities for the guidance and reorientation of German economic life. It is altogether unlikely that a “hands off” policy would be accepted and adhered to by all three powers. Consequently, we must be prepared to take all possible steps in the initial phases of occupation to prevent development of a chaotically unmanageable economic situation, since this is a prerequisite to the exercise of effective economic control.

b) Economic disarmament should include prohibition of the manufacture of land and naval armament and all types of aircraft; destruction of specialized facilities used for the manufacture of these items; and establishment of permanent or semi-permanent controls to detect surreptitious preparation for rearmament and stockpiling of key materials. Decisions regarding the synthetic oil and rubber industries should only be taken as part of an agreed, general program for abolishing German self-sufficiency.

c) With respect to treatment of the German population, we should favor, in the initial period, the lowest standards of health, diet and shelter compatible with the prevention of disease and disorder. This standard should be maintained until it is agreed that political tendencies within Germany justify some relaxation; the needs of liberated countries should, in any event, receive priority.

d) We should favor the conversion of the remainder of German industry to peacetime purposes, including particularly the production of reparation goods required to effect a large, early contribution to the rehabilitation of liberated countries. Reparation in kind should include any types of manufactured goods that claimant countries desire and Germany is fitted to produce. In addition to restitution of looted property, liberated countries may receive—as reparation—such German capital equipment as they can promptly put to effective use in the initial period of rehabilitation. We should favor a short program of heavy reparation payments, derived largely from current German production. Reparation should not be allowed to provide a pretext for building up German productive power as a means of increasing her “capacity to pay”.

e) We should advocate the establishment of machinery to assure inter-zonal movement of foodstuffs, industrial materials and finished goods, in order to foster production for reparation and to prevent large inter-zonal disparities in diet and employment.

f) We should attempt to reach agreement with Britain and Russia regarding policies for the control of large industrial firms and the elimination of Nazis from positions of influence. We should advocate a policy more drastic than the British now favor, but less drastic than Russia might be inclined to apply.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/11–1244: Telegram

[Document 205]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 12, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received November 12—2:10 p.m.]

9880. Comea 127. For the Acting Secretary, Mr. Matthews and Mr. Winant. In a long and cordial conversation with Mosely last night the Soviet representative on the EAC expatiated at length and spontaneously upon necessity for establishing in advance agreed tripartite policies regarding the treatment of Germany (Embassy’s 9851, November 11, 8 p.m.). Gousev plainly assumes that it is the function of the EAC to work out such joint policies over a wide range of problems. He particularly stressed the importance of avoiding divergencies of treatment in the three zones such as might lead the Germans to regard any one occupying power as harsher or more lenient than the others. He singled out for earliest possible negotiation question of elimination of Nazis and of the Hitler regime (Embassy’s 9702, November 8, 7 p.m.).72 Gousev’s views which obviously reflect his recent consultations in Moscow lend special emphasis to the questions raised in Embassy’s 9851 and 9702.

Gallman

[On November 14, 1944, the representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union on the European Advisory Commission in London signed an Agreement on Control Machinery in Germany. For text, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, 1945, page 124, or Department of State, Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS) 3070, printed in Department of State, United States Treaties and Other International Agreements, volume 5, part 2 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1956), page 2062.

On November 14, 1944, the representatives of these countries also signed an Amending Agreement to the Protocol on Zones of Occupation in Germany and the Administration of “Greater Berlin”. (See bracketed note printed on page 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159].) For text, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, 1945, page 121, or Department of State, Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS) 3071, printed in Department of State, United States Treaties and Other International Agreements, volume 5, part 2 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1956), page 2087.]

72 Not printed; it discussed revisions of the United States draft directive “Dissolution of Nazi Party and Purge of Nazi Personnel” (740.00119 EAC/11–844).

Report by the European Advisory Commission to the Governments of the United States of America, the United Kingdom, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 740.00119 EAC/11–1444

[Document 206]

Report by the European Advisory Commission to the Governments of the United States of America, the United Kingdom, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 73

In virtue of the Terms of Reference of the European Advisory Commission agreed upon at the Moscow Conference, the Commission has given attention to the machinery required to ensure the fulfilment of the terms of surrender to be imposed on Germany, as well as of any additional requirements which may be presented to Germany in accordance with those terms. Accordingly, we submit herewith, for the consideration of the three Governments, a proposed Agreement on Control Machinery in Germany.74

2. At the present time, it is difficult to determine the course of events in Germany after surrender or cessation of organised resistance. The immediate problem is to decide what Allied agencies should be set up in Germany directly after surrender or cessation of organised resistance and immediately upon the occupation of Germany by armed forces of the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

3. The plan contained in the attached proposed Agreement provides for the tripartite agencies of control and administration to cover the period of occupation of Germany following her defeat, during which Germany will be carrying out the basic requirements of unconditional surrender.

4. The purposes of these agencies of control and administration will comprise the control of the disarmament of Germany, including the most urgent tasks of economic disarmament; the abolition of the Nazi regime; and the preparation of conditions for the creation in Germany of organs based on democratic principles.

5. We have not found it possible to indicate what should be the duration in point of time of the period to be covered by the proposed Agreement. We would recommend, however, that the tasks assigned to the organs of control during that period should be carried out in as short a time as possible, and that the moment for the inauguration of the second period should be decided by the three Governments after consultations with their Commanders-in-Chief.

6. We have based our draft on the assumption that there will at the outset be a central administration in Germany through which the organs of control will operate. The machinery of tripartite control which we recommend would, however, be capable of adjustment to meet other conditions.

7. We have individually reported to our respective Governments on the course of the discussions which have taken place in arriving at the contents of the Agreement which is hereto attached. It is unnecessary for us, therefore, to repeat the history of those discussions.

8. In order to ensure that the control machinery proposed in the Agreement will be prepared to assume its functions with minimum delay, we recommend that nucleus control machinery, in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, be established on a tripartite basis as soon as possible after the Agreement has been approved.

9. We recommend, with reference to Article 8 of the Agreement, that the three Governments should jointly issue a public statement at the time of the signature of the Instrument of Surrender to the effect that, in connection with the exercise of the powers assumed by them in the Instrument of Surrender, they will consult with the Governments of other United Nations.

10. We further recommend that the main points of the attached Agreement on Control Machinery in Germany be published by the three Allied Representatives as a Proclamation to the German people immediately after the signing of the Unconditional Surrender Instrument or immediately following the cessation of organised resistance in Germany. This Proclamation would also include a description of the Zones of Occupation.

For the Representative of the Government of the United States of America on the European Advisory Commission:
Philip E. Mosely
Representative of the Government of the United Kingdom on the European Advisory Commission:
William Strang
Representative of the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the European Advisory Commission:
F. T. Gousev

London , 14 November, 1944.

73 Transmitted to the Department by the Acting United States Representative on the European Advisory Commission, Philip E. Mosely, in despatch 19196, from London, November 14, 1944; received November 20.

74 See bracketed note, p. 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) 740.00119 EAC/11–1444

[Document 207]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

[Washington,] November 14, 1944.

Present: Major General Hilldring, Civil Affairs Division, War Department; Colonel Cutter, War Department; Mr. Matthews—EUR;75 Mr. Hamilton—SA/HA;76 Mr. Leverich—CE;77 Mr. Lynch—U78

Mr. McCloy called on the Under Secretary this morning to discuss a letter to Mr. Stettinius from Lord Halifax dated November 10. The letter suggested that our interim directive for the treatment of Germany (JCS 1067)78a be circulated to EAC.

It was agreed to do this after the paper had been changed to make it tripartite in nature rather than a directive addressed only to SCAEF.

Mr. McCloy said that he would make the necessary alterations in the paper and would send us a copy for ultimate transmission to Ambassador Winant.

75 Office of European Affairs.

76 Maxwell M. Hamilton, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State.

77 Henry P. Leverich, Assistant Chief, Division of Central European Affairs.

78 Robert J. Lynch, Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State.

78a See bracketed note, p. 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164].

The Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs (Matthews) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy) Matthews File: Lot 5, Cabinet 110

[Document 208]

The Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs (Matthews) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)

Washington, November 15, 1944.

Dear Jack: There is enclosed herewith a copy of an informal memorandum prepared by Mr. Riddleberger on the meeting of November 6, 1944, in which you and General Hilldring, Mr. Dunn, Mr. Matthews, Mr. Riddleberger, Mr. Labouisse79 and Ambassador Winant participated. If you have any comments please let me have them; otherwise we shall be guided by this memorandum. Of course the question in paragraph No. 3 has now happily been solved.

Sincerely yours,

H. Freeman Matthews

[Enclosure]

Memorandum of a Meeting Between War and State Department Officials Regarding the European Advisory Commission

[Washington, undated.]

On November 6, 1944, a meeting was held in Mr. McCloy’s office in which the following participated: Mr. McCloy and General Hilldring for the War Department; Mr. Dunn, Mr. Matthews, Mr. Riddleberger and Mr. Labouisse for the State Department, and Ambassador Winant who had recently returned from London. The meeting was convoked to consider the War Department memorandum of November 1, 1944, respecting the British draft directives for Germany and questions related thereto.

After a comprehensive discussion of the memorandum of November 1, 1944, the State Department’s attitude thereto, and consideration of developments in the European Advisory Commission as described by Ambassador Winant, it was generally agreed to proceed as follows: 1. No more directives will be presented to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for their approval at this time. Upon his return to London, Ambassador Winant will enter into negotiations in the EAC on the directives which have been proposed. However, Ambassador Winant will not attempt to obtain complete governmental approval by each of the three powers to each and every part of proposed directives. He will attempt to get the EAC to recommend for formal governmental approval only such directives or parts of them as may be important questions of principle on which it is believed desirable to have the formal agreement of the three Governments. The details of the directives can then be worked out at an operational level, presumably by the nucleus group in which the Soviet Government has now agreed to participate. It was agreed that this procedure would make for operating efficiency and would not bind the three Governments formally to directives which might have to be subsequently modified in the light of such conditions as might be found in Germany after occupation.

2. From information that has been received from the British and Soviet Governments, the three Governments should be prepared to discuss the following matters in the EAC in the near future: (a) Control machinery for Germany (a recommendation by the EAC is expected at any time).80

(b) Proclamations and general orders (American views have been forwarded to London).81

(c) United Nations prisoners of war and interned or other citizens of the United Nations held in Germany (American views have been forwarded to London).

(d) Disarmament of German armed forces and demilitarization of Germany (American views have been forwarded to London in several directives approved by State, War, Navy and Joint Chiefs of Staff).

(e) Dissolution of Nazi party and abolition of Hitler regime. (American views are contained in several directives forwarded to London.)

(f) War criminals.

(g) Control of German economy. (State Department is preparing an additional memorandum containing its views. The President has approved82 in principle the economic objectives set forth in the Secretary’s memorandum of September 29, 1944 to the President.)

(h) Occupation of Austria.

3. General Hilldring will give his personal attention to the question of the British and American zones of occupation in order that the European Advisory Commission can complete the protocol. The protocol can be formally recommended to the three Governments as soon as the delineation of the American and British zones, as agreed upon at the Quebec Conference, can be inserted. It is understood that this is now awaiting action by the Combined Chiefs of Staff.

79 Henry R. Labouisse, Jr., Special Assistant to the Director of the Office of European Affairs.

80 See bracketed note, p. 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206].

81 See instruction 4665, October 24, to London, p. 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180].

82 The reference is presumably to the President’s memorandum of October 20 to the Secretary of State, p. 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State (Pasvolsky) Matthews Files

[Document 209]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State (Pasvolsky)

[Washington,] November 15, 1944.

Subject: Treatment of Germany

Participants: The President

The Under Secretary

Mr. Hackworth

Mr. Pasvolsky

In reply to the Under Secretary’s question, the President said that he had read the memorandum submitted to him on the treatment of Germany82a and thought that it was entirely satisfactory except for one point.

As he saw the picture, the system that would become established would be that General Eisenhower and the British and Russian Commanders would be in charge of their respective zones. In addition, there would be a commission in Germany which would consist of military men of a lower rank. What bothers the President is that on this commission in Berlin there would be insufficient representation of a tough civilian point of view. He, therefore, wants to have something worked out that would take care of this situation, possibly by way of giving a general’s commission to some outstanding civilian and making him the U.S. member of the Berlin commission.

Mr. Stettinius asked the President whether or not he would now be willing to send copies of the memorandum to the War, Navy and Treasury Departments as a Department of State proposal which he considers satisfactory but on which he would like to have their comments. The President said that he thought this to be the right procedure and that the necessary transmitting memoranda should be prepared for him.82b He then added that the Secretary of the Treasury was lunching with him today and that he would show him the memorandum, indicating his general approval of it.

The President said he was still in a tough mood and that he is determined to be tough with Germany. After some discussion, he agreed that the memorandum was sufficiently tough. He said that what he liked about it particularly was that it did not dot all the i’s and cross all the t’s. There are many questions that must be left for future determination, since we have no way of knowing what we shall find in Germany. He himself used to know Germany well, having studied there. But he would not want to rely on that as a basis of reliable judgment as to what Germany will be like after the termination of hostilities.

82a The reference here is to the memorandum of November 11 from the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt, p. 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204].

82b The Department immediately prepared and sent to the President the requested memoranda, but the President indicated that he wished to redraft the policy paper on economic treatment of Germany. Apparently this redraft was never prepared. The file was returned from the White House to the Department of State on March 6, 1945. (862.50/11–1144)

The Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy) to the Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs (Matthews) Department of Defense Files

[Document 210]

The Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy) to the Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs (Matthews)

[Washington,] 20 November, 1944.

Dear Doc: Receipt is acknowledged of your letter dated November 15, 1944, inclosing copy of an informal memorandum prepared by Mr. Riddleberger on the meeting of November 6, 1944, and requesting my comments thereon.

It is my understanding that it was decided at the meeting of November 6 and at our subsequent meeting that, as stated in paragraph one of Mr. Riddleberger’s memorandum, no more directives of the type hitherto prepared by our delegation in the EAC will be presented to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for consideration at this time. The further understanding was that, in lieu of the detailed directives heretofore prepared, JCS 1067 would be revised in a manner which would make it appropriate for presentation to the European Advisory Commission as a broad general directive for the initial government of Germany. Matters of detailed planning for the implementation of this broad directive would be handled in the Control Council or otherwise on a military level. It is my understanding that Ambassador Winant agreed to this procedure.

It was further agreed at the meeting of November 6, with Ambassador Winant’s concurrence, that JCS 1067 represents the approved U.S. views for the control of Germany in the initial stages of occupation, and that the U.S. planners on EAC would be guided thereby and would not depart from the principles set out in this paper in drafting papers for presentation to EAC or in representing us in discussions in the EAC.

In the event that the U.K. or the U.S.S.R. should desire to change or enlarge JCS 1067 in the EAC by departing from the principles and policies stated in JCS 1067 or by the inclusion of detailed matter, the Ambassador should transmit back to Washington the proposed changes in policy or detailed material for approval or comment.

Although none of the detailed directives from our group in the EAC are presently to be considered further in the Working Security Committee or by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, I should suppose that general policy guidance would be given to the EAC delegation on certain matters, including some of those mentioned in paragraph 2 of Mr. Riddleberger’s memorandum; as for example war crimes, United Nations War Prisoners and de-Nazification. JCS 1067 covers some of these matters, but a further general directive may be necessary to cover those points more fully, to the extent that they are not covered by JCS 1067.

To make the additions to Mr. Riddleberger’s memorandum which I feel are appropriate, I suggest the following: (1) Add to paragraph 1 the following additional paragraph: “It was further agreed that JCS 1067 represents the approved U.S. views for the control of Germany in the initial stages of occupation after defeat, (the so-called interim period), whether such occupation is on a combined or on a tripartite basis and until long-term policies are definitely established and put into effect. The U.S. delegation in EAC will be guided by the principles stated in JCS 1067 and will not depart from the principles set out in this paper in drafting papers for presentation to EAC or in representing us in discussions in the EAC. In the event that the U.K. or the U.S.S.R. should desire in EAC to change or enlarge the provisions stated in JCS 1067 by departing from these principles and policies or by the inclusion of detailed matter, the Ambassador will transmit back to Washington the proposed changes in policy or detailed material for approval or comment.”

(2) I would add the following to paragraph 2: “Policy instructions on the points just mentioned will be given to our group in EAC, so far as not heretofore given. On the matters on which U.S. views have been forwarded to London, our delegation will be instructed to adhere to these views. In matters relating to the initial or interim post-defeat period of occupation JCS 1067 contains the agreed principles. Policy instructions, for the initial post-defeat period, supplementing JCS 1067, will be prepared after consultation between representatives of the Secretary of State and the Secretary of War, in the form of supplemental directives or in the form of a separate paper covering points not dealt with in JCS 1067, or inadequately dealt with in that paper”.

I shall appreciate it if you will inform me whether the above conforms with your understanding of the agreement reached.82c

Sincerely,

John J. McCloy

82c No reply to this letter has been found in the files of either the Department of State or the Department of Defense.

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.00119 EW/11–2244

[Document 211]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] November 22, 1944.

Subject: Economic Treatment of Germany

At the time that you redraft the memorandum on the Economic Treatment of Germany you might find the attached memorandum useful.

E. R. Stettinius, Jr.

[Annex]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] November 22, 1944.

Subject: Summary of Department’s Views on Economic Treatment of Germany

The Department of State believes: (1) The German economy should be operated as nearly as possible as a unit during the occupation period.

(2) Allied occupation policy should be severe— (a) a rock-bottom standard of living for the Germans;

(b) labor services for the rehabilitation of devastated parts of Europe;

(c) transfer of such industrial equipment and stockpiles as liberated countries can put to effective use, limited only by necessity for maintaining a minimum German economy;

(d) conversion of the German economy to peacetime production, including production for minimum German needs and for reconstruction of rest of Europe on reparation account;

(e) elimination from positions of control of those industrial and financial leaders who have been closely identified with the Nazi regime or who have derived large benefit from Aryanization or spoliation of occupied countries.

(3) We must rely on an effective international security organization to keep Germany disarmed. We can’t make Germany so weak that it will be impossible for her to recover. A look at Russia in 1920 and in 1940 demonstrates how quickly industrial strength can be built up if a country is left alone “to stew in its own juice”. Disarmament requires prohibition of arms and aircraft production and destruction of specialized facilities for their manufacture. Some other permanent or semi-permanent industrial restrictions and controls may be necessary, but if the security organization is prepared to use force to prevent rearmament, we don’t have to cut deep into the German economy, and if it isn’t, no amount of once-and-for-all economic destruction will make much lasting difference.

(4) In the long run, we should look forward to a German economy geared into a liberal world economy on the basis of efficient specialization. This will imply equitable German access to export markets, abolition of German self-sufficiency, and abandonment of instruments of German economic aggression—private international cartels, bilateral barter arrangements, etc. This alone is compatible with the emergence of a stable non-aggressive Germany. This may prove to be unattainable, but for the present we should take no action which would permanently preclude peaceful development of Germany.

E. R. Stettinius, Jr.

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 862.50/11–2244

[Document 212]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] November 29, 1944.

Subject: British Views on the Economic Treatment of Germany

For your convenience I have summarized below a series of telegrams received from the Embassy in London on the British views on the economic treatment of Germany.

The reports generally confirm the statement of the British position which was outlined in the Department’s draft of November 10 on the economic treatment of Germany. British officials seem strongly opposed to sweeping measures of de-industrialization and extreme impoverishment of Germany. They are continuing to explore selective economic controls and restrictions, but detailed examination of specific proposals has served to make clear the difficulties and limitations of most such measures.

The British emphasize the need for selecting measures which will enjoy lasting public support and which will be enforceable a generation hence, after the emotions of wartime have cooled down.

They advocate conversion of the German economy to peacetime production and payment of reparation in kind.

They are eager to begin discussions on restitution of looted property even if discussion of broader economic questions is not yet practicable, and they intend to introduce shortly into the European Advisory Commission a proposal on machinery to handle restitution.

Edward R. Stettinius, Jr.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/12–144: Telegram

[Document 213]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 1, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received 8:02 p.m.]

10609. Comea 132. Embassy’s 9851, November 11, 8 p.m. At last night’s meeting of the European Advisory Commission, the British representative urged the Commission to take the American draft proclamations and draft general orders83 as a basis for discussion of the additional requirements to be imposed on Germany instead of pressing for discussion of his own drafts. Gousev and Massigli reported that their delegations are studying the United States drafts and seemed inclined to base its discussion on them.

Strang also told me that his delegation is enthusiastic about the United States draft directives of which twelve have been circulated in the EAC to date and it is likely that the Commission will use many of the United States directives as a basis for discussion. At last night’s EAC meeting, Strang and Gousev again emphasized the necessity for the EAC to work out directives on a wide range of policy towards Germany in order to provide the nucleus control groups for Germany with an agreed foundation of policy as a basis for their planning and implementation.

It is probable that consideration of proclamations, general order and directives will now be speeded up by assigning this work to subcommittee of the EAC. It is also possible that some directives will be considered concurrently with the relevant sections of the general order.

British, Soviet and French Delegations are also pressing for the setting up of a subcommittee of the EAC to consider the United Kingdom draft special order on treatment of United Nations prisoners of war in Germany (Embassy’s despatch 18825 of October 25).85 We have not received comments on the revised United States draft directive on this subject which was transmitted by Embassy’s despatch 18790 of October 23.85 Comments on the British draft special order and the United States draft directive are now urgently needed (Embassy’s 9134, October 24, 7 p.m., Comea 116),86 Intensive negotiation on this question will begin on December 6.

Winant

83 The United States draft proclamations and general orders for Germany were circulated in the European Advisory Commission by the Acting United States Representative (Mosely) as E.A.C. (44) 27, November 14, 1944, copies of which were transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 19456, November 24, not printed.

85 Not printed.

85 Not printed.

86 Not printed; it requested that action on a new directive regarding prisoners of war be expedited by the Department (740.00119 EAC/10–2444).

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State Matthews Files

[Document 214]

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

[Warm Springs, Georgia,] December 4, 1944.

Memorandum for Hon. E. R. Stettinius, Jr.

I have yours of November 29th on the Economic Treatment of Germany. There are two things which I think the State Department ought to keep in the linings of their hats. (1) That in the Economic Treatment of Germany we should let her come back industrially to meet her own needs, but not to do any exporting for sometime and we know better how things are going to work out.

(2) We are against reparations.

(3) We do want restitution of looted property of all kinds.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 E.A.C./12–444: Telegram

[Document 215]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 4, 1944—midnight.
[Received December 4—10:46 p.m.]

10733. Personal for the Secretary. My delay in answering your 9961, November 28, 1 p.m.87 has been due to an effort on my part to get an unequivocal confirmation by the Russians of their withdrawal of any condition regarding their acceptance of the instrument of unconditional surrender for Germany. The conditions placed by the British on their original acceptance prompted the Russians to enter a reservation of their own conditioned on the British action. After the withdrawal of the British conditions, the Russians acknowledged the British action and Gousev stated that the original acknowledgement of unconditional acceptance by his Government was thereby reinstated. I have not been satisfied with the language in the exchange of letters and since returning from Washington I have taken up this subject with Gousev and I have his assurance that he will clarify this question of language. I had hoped to get this accomplished last week but I am very certain I will be able to complete the record this week.

Winant

87 Not printed; it asked if the Soviet Government had withdrawn its reservation regarding the instrument of surrender for Germany (740.00119 EAC/9–2144).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/12–544: Telegram

[Document 216]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 5, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received 11:15 p.m.]

10752. Comea 133. Strang today notified me officially that United Kingdom Government approve (1) text of agreement and covering report on Control Machinery in Germany of November 14 and (2) text of the protocol on Zones of Occupation in Germany of September 12, as modified and completed by the agreement of November 14 on amendments to the Protocol on Zones (Embassy’s 9972 November 14, 10 p.m.;88 originals transmitted in Embassy’s despatches 19196 and 19215 of November 14),89 as submitted by the European Advisory Commission to the three Governments.

Winant

88 Not printed; it reported the signing of the above-mentioned agreements (740.00119 EAC/11–1444).

89 Neither despatch printed; for citation to the agreements, see bracketed notes, pp. 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159] and 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/12–144: Telegram

[Document 217]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 7, 1944—8 p.m.

10249. We regret that we have not been able to send a reply to the request made in the last paragraph of your 10609 of December 1 (Comea 132). The Working Security Committee promptly held several meetings on this subject but because of differences of opinion which developed between the military representatives was unable to agree upon a reply. We are still working on this question and it will be discussed in a high level conference tomorrow. We shall advise you of action here at the earliest possible moment.

In the meantime, it is suggested that you agree to the establishment of a subcommittee of EAC to consider this question and cable any developments in that subcommittee.

Stettinius

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/12–744: Telegram

[Document 218]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 7, 1944—midnight.
[Received December 7—9:05 p.m.]

10856. Comea 134. By letter of December 4 (copy transmitted to the Department by air today)90 the British representative on the European Advisory Commission proposed the early establishment of a committee of experts to work on “the material before the Commission relating to the disarmament and demilitarization of Germany”. As stated in an aide-mémoire of October 25 from the Soviet Embassy to the Foreign Office and as mentioned in my telegram No. 9851 (November 11, 8 p.m., Comea 126), the Soviet Government also attaches a high priority to this subject. At tonight’s meeting of the EAC it was agreed to appoint this committee tomorrow to begin its work immediately.

Material before the Commission includes several British draft directives and the following US draft directives which were circulated to the Commission on November 23 and 25 (see my despatch No. 19592 of December 1):91 Disposition of naval craft (EAC/44/34);

Disposition of aircraft (EAC/44/37);

Disposal of nationals, armed forces and property of enemy countries other than Germany (EAC/44/39);

And, disposition of the German Police (EAC/44/38).

I have now circulated the US draft directive on elimination and prohibition of military training in Germany in accordance with Department’s instruction No. 4684 of October 28.92

The revised US draft directive on “disarmament of German armed forces and disposal of enemy equipment” which incorporates the comments of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Department’s instructions No. 4664 of October 24 and No. 4722 of November 4)93 was transmitted with my despatch No. 19300 of November 18.92 Early clearance in Washington of this draft directive is essential if the US views are to be adequately presented in the now imminent discussions on this question.

The US draft directive on “disposal of German armed forces subsequent to surrender” was transmitted with my despatch No. 16970 of July 20.92 Comment and clearance on this important directive are similarly awaited urgently as a basis for stating US views and interests in the Commission’s discussions.

Winant

90 In despatch 19728, December 7, from London, not printed.

91 Not printed.

92 Not printed.

93 Neither printed.

92 Not printed.

92 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/12–1144: Telegram

[Document 219]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 11, 1944—9 p.m.
[Received December 11—6:15 p.m.]

10997. For attention of Mr. Dunn. Thank you for your 10249, December 7, in reply to the last paragraph of my 10609, December 1.

The directive on treatment of United Nations POW’s94 in Germany I am sure you realize involves political considerations as well as military action. It therefore clearly falls within the category of directives which we agreed in the conference with the War Department should be considered by the EAC. Both you and McCloy were present at this meeting. My inability to act is holding back the work of the committee authorized by the EAC to consider this subject. The British, the Russians and the French are all ready to proceed. I hope that the differences which you referred to in your message and which you explained would be discussed at a higher level conference scheduled to meet on December 9 have been resolved and that we may expect a reply the early part of this week.

Winant

94 Prisoners of War.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/12–744: Telegram

[Document 220]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 12, 1944—7 p.m.

10371. This telegram, which is in reply to your Comea 132 of December 1 and Comea 134 of December 7, has War and Navy concurrence.

The whole question of expediting decisions by the EAC has been under review here in high level conferences. The War and Navy Departments have expressed concern on two aspects of the problem: (a) that there is no general over-all directive agreed upon by the three powers for the initial phase of occupation, and (b) that under the existing system of presenting detailed directives for discussion in the EAC the military commanders will be tied down by such detailed directives whether applicable or not to the situation they may find in Germany. Furthermore, it is doubted here if the Commission will be able to reach agreement in time on thirty-odd directives. It is our opinion, therefore, that you should not seek EAC agreement on the detailed directives in their present form, but should extract from them the general policy provisions on which agreement should be reached in EAC negotiations. We believe, however, that some agreement on broad policy lines before surrender or defeat is essential.

We therefore think that you should urge the Commission to consider, at least initially, the preparation of an over-all directive. The details of policy and questions of procedure and administration should then be turned over for planning on a working military level under the Control Council.

In accordance with this aim, JCS 1067 is being revised here in a form which will make it suitable for presentation to the EAC as a broad general directive for the initial governing of Germany. This draft will be transmitted to you at an early date. In the meantime, you should consider JCS 1067 as representing U.S. views with respect to policy referred to therein, which may come up for discussion in the EAC.

In view of these decisions here, we feel that it is not necessary to resubmit to Washington draft directives upon which you have received U.S. comments. These U.S. comments should be followed closely in revising papers for submission to EAC but revised papers need not be resubmitted here so long as they are consistent with views already expressed here. In particular instances, the U.S. comments do not appear to have been fully taken into account. For example, the comments set forth in JCS 1103, transmitted to you by Department’s instruction No. 4665 of October 24, were not fully reflected in the revised proclamations and general orders received here.96 It is believed that draft orders presented to EAC should conform to views expressed in JCS 1103. Possibly consultation between your Military Adviser and U.S. side of SHAEF will be of assistance in guiding form and substance of such orders.

The question of United Nations prisoners of war and other subjects not included or not adequately covered in JCS 1067 or in the policy provisions of the other directives already transmitted to you, will be incorporated in further guidance to be formulated here and transmitted when approved.

We very much hope, however, that you can enter into discussions in the EAC on the material now in hand and the revised JCS 1067, and earnestly recommend the high desirability of having the Commission agree, if possible, on a broad over-all directive which can be utilized by the commanders in the early stages of occupation. (Halifax has asked that 1067 be submitted to EAC). If it is not possible for the Commission to recommend one directive, we should not object to splitting JCS 1067 into several, provided each was a broad policy statement consistent with JCS 1067 and not too detailed.

Stettinius

96 The revised United States draft proclamations and general orders were transmitted in despatch 19456, from London, November 24; received November 29 (none printed).

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger) 740.00119 E.A.C./12–1444

[Document 221]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger)97

[Washington,] December 14, 1944.

The revised edition of the JCS 1067 is attached hereto.98 It has been reworked during the past several weeks, principally by Colonel Cutter and Colonel Allen of the War Department and by Mr. Despres99 and me of the State Department. Ambassador Winant has been informed that it is being revised to make it suitable for presentation to the European Advisory Commission, and that he will shortly receive it for that purpose.

1. General Directive

The first section of JCS 1067 has been rewritten to conform to recommendations made by the EAC, notably on control machinery for Germany, subsequent to the original preparation of the directive.

2. Political Directive

In revising this paper, the War Department representatives were obviously under categorical instructions to adhere as closely as possible to the original. This intransigent attitude was particularly noticeable in connection with the political section of the directive.

In consequence, the ad hoc committee has done little more on this section than improve the arrangement, the phrasing and the German. Substantively it is the same as drafted by the Treasury Department some months ago. The suggestions submitted by the State Department experts with respect to paragraph 1 (the arrest provisions) and paragraph 8a (the dismissal provision) of the political directive, including carefully worked out categories of Nazis for dismissal, were summarily rejected by the War Department representatives. They were rejected not on their merits but for the stated reason that they would not be pleasing to the Treasury Department. This unyielding attitude on a section of the directive which is peculiarly an affair for State Department determination is astonishing, particularly as there is no disagreement on the general proposal of the de-Nazification of Germany.

It might well be expected that the State Department’s opinion on how best to effect this political housecleaning in Germany would prevail. The Department had prepared and made available to the War Department comprehensive studies on the organization of National Socialism in Germany, which incorporated specific recommendations for effective dissolution.

There was never any real discussion of this problem in the ad hoc committee because of the unwillingness of the War Department representatives to depart from the wording of the original draft. All of the officers in CE1 and TS2 assigned to German problems are convinced that the State Department’s suggestions, both for the purpose of effective de-Nazification and in the interests of an orderly military government, are far superior to the original phraseology.

There are other matters on which the draft of the political directive is faulty. For example, paragraph 11 contains some provisions that are practically impossible of application, but I was unable to get any modification of them in the ad hoc committee. However, I do not believe that these points are important enough to belabor them further.

3. Financial Directive

The revision of the financial directive has consisted largely of detailed technical changes. The principal defects of the directive are as follows: (a) A large part of the directive deals with matters of internal financial housekeeping of the occupation forces themselves, which should not, in general, be the subject of tripartite negotiation.

(b) Its guidance on policy matters is extremely limited. It states that banks should be placed under such control as is necessary for military needs, that banks should not be kept closed, that stock exchanges may be closed, that all financial assets of certain specified classes of holders should be blocked, and that exchange control should be established. A dollar-mark exchange rate of ten cents is fixed for pay of troops. Apart from these specified matters, the general burden of the directive is “hands off”.

In response to considerable urging, the military representatives accepted our proposals for two changes of slight importance. A new sentence has been added to paragraph 8 which envisages continued collection of most taxes. A final paragraph (10) has been added relating financial measures to the general policies set forth in the economic directive.

4. Economic and Relief Directives

The principal changes in this directive are as follows: (a) A clause is added relating to restitution. (Economic—1f).

(b) The “hands off” note and disavowal of responsibility are made less extreme. (Economic—last two sentences of paragraph 1).

(c) The desirability of avoiding general revival of German export trade is noted. (Economic—bottom of page 1).

(d) The possible need for imports is recognized. (Economic—paragraph 2b; Relief—paragraph 2).

(e) Explicit reference is made to the inter-zonal problems resulting from regional surpluses and deficits, and this problem is assigned to the Control Council.

The above changes were made at our suggestion. The economic and relief directives leave much to be desired, but in view of the existing uncertainty over economic policy toward Germany, it is not possible to go much further.

5. Recommendation

With reference to the presentation of JCS 1067 to the EAC, it should not be forgotten that our delegation in London is convinced that the British and Soviet representatives are not going along with this procedure of an over-all directive (London’s 9851, November 11, Comea 126). If, however, for various reasons the Department thinks it must follow this procedure and approve JCS 1067 for submission to EAC,3 I strongly recommend that Winant be advised by us that he should not insist upon JCS 1067 to a point where it will unduly prolong the negotiations. If we force him to adhere too rigidly to JCS 1067 (particularly in view of its unsatisfactory nature and incompleteness) we may enter Germany with very little basic policy agreed upon by the three powers. I believe we are all of the opinion here that it is highly advisable to have as wide an area of agreement as possible with the British and Russians on the treatment of Germany before its occupation.

In conclusion, I think a word of commendation to our delegation in London is in order. Mr. Winant has now had his procedure reversed several times. He has received a minimum amount of guidance from this Government. Recriminations as to why this is the case will serve no useful purpose, but I feel we should once more urge upon the War Department the necessity of rapid replies to his urgent and repeated requests for guidance on a number of matters which are scheduled for discussion in the EAC, and on which this Department has for months been prepared to act. JCS 1067 still does not cover some of these questions and we cannot expect Ambassador Winant to operate without continuing and approved guidance from his own government.

James W. Riddleberger

97 Addressed to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn) and the Deputy Director (Matthews).

98 Not printed.

99 Emile Despres, Adviser on German Economic Affairs, Office of Economic Affairs and Office of Wartime Economic Affairs.

1 Division of Central European Affairs.

2 Division of Territorial Studies.

3 Marginal handwritten note on first page of the memorandum states: “Mr. Dunn and Mr. Matthews approved revised draft of J.C.S. 1067 and I so notified Col. Cutter in War Dept. on Dec. 16. J[ames] W. R[iddleberger].”

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/12–1444: Telegram

[Document 222]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 14, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received December 14—5:02 p.m.]

11085. Personal for the Secretary. My 10733, December 4, midnight, in reply to Department’s 9961, November 28, 1 p.m.4 In answer to your message, I received from Gousev today a letter withdrawing in unequivocal language the Soviet reservation concerning approval of the instrument of unconditional surrender for Germany. Text follows: “In connection with the question which you raised with me in a conversation of November 30 regarding the reservation to the instrument of unconditional surrender of Germany, have the honor to inform you that the Soviet Government agrees to withdraw the reservation made by it in my letter of September 14, 1944 inasmuch as the Government of Great Britain has withdrawn its reservations presented in Sir William Strang’s letter of August 31, 19445 and that the Soviet Government will not make any reservations whatsoever regarding this question unless the Government of Great Britain or the Government of the United States of America makes an analogous reservation.”

The status of the surrender instrument is that it has been approved without reservation by the three Governments.

This took some doing. I thought you would like to know that I got this done directly with the Russians without British assistance. My best always.

Winant

4 See footnote 87, p. 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216].

5 See telegrams 7138, September 1, and 7679, September 17, from London, pp. 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 155] and 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], respectively.

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger) 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–1644

[Document 223]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger)6

[Washington,] December 16, 1944.

On October 1, 1944 Secretary Hull gave the President a memorandum7 respecting American policy for the post-war treatment of Germany. This memorandum summarized the status of the negotiations in the European Advisory Commission and listed the important problems for which high policy decisions must be worked out by the three governments. These problems include: Demilitarization of Germany; dissolution of the Nazi Party in all its ramifications; controls over communications, press, propaganda and education; and, primary and continuing economic objectives which are to render Germany incapable of waging war and to eliminate permanently German economic domination of Europe. A recommendation was also included that no decision should be taken on the possible partition of Germany at this time.

The President replied to this memorandum under date of October 20, 19448 in which he agreed with many of the points mentioned and requested further discussion with the State Department on others. The State Department has consequently submitted several additional memoranda to the President,9 particularly with reference to our economic objectives. The President has subsequently informed the State Department10 that he is in favor of restitution of looted property of all kinds and that Germany should be allowed to “come back industrially to meet her own needs but not to do any exporting for some time until we know better how things are going to work out”. The President also expressed himself as being opposed to reparations.

In the meantime, the State, War and Navy Departments have prepared a revised edition of JCS 106711 for presentation to the European Advisory Commission. Ambassador Winant will be instructed to seek agreement on this directive as a general policy guide for the military government during the initial phase of occupation subsequent to German surrender or defeat. Mr. McCloy of the War Department intends to show this revised directive to the Secretary of the Treasury before it is transmitted to London. In the meantime, a number of directives on particular subjects, approved by the State, War and Navy Departments and by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, have been transmitted to London and submitted to the EAC for discussion there. A list of these approved directives is attached hereto.

In conclusion, it should be stated that the President recently informed the Secretary of State that he wished to work out these problems in connection with Germany with the State Department before taking them up with other agencies of this Government.

James W. Riddleberger

[Annex]

List of Approved Directives Transmitted to the American Representative on the European Advisory Commission 12

1. Control of merchant shipping subsequent to surrender.

2. Securing and examining information in archives.

3. Control and disposal of nationals, armed forces and property of enemy countries other than Germany.

4. Administration of Justice.

5. Religious affairs.

6. Disposition and control of German police.

7. Primary disarmament of German armed forces subsequent to surrender.

8. Control of public information in Germany.

9. Control of inland transport.

10. Elimination and prohibition of military training in Germany.

11. Control of post, telegraph and telephone service in Germany.

12. Censorship of civilian communications in Germany.

13. Disposition of German or German-controlled aircraft, aeronautical equipment and facilities.

14. Disposition of German and German-controlled naval craft, equipment and facilities.

15. Control of works of art and monuments in Germany.

16. Disposal of German armed forces.

17. U.S. directive of proclamations and general orders for Germany.

6 Handwritten note at the top of the memorandum states: “Written for the Secretary to give to Mr. Morgenthau Dec. 18. J[ames] W. R[iddleberger]”

7 Dated September 29, p. 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 167].

8  Ante, p. 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177].

9  Ante, pp. 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], and 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213].

10 The reference is to the President’s memorandum of December 4 to the Secretary of State, p. 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214].

11 See memorandum dated December 14, p. 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221].

12 Of the following draft directives, only Nos. 15 and 17 are printed (vol. ii, p. 1060, and ante, p. 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], respectively). The remaining documents are in the European Advisory Commission files of the Department of State.

Memorandum Prepared in the Division of Central European Affairs for the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Germany)/12–2644

[Document 224]

Memorandum Prepared in the Division of Central European Affairs for the Secretary of State

[Washington,] December 26, 1944.

Mr. Secretary: In conformity with your arrangement with Secretary Morgenthau, Messrs. Luxford13 and Dubois14 of the Treasury met with Messrs. Riddleberger and Despres on Tuesday afternoon, December 19, and went over the Department’s recent policy documents on Germany, including the interchange of memoranda with the President. Mr. Luxford telephoned Mr. Riddleberger on the following day to suggest a further informal discussion on German questions, saying that his reading of our recent memoranda led him to believe that State and Treasury might be less far apart on treatment of Germany than both had supposed. Messrs. Riddleberger and Despres had an extended discussion of German questions with Messrs. Luxford, Dubois and Glasser15 on Thursday afternoon, December 21.

Although the Treasury people held that they were not retreating from their earlier position—which they alleged had been misconstrued or distorted—it became clear from the discussion that they were prepared to abandon or modify a number of points in their original plan if this could lead to agreement with the State Department. It appeared that they were primarily interested in two objectives: (1) Vigorous de-Nazification, and

(2) A substantial and lasting contraction of the heavy industrial sector of the German economy.

They proposed that we explore further the possibility of getting together on a mutually acceptable statement of policies. Messrs. Riddleberger and Despres agreed to consider this proposal.

Although the Treasury view on economic matters, even in its more moderate form, diverged in important respects from the position the Department had been taking, Mr. Riddleberger, after discussion with Mr. Matthews, informed Mr. Luxford on Friday, December 22, that we would like to continue our exploratory efforts to reach agreement with the Treasury specialists, subject to the understanding that the matter would be kept informal and that Departmental clearance on any policy statement would be sought only if the specialists had arrived at a point where it appeared that such clearance would be fruitful.

Pursuant to this arrangement, Mr. Despres has made an appointment for further discussion with Mr. Glasser of the Treasury on Tuesday afternoon, December 26. It is requested that he be informed whether to carry forward this effort to reach agreement, or, alternatively, to tell Mr. Glasser that we have been instructed by the President not to engage in such discussion for the present.16

13 Ansel F. Luxford, Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury.

14 Josiah E. DuBois, Jr., Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury.

15 Harold Glasser, Assistant Director of the Division of Monetary Research of the Treasury Department.

16 A handwritten note, dated December 30, at the end of the memorandum, states that Henry P. Leverich, Assistant Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs, was informed by phone that the Secretary “would like discussions to continue in effort to reach agreement”.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/12–2744: Telegram

[Document 225]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 27, 1944—4 p.m.

10731. Reurtel 11012, December 12, 6 p.m.17 Ambassador Harri-man sent a letter to Molotov on August 28, proposing that discussions be undertaken at a technical level, either through EAC or independently, as a first step toward arrival at an interim arrangement on reparation and restitution, such discussions to be followed by policy discussions in EAC. According to our most recent information, the Soviet Government has not replied to this letter, and Moscow Embassy has made no further approaches.

In Department’s 9052 to London of October 30, and 9325 to London of November 4 [7], both of which were repeated to Moscow, we indicated our desire to postpone tripartite discussions until clarification of American views regarding economic treatment of Germany had been obtained. We have made some progress in obtaining such clarification, and expect further progress in next few weeks. Meanwhile, however, no steps should be taken to expedite discussions on reparation and economic security.

Stettinius

17 Not printed; it reported that the British Foreign Office informed the Ambassador that on November 10 the British Ambassador in the Soviet Union addressed a letter to the Soviet People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs urging early discussion in the EAC of problems of reparation and economic disarmament of Germany (740.00113 EW/12–1244).

Memorandum by the French Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Massigli) 740.00119 E.A.C./12–3044

[Document 226]

Memorandum by the French Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Massigli)18

E.A.C. (44) 47 London, 29 December, 1944.19

Germany: Terms of Surrender and Machinery for Their Enforcement

The French Representative on the European Advisory Commission has made a close study of the document of 25th July, 1944* laying down the Terms of Surrender to be imposed on Germany; he is happy to be able here and now to inform the Commission that, subject to a few amendments to be communicated later, most of them dealing with the decisions to be taken regarding the draft “General Orders” tabled with the Commission, the clauses adopted meet the views of the French Government.

2. As regards the documents adopted on 12 September† and 14th November‡ last, while the French Delegation wishes, before expressing an opinion, to have a further opportunity of studying them more closely, it must nevertheless draw the Commission’s attention forthwith to an essential point.

3. As adopted, the Instrument of Surrender would be signed only by the Representatives of the American, British and Soviet Supreme Commands, who alone would exercise supreme authority in Germany on behalf of their respective Governments. Similarly, the occupation of Germany and the administration of that country by the Allies is to be on a tripartite basis.

4. Following the French Committee of National Liberation, the Provisional Government of the French Republic has already on several occasions emphasised the importance, both from the political and moral standpoints, of France being associated from the outset with an event which will be vitally important to her, as it will decide for the near future the relations between France and Germany which have for centuries weighed so heavily on the fate of Europe.20

After the distressing events of 1940, after four years during which the Germans believed they had finally crushed French strength, it is essential for the maintenance of European peace, that the German nation should see French soldiers among its conquerors.21 For the French people who have suffered so much under enemy occupation and who, as the Allies have generously admitted, have played an important part in freeing their own country, the fact of being fully associated in the common victory will constitute both a promise of increased security and the beginning of reparation for sufferings undergone.

5. The Allied Governments, moreover, must realize the anxiety of France to take an ever-increasing part in the common war effort and her wish to bring fresh units into action, insofar as the Allies enable her to equip and arm them. It can, therefore, reasonably be assumed that, when Germany surrenders, the French forces at the front will be very substantially greater than at present.

6. Following on the foregoing considerations, the cogency of which he believes the members of the Commission will recognise, Monsieur Massigli has the honour to suggest to the U.S.A., the U.K. and U.S.S.R. Representatives on the Commission the adoption of the following recommendations:— (a) The Provisional Government of the French Republic shall share with the U.S.A., the U.K. and the U.S.S.R. supreme authority in Germany;

(b) The Instrument of Surrender shall also be signed by a Representative of the French Command; the relevant amendments to be introduced in the text of this Instrument as already adopted, more particularly in the second paragraph of the Preamble and in paragraph (a) of Article 12;

(c) A zone of occupation, the boundaries of which will be fixed later, shall be assigned to the French army which shall also take part in the occupation of Greater Berlin; the Protocol of 12th September§ —14th November║ to be amended accordingly;

(d) Similarly, the Agreement of 14th November, 1944¶ on Control Machinery in Germany shall be amended so as to substitute quadripartite for the tripartite agencies at present provided for;

(e) the Instrument of Surrender shall be drawn up not only in English, Russian and German, but also in French, the French text being equally authentic with the English and Russian texts.

There shall be an authentic French text of all instruments finally adopted by the Commission, which will have the same validity as the English and Russian texts.

The members of the Commission will shortly receive draft amendments to the texts already adopted, based on the above recommendations.

M[assigli]

18 Transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 20145, December 30, 1944; received January 8, 1945.

19 Memorandum circulated in the European Advisory Commission by the French Representative on December 27.

* E.A.C. (44) 7th Meeting. [Footnote in the original.]

† E.A.C. (44) 9th Meeting. [Footnote in the original.]

‡ E.A.C.(44) 10th and 11th Meetings. [Footnote in the original.]

20 For correspondence regarding French participation in the activities of the European Advisory Commission, see pp. 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 55] ff.

21 In agreeing to publication in the present volume of this document (as translated into English in 1944, presumably by the secretariat of the European Advisory Commission) the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs suggested that “victors” would be a more correct rendering of “vainqueurs” than “conquerors” (airgram A–371, August 14, 1964, from Paris).

§ E.A.C.(44) 9th Meeting. [Footnote in the original.]

║ E.A.C.(44) 12th Meeting. [Footnote in the original.]

¶ E.A.C. (44) 11th Meeting. [Footnote in the original.]

Memorandum by the Political Adviser to the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Mosely) EAC Files: Lot 55 D 375

[Document 227]

Memorandum by the Political Adviser to the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Mosely)22

[Extracts]

[London,] January 22, 1945.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5. Present Status.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

This instruction of December 12,23 which is still in force, has proved difficult to interpret inasmuch as it contains several important inconsistencies. Mr. Winant can hardly withdraw the U.S. draft directives from the Commission before receiving the long-promised “overall directive”. To do so would confuse our colleagues and leave before the Commission only the less satisfactory British draft directives.

Furthermore, since authorization is given to split up the substance of JCS 1067 into separate broad directives, it is hard to see what advantage is to be gained by withdrawing and refusing to discuss our series of directives which in the final analysis are designed to cover for the period of Allied control in Germany the same field treated in JCS 1067 for the brief interim period between the surrender or collapse of Germany and the setting up of Allied control machinery. The U.S. draft directives are criticized as being already too detailed, but JCS 1067 in some parts glosses over important fields requiring Allied agreement with rather meaningless and vague generalizations, while in other parts, such as the Finance Section, it goes into far greater detail than the U.S. draft directive on Control of Finance.

There is another important reason why Mr. Winant cannot effectively use JCS 1067 as the only basis for E.A.C. discussions. JCS 1067 is designed to cover the interim period, probably very short, between the end of hostilities and the establishment of joint Allied control machinery in Berlin. E.A.C. discussions may not initially attempt to cover long-term policies but they must eventually cover a longer period than that dealt with in JCS 1067. In fact policy agreements reached in the E.A.C. may not even come into effect until after the interim period covered by JCS 1067 has ended. It is therefore evident that the guidance contained in JCS 1067 is not suitable as the sole basis for agreement in the E.A.C. for the period of joint Allied control.

Upon the receipt of an “overall directive” it will be possible to take up in the E.A.C. the question of recommending agreement on such a paper. However, the U.S. Representative should not be put in the position of holding out for such a paper to the exclusion of consideration of a series of directives. If we did so and if the other Delegations were equally adamant in refusing to consider such a paper, the E.A.C. would once again reach a deadlock similar to that of a year ago when the form of the Surrender Instrument could not be agreed upon. In this case the U.S. would be open to the accusation by its Allies of having broken the basic agreement to handle the treatment of Germany as a joint matter.

It would not solve the question for the U.S. Representative to agree to split the subject matter of JCS 1067 (or the revised version), if he is bound, on a “take-it-or-leave-it” basis, not to enlarge in any respect on the policies contained therein. He can and will press throughout the negotiations for broad and brief policy statements. That has in fact been the U.S. point of view from the beginning.

However, it will be necessary, before reaching agreement, to consider policies lying outside the scope of JCS 1067. For one thing, the British are bound to raise many points contained in their directives, and the Soviet Representative has listed in writing (memorandum of October 25)24 a series of broad policy questions on which his Government wishes early discussion in the E.A.C. We cannot bluntly refuse to discuss the applicability and wisdom of the Soviet, British and French proposals by merely saying they are outside the scope of JCS 1067 and ipso facto unnecessary.

6. History of the General Order.

The idea of having a General Order dates from the beginning of the E.A.C. discussions in January–February 1944, when the character of the future Surrender Instrument was under consideration. The U.K. Delegation had originally presented a detailed draft Instrument of seventy articles. The U.S. and Soviet Governments strongly preferred a short document containing a blanket provision for the later issuance of all necessary additional requirements.

In February 1944 the U.S. Government instructed Mr. Winant to propose in the E.A.C. such a short form of instrument.25 The accompanying explanatory statement of U.S. views,26 in which General Hilldring concurred in writing, contained a paragraph to the effect that it was contemplated that the additional requirements omitted from the British longer terms would be handed to the German Authorities when the Surrender Instrument was signed. The Soviet Representative made the same promises. After a considerable period of deadlock, the U.K. Delegation acceded to the American and Soviet proposal, on the understanding that the substance of the long British terms would be covered in proclamations and general orders.

In fulfilment of the undertaking entered into by our Government, the U.S. Delegation proceeded to prepare a draft General Order based in the main on the provisions omitted from the U.K. draft instrument. The draft General Order was submitted to the War Department in July 1944 and to the State Department on August 1.27

After receipt of Mr. Winant’s telegram of October 7, comments on the General Order were prepared and cleared in Washington. These comments, contained in JCS 1103,28 stressed the desirability of reaching an agreement with our Allies on the matters covered in the General Order but objected to the assumption that the General Order would be published as an order to the Germans at the time of surrender. JCS 1103 pointed out that certain articles of the General Order did not contain direct instructions to the Germans but merely provided for the later issuance of such instructions by the Allied representatives in Germany. In addition to these general comments, JCS 1103 contained a few specific proposals for change in the text.

It should be pointed out that in London the question of what parts of the General Order would be published to the German people has been considered as open for later discussion either in the E.A.C. or in the nucleus Control Groups.

The use of the term “General Order” has undoubtedly confused the issue in Washington. It is clear from the history of the E.A.C. negotiations that it was never intended to provide the specific direct military orders, such as the Commanders-in-Chief would issue to the Germans in giving effect to the agreed policy directives to be issued to those Commanders-in-Chief by their Governments. The U.S. Delegation has consistently felt that direct orders of that nature should be worked out by the military in the nucleus Control Groups.

The so-called General Order has been intended as an extension of the Surrender Instrument to cover non-military requirements not contained in the Instrument. Basically, it should be an agreement among the Occupying Powers to jointly exercise powers over certain fields. Such a preliminary “agreement to agree” is a valuable safeguard to have in hand prior to undertaking the negotiation of the separate directives.

One thing that worries C.A.D.32 is the notion that the British are pushing the General Order because they feel that it is necessary in order for the victors to “take powers” in Germany. C.A.D. feels that the British believe the Allies’ powers derive, not from the unconditional surrender of Germany, but from agreements with the Germans or from proclamations and general orders announcing the powers which they will exercise. Without regard for the British position—and there is little reason to believe they hold the views attributed to them by C.A.D.—the U.S. Delegation feels that agreement among the Allies to exercise certain powers jointly in no way restricts the range of the Allies’ power, which, according to the Surrender Instrument, is absolute. In other words, a General Order setting forth additional requirements to be imposed on the Germans would merely be a first instalment under Article 12 of the Surrender Instrument. In no sense would it be a contract with the Germans limiting the absolute power of the victors to issue further orders to them on any and all subjects.

Since the receipt of JCS 1103, the U.S. Delegation, working closely with representatives of the U.S. side of SHAEF and of the U.S. Control Group, has been elaborating a part of the matter covered in the draft General Order in a form suitable for issuance as a direct order to the Germans. The resulting paper will be short, covering approximately 20 percent of the contents of the original document. It is believed that it will fully meet the criticism of JCS 1103.

In order to meet its commitment of last March in the E.A.C. the U.S. Delegation has also been redrafting the General Order as a whole in a form suitable for conclusion as an Allied agreement. This program was concurred in by the officers from the U.S. side of SHAEF, who recognize that Allied agreement on the subject matter of the General Order is essential. It is not known how the other Delegations on the E.A.C. will react to the idea of turning the General Order into an agreement and extracting a small portion of it as an order to the German people. If the Ambassador is to receive a U.S. overall directive for negotiation, it is possible that that paper might be combined with the substance of the General Order as an Agreement or General Policy Directive. In advance of receiving the overall directive from Washington, this thought is merely a matter of speculation.

7. Directive on “United Nations Prisoners of War”.

In October 1944 the Soviet and British Delegations requested early negotiation in the E.A.C. concerning the handling of United Nations prisoners of war found in Germany upon surrender. By telegram 9134 of October 2433 Mr. Winant requested instructions and guidance on this subject. On December 1 the E.A.C. agreed to appoint a special Committee on Prisoners of War and Mr. Winant, by his telegram 10609 of that date, again requested either instructions or clearance in Washington of the revised U.S. draft directive on this subject, submitted by him on October 23. In mid-December General Barker of G–1 SHAEF34 was consulted by Mr. Winant’s Joint Advisers regarding this problem and his views were reported by Embassy’s telegram 11158 of December 15.33

On January 6, 1945, Mr. Winant’s Military Adviser was informed from Washington that active efforts were being made by a War, State and Navy Coordinating Committee to arrive at a statement of U.S. views on this question. Up to January 22 no statement of U.S. views had been received. The E.A.C. Committee on United Nations Prisoners of War has therefore been unable to meet. For this Committee to meet before a U.S. position had been formulated would mean accepting as a basis for discussion the U.K. draft directive, which is less favorable to U.S. interests than the proposed U.S. draft directive.

8. Directive on “Disarmament of German Armed Forces and Disposal of Enemy Equipment”.

A directive on this subject was prepared by the U.S. Advisers35 and was reviewed in Washington during the flurry of clearances in October 1944. It was then revised by the U.S. Joint Advisers in accordance with the detailed comments of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and was resubmitted on November 18,36 for confirmation of its expression of J.C.S. and State Department views prior to being submitted to the E.A.C.

In early December other Delegations pressed for early discussion of disarmament and demilitarization of Germany, and the E.A.C. agreed to set up a Committee of experts to work on this subject. By telegram 10856 of December 7 Mr. Winant requested clearance of the revised U.S. draft directive or preparation of a new statement of U.S. policy. Up to January 22 no instruction had been received from Washington.

It should be pointed out in passing that no policy relating either to the treatment of United Nations prisoners of war or to the disarmament of the German armed forces is contained in JCS 1067 as known to the Delegation. Department’s 10371 of December 12 specifically promised that “the subject of United Nations prisoners of war, as well as other subjects not included or inadequately covered in JCS 1067, would be incorporated in further guidance formulated in Washington and transmitted to the U.S. Representative on the E.A.C.” On two key subjects—prisoners of war and the disarmament of Germany—such instructions have been requested in vain for seven weeks and the consideration of these subjects in the E.A.C. is at a standstill.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22 This memorandum reviewed the problems relating to the formulation of policy directives on Germany for the United States Delegation during 1944, and it recapitulated some of the principal correspondence between the Delegation in London and the Department of State on these problems. Nearly all of that correspondence is included in this collection of documents. The omitted portions of the memorandum included the following numbered items: 1. Clearance of U.S. Papers in Washington; 2. An Alternative to Presentation of U.S. Policy Directives; 3. Speeding up of Clearance in October 1944; 4. Reversal in Washington’s Treatment of Directives; and 9. Certain Basic Fallacies.

23 The reference is to telegram 10371, December 12, to London, p. 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 220], which was summarized in the immediately preceding omitted portion of this item.

24 See telegram 9227, October 26, from London, p. 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182].

25 See instruction 3735, February 12, to London, p. 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 90].

26  Ante, p. 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 90].

27 Not printed, but see footnote 24, p. 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180].

28 See footnote 25, p. 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 180].

32 Civil Affairs Division, War Department.

33 Not printed.

34 Maj. Gen. Ray W. Barker, Chief of the G–l (Personnel) Division of the Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force.

33 Not printed.

35 Directive not printed.

36 Revised directive not printed.

VI. Questions of zones of occupation and control machinery for AustriaVI. Questions of zones of occupation and control machinery for Austria

[228] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington, 12 June 1944.

740.00119 EAC/6–1244

[229] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 15, 1944—9 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/202a: Telegram

[230] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 17, 1944—4 p.m. [Received June 17—1:55 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/203: Telegram

[231] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, June 24, 1944.

740.00119 E.W./6–2444

[232] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 1, 1944—3 a.m. [Received 10:30 a.m.]

740.00119 E.A.C./7–144: Telegram

[233] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 8, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/203

[234] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 15, 1944—3 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/7–144: Telegram

[235] The Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington , July 18, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/6–1244

[236] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 27, 1944—5 p.m. [Received July 27—4:25 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/7–2744: Telegram

[237] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 1, 1944—8 p.m. [Received August 1—4:50 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/8–144: Telegram

[238] Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)

London, 21 August, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/8–2344

[239] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 22, 1944—7 p.m. [Received August 22—3 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/8–2244: Telegram

[240] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, September 11, 1944—11 p.m.

740.00119 EAC/8–2344: Telegram

[241] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, September 14, 1944.

863.01/9–844

[242] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 9, 1944.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/9–2244

[243] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , October 14, 1944.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/10–1444

[244] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, October 17, 1944—8 p.m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/10–1444: Telegram

[245] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, November 3, 1944—5 p.m. [Received November 4—6:30 a.m.]

740.00119 Control (Austria)/l 1–344: Telegram

[246] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 3, 1944—7 p.m. [Received November 3—6:35 p.m.]

740.00119 Control (Austria)/11–344: Telegram

[247] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, November 22, 1944—9 p.m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/11–1444: Telegram

[248] The Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of State

Washington, 23 November, 1944.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/11–2344

[249] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 24, 1944—7 p.m. [Received November 24—5:01 p.m.]

740.00119 E. W./11–2444: Telegram

[250] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 27, 1944—3 p.m. [Received November 27—11:55 a.m.]

740.00119 EW/11–2744: Telegram

[251] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 4, 1944—midnight. [Received December 4—10:18 p.m.]

740.00119 EW/12–444: Telegram

[252] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 5, 1944—10 p.m.

740.00119 EW/11–2744: Telegram

[253] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 8, 1944—6 p.m. [Received 9:45 p.m.]

740.00119 EW/12–844: Telegram

[254] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 9, 1944—midnight.

740.00119 EW/12–844: Telegram

[255] Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)

London, 14 December, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/12–1544

[256] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 26, 1944—8 p.m.

740.00119 Control (Austria)/12–2644: Telegram

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00119 EAC/6–1244

[Document 228]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington, 12 June 1944.

It is important that His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom should know as soon as possible how far the United States Government are prepared to participate in the occupation and control of Austria. They need this information in preparing their own estimates of manpower required during the period after the close of hostilities with Germany.

The following formula was included at the suggestion of the United States Chiefs of Staff as paragraph 3 of telegram No. Cosmed37 127 sent to General Wilson,38 A.F.H.Q.,39 Algiers on June 9th by the Combined Chiefs of Staff: “With regard to the occupation of South East Europe the policy of the United States may be summarised as follows: A. No United States forces will be employed as occupational forces in Southern Europe, including Austria, or South East Europe, including the Balkans. Such United States forces as may be present in these areas due to military operations will be withdrawn as soon as practicable after the cessation of hostilities.

B. United States participation of civil affairs in Southern and South East Europe will be limited to procurement and shipment of supplies to Albania, Yugoslavia, and Greece, and to the employment of a small number of officers in connection with distribution until such time as UNRRA40 can take over these duties.”

According to this formula no United States forces would be available for the occupation of Austria. It is not clear from sub-paragraph B of this formula whether the United States objection to participating in civil affairs in “Southern and South Eastern Europe” would also extend to Austria.

The United States representative on the European Advisory Commission,41 however, stated at a meeting of the three representatives on May 31st42 that he was authorised to accept the proposal for tripartite occupation of Austria.

His Majesty’s Government are anxious to have a statement of the intentions of the United States Government in this matter. If the United States Government in fact intend, as His Majesty’s Government much hope they do, to participate in a three power occupation, it is desired to know what is likely to be their contribution towards: (A) Civilian personnel of three power control machinery.

(B) Administrative personnel of military government; and

(C) Military forces of occupation.

37 Series designation for telegrams from the Combined Chiefs of Staff to the Mediterranean Command.

38 Gen. Sir Henry Maitland Wilson, Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater.

39 Allied Force Headquarters.

40 United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration.

41 John G. Winant, Ambassador in the United Kingdom.

42 See memorandum by the Military Adviser to the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission (Wickersham), June 1, p. 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/202a: Telegram

[Document 229]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 15, 1944—9 p.m.

4742. Department has received a communication from the British Embassy dated June 12, inquiring how far the United States Government is prepared to participate in the occupation and control of Austria. After quoting a telegram sent to General Wilson AFHQ, Algiers, on June 9 by the Combined Chiefs of Staff, which is based on the views set forth in the Department’s telegram no. 3499 of May 1, 11 p.m.,43 Eacom44 18, the British document states, among other things, the following: “The United States representative on the European Advisory Commission, however, stated at a meeting of the three representatives on May 31 that he was authorized to accept a proposal for tri-partite occupation of Austria.”

In so far as the Department is aware, this Government’s policy has not thus far deviated from that outlined in the Department’s telegram just cited. Before replying to the British communication, however, your immediate comment would be appreciated.

A copy of the British document is being forwarded to you by air pouch.45

Hull

43  Ante, p. 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111].

44 Series designation for telegrams to London concerned with European Advisory Commission affairs.

45 Transmitted as an enclosure to Department’s instruction 4203, June 20, not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/203: Telegram

[Document 230]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 17, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received June 17—1:55 p.m.]

4844. For the Secretary and Mr. Dunn.46 This is in reply to your 4742, June 15, stating that a communication had been received from the British Embassy asking how far the United States was prepared to participate in the occupation and control of Austria. You also cite a telegram forwarded by the Combined Chiefs of Staff as of June 9th and the Department’s cable 3499 of May 1 (Eacom 18)47 in which the position of our Government was outlined in relation to the occupation of Austria at that time.

At an earlier stage in negotiations undertaken by the British with the Russians and later related to the work of the European Advisory Commission, the British, in presenting a plan of the occupation of Germany, set out a north-south line the area east of which was to be occupied by the Russians, the western area to be occupied by United States and British troops, the British placing themselves in the northern section of Germany on the west side of the line with the United States occupying the southern area, including Austria. The British also suggested the occupation of East Prussia by the Poles. This latter proposal was resented by the Russians and in their counterproposal they insisted on Russian occupation of East Prussia and asked for the tripartite occupation of Austria.

The President opposed the allocation of the northwest area to the British and the southwest area for occupation by United States troops. He insisted that the positions be reversed. Without compromise I have supported his wishes both within the Commission and outside. The British Delegation in the Commission realizing that the United States and British position was deadlocked on this issue and not wanting to further complicate their position with the Russians were quick to agree to the Russian occupation of East Prussia and a tripartite occupation of Austria. This disadvantaged us in the general negotiations and although we had not asked for Polish occupation of East Prussia I was not authorized to take a position in relation to the tripartite occupation of Austria. Therefore, the last day I was in Washington48 I took this matter up with the President and got his permission to agree to the tripartite control of Austria but with the understanding that I would in no way commit our Government as to the size of the contingent that we might be willing to contribute for this purpose. For example in working on drafts covering the subject of Austrian occupation I rejected the phrase “will be occupied by forces of the three countries” and have used a briefer and less concise [precise?] phrase “tripartite control”. I discussed this question with General Marshall49 when he was here explaining our limited position.

The important objective is to fix the line between the Russians and ourselves. This we have been able to do. I hope before the end of the coming week to be able to send you a paper in relation to occupation on which we will be able to obtain agreement within the Commission which would include the delineation of areas but leave open for later decision the question as to whether we or the British would move into the northwest or southwest areas of Germany.50 This latter question is under consideration by the President and the Prime Minister.51

Winant

46 James C. Dunn, Director of the Office of European Affairs.

47  Ante, p. 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111].

48 May 26.

49 Gen. George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff, U.S. Army.

50 See telegram 4955, June 22, from London, p. 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121].

51 Winston S. Churchill, British Prime Minister.

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.00119 E.W./6–2444

[Document 231]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, June 24, 1944.

I append a report entitled “The Treatment of Austria” together with a summary thereof, including policy recommendations, which was prepared for and approved by the Committee on Post-War Programs of the Department of State. Without objection on your part, I should like to transmit this document to London for the guidance of Ambassador Winant in the discussions of the European Advisory Commission respecting the eventual occupation of Germany and Austria.

Paragraph 15 of the summary statement and the more detailed discussion of the occupation of Austria on page 6 of the basic memorandum will have to be modified in the light of information which has just been received from Ambassador Winant in London to the effect that he has agreed to a tripartite control of Austria on the understanding that he would in no way commit this Government to the size of the contingent that we might be willing to contribute for the occupation.

Ambassador Winant reported that he agreed to this tripartite control of Austria after having received your permission to do so on the last day he was in Washington before returning to London.

The enclosed report is also being submitted to the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff for their approval with respect to the military aspects of this question.52

C[ordell] H[ull]

[Annex 1]

Memorandum by the Committee on Post-War Programs 53

PWC–218 [Washington,] June 8, 1944.

The Treatment of Austria

i. introduction

The following discussion of the treatment of Austria makes a distinction between (1) the long-range interests and objectives of the United States and (2) the problems of the occupation period. The former involve the establishment and maintenance of Austria on a sound political and economic basis so that that country may not again become either a focus of Pan-German activity or a temptation to powerful neighbors. The second category includes the tasks of instituting military government in Austria, separation from Germany, immediate security dispositions, and the establishment of a permanent government.

This program is premised on the view that Austria is a victim of Nazi aggression rather than an integral part of Germany and should be dealt with on a different basis.

ii. Long-range interests and objectives of the united states

A. International Status

1. Political Aspects.—Austria’s strategic position in Europe makes its future political status in relation to its neighbors a matter of concern to the international community and therefore to the United States. Austria has been the occasion of threat to general security chiefly for two reasons; first, the lack of internal economic and political stability, and second, the disposition of interested powers to seek to influence Austrian affairs to their own advantage.

The Moscow Declaration on Austria (November 1, 1943)54 poses the problem of Austria without specifying an ultimate solution. The initial independence of Austria is predicated as a corollary of liberation from Nazi tyranny. The Declaration refers to Austria as the first victim of “Hitlerite domination” and indicates that Austria’s treatment will depend upon its own contribution to her liberation. Thus there exist clear grounds for according Austria a different treatment from that applied to Germany and for permitting the Austrian people a voice in the determination of their future status. Moreover, the Declaration asserts the desirability of collaboration between Austria and her neighboring states in a solution of their common problems. Thus independence is not a prescription against future economic and political relationships with Austria’s neighbors which, presumably, might assume the character of special economic arrangements, political federation, or even a merger of sovereignties, provided any such arrangement was approved by the parties concerned and was acceptable to the international organization.

The United States, never having accorded de jure recognition to the union of Austria with the Reich,55 should favor the prompt restoration of Austria as an independent state.

Independence alone, however, would not be an adequate basis for Austria’s future. The continuance of the revived state will depend on a solution of its internal problems and an adjustment of its political and economic relations with its neighbors.

To achieve Austrian revival, it is recommended that this government support all appropriate means of fostering the growth of a more pronounced Austrian national feeling along democratic lines, assuring a viable economy within the framework of European reconstruction, and providing effective protection through international organization or otherwise against external encroachments.

Since future developments in Austria and Central Europe are so uncertain, it is further recommended that there be no definitive prohibition at the end of the war against a future decision of the Austrian people to effect close economic or political relationships with neighboring states.

If Austria is to remain independent, its peculiar strategic and economic position would underscore the responsibility of the international community to make adequate provisions for the security and internal viability of small states.

2. Economic Aspects:—It is to the interest of the United States that Austria be enabled to develop that type of internal economy and those international economic relations that will not place Austria in the position of a special ward of the international community or of any power.

To this end it is recommended that Austria be included in those international organizations and arrangements which are established to lessen economic discrimination and to promote stable financial relations and the expansion of trade on a multilateral basis.

To guard against economic crisis in Austria, the United States should cooperate, through such international economic machinery as may be set up, in extending long-term credits for sound economic projects and in extending financial assistance in case of threatened financial breakdown. Any aid to reconstruction or to conversion of Austrian production should be such as to facilitate the elimination of uneconomic industry.

Since the question of economic union between Germany and Austria is largely contingent on the political desirability of such a union, this possibility need not be examined here. This Government should be prepared, however, to examine any specific proposals for Austria’s participation in a central European or Danubian economic federation.

B. Frontiers

1. The Czechoslovak-Austrian Frontier:—The United States should favor the restoration of the 1937 Austro-Czechoslovak frontier.

The American Delegation at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 favored the establishment of this frontier, which, in the main, followed the old administrative boundaries between Moravia and Bohemia, on the one hand, and Austria, on the other. Some Austrian groups have asked for a cession of about seventy square miles of territory in the regions of Gmünd (Třeboň) and Feldsberg (Mikulov), The population of these regions, according to the 1930 census, was about 61,000, approximately 85 percent of whom were Austrian Germans. Restoration of Gmünd to Austria would threaten the communications of České Velenice to Pilsen and Prague, while restoration of Feldsberg to Austria would cut the railway from Breclav to Znojmo, endanger the Prague-Brno-Vienna route via Breclav, and cut river communications on the Thaya River.

2. The Austrian-Yugoslav Frontier:—The United States should favor the restoration of the 1940 frontier between Austria and Yugoslavia.

The Yugoslav Government-in-Exile is demanding the inclusion of all territory inhabited by the Slovenes, 27,000 of whom were left in Austrian Carinthia and less than 4,000 in Austrian Styria. Cession of the Klagenfurt Basin to Yugoslavia would probably run counter to the wishes of the Carinthian population consulted at the time of the Klagenfurt Plebiscite of 1920. It would, furthermore, disturb the economic stability of the region and would create economic difficulties for Austria without bringing any corresponding economic benefits to Yugoslavia. Modification of the frontier between Austrian Styria and Yugoslavia would not be justified, since the frontier of 1940 followed closely the ethnic line of division and the several thousand Slovenes north of the line are widely scattered.

3. The Austrian-Hungarian Frontier:—The United States should favor preservation of the existing frontier between Austria and Hungary, leaving the Burgenland within Austria.

In 1922, after a plebiscite, Austria acquired the Burgenland, previously a part of Hungary. The Burgenland covers an area of about 1,532 square miles with a population (1934) of about 292,247, of whom approximately 80 percent (241,300) are German Austrians, 14 percent (40,500) are Croats and 4 percent (10,400) are Magyars. Hungary has not asserted its claim to the Burgenland vigorously, and there is no compelling reason why this territorial question should be reopened.

4. The Austro-Italian Frontier:—It is recommended that the frontier between Austria and Italy be rectified by cession to Austria of the Italian province of Bolzano with the provision that minor adjustments of this line may be made in accordance with the distribution of the linguistic groups.

The Committee has proposed this solution because: a. It recognizes this area as Austrian in its history, culture and tradition, and as an area which will probably be predominantly Austrian in population at the end of the war;

b. The retrocession of this region to Austria would aid both in the political and economic reconstruction of an Austrian state;

c. The loss to Italy through this cession would be slight in comparison with the gain to Austria.

5. The Austro-German Frontier.—It is recommended that the Austro-German frontier as of January 1, 1938 be recognized, except for the two small mountain communities in the Sonthofen area which were combined with Germany in 1938 for administrative reasons.

C. Internal Political Conditions

The long-range interest of the United States in the tranquillity of the Danubian region would be best served, in so far as the internal political order in Austria is concerned, by the development of sound democratic self-government.

The essential predicate of such a development will be the elimination of the fascist vestiges of the Dollfuss–Schuschnigg56 regime and the destruction of Nazi authoritarianism.

It is further believed that the success of democracy in Austria will depend on an adjustment of the political differences between the two sections of the population formerly organized in the Christian Socialist and Social Democratic Parties. Such an adjustment will be fostered by the creation of tolerable economic conditions, by instituting a political structure that would allow a considerable degree of local autonomy, and by restraining, in so far as possible, the exercise of disturbing external influences.

In the further interests of tranquillity, it is recommended that this Government oppose the restoration of the House of Hapsburg in Austria. Because of the imperialist tradition of the dynasty, a restoration of the monarchy would be interpreted by the neighboring states as a threat to their security.

iii. transitional procedures and arrangements

A. Character and Duration of Occupation

1. Responsibility for Occupation:—Divergent proposals have been set forth regarding the method of occupation and the allocation of responsibility for Austria. This Government has advocated that Austria, along with the south German zone, should be under occupation of United Kingdom forces. A British proposal assigning the south German zone to the United States includes Austria under American occupation and suggests the advisability of stationing a British division in Austria in order to establish the fact of United Nations occupation in the minds of the Austrians. The Soviet Government has proposed that Austria be occupied jointly by the armed forces of the three powers.

Joint tripartite occupation of Austria would have the decided advantage of effecting at once a clear administrative separation of Austria from Germany. However, for a small country joint occupation would probably be cumbersome and inefficient, and would necessitate a more complicated administrative set-up than required for the accomplishment of United Nations aims in Austria. Such an arrangement might, too, add a further potential source of direct friction between the three powers.

To reconcile the opposing views, it is recommended that Austria be declared under joint occupation, that actual administration and occupancy be left primarily to the power controlling also the South German zone, while the two other powers furnish civil affairs representatives and liaison officers.

2. Occupation Administration:—Although the administration of occupation in Austria will be legally based on the surrender instrument as in Germany, it is recommended that the administration and treatment of Austria under occupation be from the beginning differentiated from that accorded Germany.

If it is accepted that occupancy be left primarily to the power controlling south Germany, provision should be made for a civil affairs administration in Austria, which would be entirely separate from the German zonal administration. On account of the subordination and elimination of many central Austrian administrative agencies under German annexation and the coordination of Austrian provincial administration through Berlin, the occupation authorities should at once reconstruct a machinery of central administration in Vienna. The presumably considerable number of retired or inactive former Austrian officials who did not collaborate with the Nazis should be enlisted to aid in the de-Nazification and reconstruction of Austrian administrative agencies. In general, immediate efforts should be made to obtain the cooperation of Austrians and to return central and local administrative functions to non-Nazi Austrians.

Unless a provisional Austrian government emerges at the time of surrender, with which the three powers might agree to deal, direct military government should be installed in Austria supplanting the German political authorities. As soon as central Austrian administrative agencies have been reestablished, it is recommended that there be formed a provisional Austrian central regime to coordinate administration and participate in the steps necessary for the reconstitution of the Austrian state. At this stage the military government might administer Austria by means of directives to this central Austrian political organ.

Since problems of disarmament, demobilization, and popular resistance will be in no wise as acute as in Germany, it should be possible at an early date to transfer the control of Austria from military authorities to an inter-allied civilian agency, which would be supported by military garrisons as needed. Such an agency would direct the occupation until a duly elected representative government was ready to reassume control for the Austrian people.

3. Length of Occupation:—To promote the divergence of Austria from Germany, the occupation of Austria should be as brief as is consonant with the accomplishment of essential United Nations security aims.

B. Security Functions under Occupation

1. Demobilization of Austrian Members of the Wehrmacht: 57 —It is recommended that in demobilizing and disbanding the armed forces of the Reich, Austrian nationals be separated as speedily as possible tfrom their units and permitted to return home as expeditiously as considerations of internal security and transport arrangements will allow.

2. Disarmament and Disposition of Surrendered Arms and Equipment:—It is recommended that surrendered arms, ammunition and implements of war be scrapped in so far as they are not needed for use by the victors or adaptable to peaceful purposes. In general the principles with respect to disarmament as applied to Germany should be applied to Austria.

3. Dissolution of Military and Para-Military Agencies:—The policies applied to the dissolution of military and para-military agencies in Germany should, wherever applicable, apply also to Austria. A civil police force, composed exclusively of Austrian nationals and adequate to maintain internal order, should be permitted.

4. Immediate Measures for the Control of Austrian War Potential:—The steps deemed essential for the immediate reduction of war potential in Germany should likewise be taken in Austria. These measures will be especially necessary in view of the heavy concentration of war industries in Austria.

C. Immediate Political Dispositions

1. Disannexation:—In disjoining Austria from Germany, it is deemed advisable for reasons of administrative convenience to annul Nazi legislation by successive proclamations abrogating stated laws or types of laws rather than to promulgate one blanket decree sweeping away all laws issued in Austria after March 11, 1938. The following legislation, in particular, should be promptly annulled: decrees joining Austria to the Reich, introducing Reich law in Austria, establishing the Nazi Party and the Nazi system of government in Austria; laws regulating citizenship matters; laws introducing racial discrimination and Nazi eugenic practices; laws changing judicial procedures and the Austrian court system.

The task of military government in Austria will be complicated by the fact that direct return to the entire body of pre-1938 Austrian law is precluded because of the Fascist character of much legislation under the Dollfuss–Schuschnigg regime. Pre-1938 laws which are unobjectionable from a political standpoint, however, should be continued or revived at the discretion of the occupation authorities. It is considered likewise undesirable to return to the authoritarian Constitution of 1934. Pending the promulgation of a new Constitution by a constituent assembly elected by the Austrian people, it is deemed preferable that the occupation authorities refer, as occasion may warrant, to provisions of the Austrian Constitution of 1920, as later amended.

2. Treatment of the National Socialist Party and of Party Members:—It is recommended that the procedures envisaged for the elimination of the National Socialist Party and its affiliated and supervised organizations from Germany be followed in Austria. To the degree that it is found necessary to maintain social services performed by these organizations, those services should be transferred promptly to appropriate Austrian administrative agencies. The property and records in Austria of National Socialist organizations should be impounded.

It is recommended that Party leaders and other active Nazis be excluded from office and made subject to limitation of other political rights in the restoration of government in Austria.

3. Treatment of German Nationals in Austria:—It is recommended that those Germans whose residence in Austria is directly connected with the Nazi exploitation of that state be deported to Germany. Because of the important political considerations involved, the deportation of this category of persons should be arranged at an early date.

4. The Transfer of Other Persons:—The million foreign workers and prisoners of war now in Austria would constitute a particularly heavy and disproportionate burden on the resources of that country; it is recommended, therefore, that attention be given to the possibility of an early transfer of that alien population. The prompt return of Austrian citizens outside Austria would likewise facilitate the beginning of reconstruction.

5. Political Activity and Association:—While it is recognized that the uncertainties of the early days of military occupation may require a complete ban on political activity, it is recommended that, as soon as military conditions permit, the occupation authorities allow the formation of parties and political discussion on the part of those groups demonstrably seeking to establish democratic political life. It is further recommended that the privilege of organization and activity be denied those groups attempting to form para-military units, to advocate National Socialist and related doctrines, to revive the authoritarian Fatherland Front of the Dollfuss–Schuschnigg regime or to restore the monarchy.

D. Economic Dispositions

The decision to restore Austrian independence will imply prompt action on a number of economic matters, notably the restoration of the schilling and the reestablishment of the banking systems. Since the banking and monetary questions are being discussed actively elsewhere, no recommendations on these problems are here offered.

Decision on restitution and reparation will also be of importance, but in view of the fact that the Reparation Committee has not taken up the question of a settlement for Austria, recommendations on this subject are likewise postponed.

It is recommended that the following steps be taken by the occupation authorities: 1. The main economic controls applied to Germany should be imposed immediately by the occupation authorities, subject to progressive relaxation in accordance with the aim of prompt conversion and reconstruction as detachment from the Reich proceeds.

2. All deposits should be frozen immediately and released selectively as soon as a suitable plan can safely be put into operation. These should be a general moratorium on all debts—to be relaxed as soon as conditions permit.

3. The customs union with Germany should be terminated and provision made by the occupation authorities for border control over trade between Austria and Germany. The suspension of German bilateral trade agreements, in which Austria is included as part of the Reich, will call for the establishment of new trade arrangements between Austria and other countries, including Germany. In the absence of established commercial relations with other countries and governmental machinery for carrying on foreign trade, the occupation authorities should attempt to stimulate foreign trade making use as far as practicable of reliable Austrian personnel. This Government should recognize the need for initiating measures to help finance Austrian trade in the immediate occupation period.

4. All foreign owned property in Austria should be held in custody by the occupation authorities, who should establish an administrative agency to perform the functions which may be necessary in this respect. The occupying authorities, acting as custodian, may at their discretion in special types of instances appoint former owners as agents for the management and operation of their properties under their supervision. In general such action should not be taken if the owners are nationals or residents of other ex-enemy countries; and careful precaution should be exercised in the case of citizens and residents of neutral countries who may appear as claimants to property situated in Austria.

5. Should reparation and restitution by Austria be considered, special commitments on the part of the United Nations with respect to Austria would place Austria in a special category and require different treatment from that accorded Germany.

E. Establishment of Independent Austrian Government

1. When Steps Should be Taken:—It is recommended that as soon as political conditions have become reasonably stable and there is clear evidence of a desire by the Austrian people to act, steps be taken toward the reestablishment of Austrian political life on an enduring constitutional basis.

It may be anticipated that opportunities for the revival of national self-government will appear at an earlier period in Austria than in Germany. A national opposition has persisted under Nazi rule and it should prove easy to collaborate with anti-Nazi elements in the task of political reconstruction at an early stage of the occupation.

2. What Steps Should be Taken:—It is recommended that the determination of Austria’s future governmental structure be made by a democratically elected constituent assembly, in view of the fact that there exists no Austrian government-in-exile or other organ recognized as custodian of Austrian sovereignty.

At the earliest opportunity efforts should be made to assist the restoration of local organs of self-government, either de facto or on a juridical basis.

It is suggested that at an early stage of the occupation, and if clearly in accord with the wishes of the Austrian people, a provisional Austrian national assembly might be chosen by general suffrage. This assembly should plan systematically the necessary steps to be taken in the transition from provisional to permanent government and formulate proposals for consideration by the constituent assembly.

At an appropriate time, the provisional government, acting upon the authorization of the inter-allied authorities, should arrange for the free election by universal suffrage of a national constituent assembly to undertake the formation of a national constitution. Intervention by the occupation authorities should be confined to the insuring of fair and orderly elections and the exclusion of active Nazis from suffrage and eligibility to seats in the assembly. The Austrian people should be free to determine their own form of government with the proviso that the new regime be essentially democratic in character and that it accept such international responsibilities and obligations as the tripartite powers, acting in the interest of the United Nations, may see fit to impose. There should be no prescription as to the structure, whether federal or unitary, of the new Austrian state; decision in this matter should be left to the Austrian people.

[Annex 2]

Memorandum by the Committee on Post-War Programs 58

PWC–217a [Washington,] June 21, 1944.

Summary: The Treatment of Austria: Policy Recommendations

i. long-term interests and objectives of the united states

A. International Status

1. Austria should be dealt with as a victim of Nazi aggression rather than as a willing and integral part of Germany.

2. This Government should favor the prompt restoration of Austria as an independent state.

3. This Government should support and use appropriate means to foster among Austrians a more pronounced loyalty to an independent and democratic Austria under effective protection against external encroachments.

4. This Government should favor a provision, whereby the Austrian people eventually could, with the approval of the international organization, arrange such economic and political relationships with neighboring states as are consistent with the maintenance of peace and with general economic welfare.

5. It is to the interest of the United States that Austria be enabled to develop that type of internal economy and those international economic relations that will not place Austria in the position of a special ward of the international community or of any power.

6. Austria should in the future be included without discrimination in international economic organizations and arrangements.

7. This Government should favor extending long-term credits and other financial assistance to Austria through such international machinery as may be set up.

B. Frontiers

8. The Austrian-Czechoslovak frontier of 1937 should be restored.

9. The Austrian-Yugoslav frontier of 1940 should be restored.

10. The present Austrian-Hungarian frontier should be maintained.

11. The Austrian-German frontier of January 1, 1938 should be maintained except for inclusion within Germany of the small Sonthofen area.

12. The Austrian-Italian frontier should be rectified by the cession of the Italian province of Bolzano subject to minor adjustments.

C. Internal Political Conditions

13. The Government should seek to foster in Austria the development of sound democratic self-government. As a part of this process all vestiges of the Fascist and Nazi regime should be eliminated.

14. This Government should oppose the restoration of the House of Hapsburg in Austria.

ii. transitional procedures and arrangements

A. Character and Duration of Occupation

15. This Government should favor a joint Anglo-American-Soviet occupation of Austria which would, however leave the administration of the country primarily in the hands of the power controlling the projected zone of South Germany. The other two powers should have only token participation in the occupation and administration.

16. The occupation and control of Austria should be separate from the military government of Germany.

17. Unless a trustworthy provisional Austrian Government has emerged at the time of surrender or conquest, direct military government should be established, but should be supplanted by inter-allied civilian control as soon as conditions permit.

18. If not established at the time of surrender or conquest, a provisional Austrian government should be established as soon as security considerations and the prospect of a regime representative of the major non-Nazi and non-Fascist political groups make it feasible.

19. At the earliest opportunity the occupation authorities should encourage and assist the formation of local organs of self-government.

20. Troops of the United Nations should be withdrawn from Austria as quickly as considerations of security and internal order permit.

B. Security Functions Under Occupation

21. Austrian members of the Wehrmacht should be sent home without unnecessary delay.

22. Regulations similar to those with respect to the disarmament of Germany and to the disposition of surrendered German arms, ammunition and implements of war should be applied to Austria.

23. Austria’s armed forces should be limited to a civilian police composed exclusively of bona fide Austrian nationals.

C. Immediate Political Dispositions

24. Nazi and pre-Nazi fascist legislation should be abrogated progressively rather than by means of one comprehensive decree.

25. Measures and procedures similar to those for the elimination of the National Socialist Party and subordinate organizations in Germany should be instituted in Austria. The principles for the exclusion of Nazi leaders and other active Nazis from political life should likewise be applied to Austria.

26. Germans whose residence in Austria is connected with the Nazi exploitation should be promptly deported to Germany.

27. As soon as military conditions permit, political activity should be permitted to those groups demonstrably seeking to establish democratic political life.

D. Economic Dispositions

28. In the interest of preventing economic collapse, economic controls comparable to those applied in Germany should be continued until their progressive relaxation appears feasible.

29. The customs union with Germany should be terminated and a systematic program should be instituted immediately to put the Austrian economy on a viable basis through the revival of foreign trade.

30. All foreign-owned property in Austria should be held in custody until plans for its ultimate disposition are made.

E. Establishment of Independent Austrian Government

31. There should be as speedy a transition as possible from a provisional regime to government on a regularized constitutional basis.

32. A freely elected constituent assembly should determine the character of Austria’s future government and internal structure, without interference by the allied powers.

52 Working Security Committee document WS–173, Annex A, dated July 3, 1944, reproduces this memorandum together with the following note: “Mr. Gray [Cecil W. Gray, Executive Assistant to the Secretary] in the Secretary’s Office telephoned Mr. Dunn on June 27, and stated that he had been informed by the White House that this memorandum and the two papers on the treatment of Austria attached thereto had been approved by the President. H[enry] P. L[everich]” (Lot 55 D 375).

53 Filed separately under Lot 55 D 375, WS Book V. Original draft (CAC–210) prepared and reviewed by the Inter-Divisional Committee on Germany. Reviewed at the 50th meeting of the Committee on Post-War Programs, June 13, 1944.

54  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 761.

55 For correspondence regarding the annexation of Austria by Germany, see Foreign Relations, 1938, vol. i, pp. 384 ff., and ibid., vol. ii, pp. 483 ff.

56 Engelbert Dollfuss, Chancellor of Austria from May 1932 to July 1934; Kurt von Schuschnigg, Chancellor of Austria from July 1934 to March 1938.

57 German Armed Forces.

58 Filed separately under Lot 55 D 375, WS Book V. Original draft prepared and reviewed by the Inter-Divisional Committee on Germany. Reviewed and revised at the 50th meeting of the Committee on Post-War Programs, June 13, 1944.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 E.A.C./7–144: Telegram

[Document 232]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 1, 1944—3 a.m.
[Received 10:30 a.m.]

5206. Comea59 66. See my 5205, July 1, 3 a.m.60 and my 4844, June 17, 4 p.m. The following is the text of a draft protocol on the occupation of Austria which the Russian delegation circulated to the EAC simultaneously with, but separate from, their “revised draft protocol” on the occupation of Germany: “Protocol of an agreement between the Governments of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom and the United States of America, regarding the military occupation of Austria after the surrender of Germany.

1. The Governments of the USSR, the UK and the USA have agreed that the whole territory of Austria, within her frontiers as they were on the thirty-first of December 1937 will be occupied jointly by armed forces of the USSR, the UK and the USA.

2. The present protocol has been drawn up in triplicate in the Russian and English languages, both texts being authentic.”

In submitting this brief protocol on Austria the Russians have tried to meet me half way by simply setting out the principle of tripartite occupation by armed forces of the USSR, the UK, and the USA.

It was the British intention [to?] lay out a detailed occupation program which might have committed us to policing one third of the country under joint control authority. At our meeting this afternoon it was agreed that if the Austrian protocol proposed by the Russians was accepted the details of the occupation and administration would be worked out at some later date.

Since I cannot get Ambassador Gousev61 to agree to submit officially to the respective Governments the surrender terms and the protocol on the occupation of Germany, including the occupation and administration of Berlin, unless we also include the protocol on Austria as herein submitted, I hope you will be able to clear this brief agreement in principle on Austria.

Winant

59 Series designation for telegrams from London concerned with the work of the European Advisory Commission.

60  Ante, p. 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 123].

61 Fedor Tarasovich Gousev, Soviet Ambassador in the United Kingdom and Soviet representative to the European Advisory Commission.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/203

[Document 233]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

No. 4278 Washington, July 8, 1944.

Referring to your telegram no. 4844 of June 17, 1944, the Secretary of State encloses herewith, for your information and guidance, a copy of a memorandum for the President dated June 24, 1944, transmitting copies of two documents regarding the treatment of Austria which had been cleared by the Department’s Post-War Programs Committee. Copies of these documents, which are entitled “The Treatment of Austria” (PWC–218), and “Summary: The Treatment of Austria: Policy Recommendations” (PWC–217a) are likewise enclosed.62

Subject to the modifications which the memorandum pointed out will have to be made, the President has now approved the two documents and they may be regarded therefore as representing the present policy of this Government with respect to Austria.

62  Ante, pp. 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 231] and 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 231], respectively.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/7–144: Telegram

[Document 234]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 15, 1944—3 p.m.

5537. Your 5206, 3 a.m., July 1, Comea 66. Respecting the protocol presented by the Soviet Government, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have presented a statement under date of July 12, of which the following is the pertinent section: “The United States Chiefs of Staff are informed that there is no change in the policy of United States Government as regards occupational forces for Austria, except that a token force similar to the force planned for Berlin may be sent to Austria in connection with a tripartite control of Austria that may be agreed upon.”

The Department is informed that the foregoing statement was made at the direction of the President and in reply to an inquiry from the British Chiefs of Staff.

In conformity with the President’s instruction to you, you are thus authorized to accept the protocol provided that it is expressly understood that only a token occupation force for Austria will be provided by the United States. This reservation could be effected by the inclusion of a separate article in the protocol or by an understanding in writing covering this point.

Hull

The Department of State to the British Embassy 740.00119 EAC/6–1244

[Document 235]

The Department of State to the British Embassy

Memorandum

Reference is made to a memorandum from the British Embassy dated June 12, 1944, inquiring how far the United States is prepared to participate in the occupation and control of Austria.

The policy in this regard, as outlined in the telegram sent to General Wilson on June 9 by the Combined Chiefs of Staff, has subsequently been modified only to the extent that the United States representative on the European Advisory Commission has been authorized to accept the protocol proposed by the Soviet representative for tripartite control of Austria, provided that it be clearly understood that only a token occupation force will be provided by the United States. It was suggested to the United States representative that this reservation might be effected by inclusion in the protocol as a separate article or by an understanding in writing covering this point.

Washington , July 18, 1944.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/7–2744: Telegram

[Document 236]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 27, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received July 27—4:25 p.m.]

5945. Personal for James Dunn. Embassy’s despatch 17092, July 26.63 In forwarding the draft of surrender terms with accompanying documents, I thought I should report to you certain details that are not included in the official attached communication.

Under our alternative schedule for chairing the European Advisory Commission, I took over on July 14. The Commission met that afternoon. The Commission again met on Monday, July 17. Gousev then asked for a postponement of the next meeting until he had time to communicate with his Government. Meetings tentatively scheduled for Wednesday July 19 and Thursday July 20 were further postponed until Monday July 24. I took advantage of the news of the German crisis64 and asked both Gousev and Strang65 to meet me in my apartment Friday evening. In formal conversation without overpressing, we all came to an agreement that the business of the EAC had to be expedited. I believe it was this latter meeting that resulted in the Russian delegation agreeing to free the surrender terms for immediate formal forwarding together with the report to the Governments and the release of the letter to the interested European nations.66 The addendum to the instrument of surrender was attached and signed at the request of the Russians. The changes in the letter directed to the French Committee and compared with the identic letters addressed to the other governments were made at my suggestion and without opposition by either Gousev or Strang. I addressed this letter “Dear Mr. Paris”.67 Vienot68 had died the day before. In spite of the footnote insisted on by the Russians in the confidential report to the three Governments, they made no objections to a letter going to the Polish Foreign Minister.69

Last night Gousev came to see me to discuss the German and Austrian protocols. I believe without great difficulty, we can find a substitute phrase for “auxiliary contingents” which the Russians have objected to and straighten out certain detailed boundary questions as well as one or two matters of lesser importance in the German protocol, but Gousev also told me that his Government would have to insist on the definite allocation of the Northwest and Southwest Zones. These have been left blank in the document because we and the British have not been able to agree as you know, as to which area each would occupy. Could you help me by getting a decision on this matter? I realize the differences and difficulties involved.

I understand that in the disposition of our air forces policing Germany that it may be of advantage to use airfields in Austria. If I could state this in connection with the “token forces” proposal, it would facilitate a prompt settlement of differences in relation to the British and the Russians regarding tripartite occupation of Austria. My difficulty in the latter situation has been due to the Department’s instruction that I should get written agreement on the President’s reservation. The question of quantitative forces had not been raised in either settling the German zones or the Berlin area. Since this was the fact, I had felt that a verbal statement which both the Russions and the British had been willing to accept would have been sufficient. I have maintained our position with respect to tripartite control in Austria.

I would appreciate advice or help you may give me in these matters.

Winant

63 See footnote 4, p. 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134].

64 A plot to overthrow Adolf Hitler was revealed following an unsuccessful attempt on his life on July 20, 1944.

65 Sir William Strang, United Kingdom Representative on the European Advisory Commission.

66 For texts of these documents, see pp. 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 134], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 134], and 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], respectively.

67 Jacques-Camille Paris, First Counsellor of Embassy in the United Kingdom of the French Committee of National Liberation.

68 Pierre Viénot, Ambassador in London of the French Committee of National Liberation.

69 Tadeusz Romer.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/8–144: Telegram

[Document 237]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 1, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received August 1—4:50 p.m.]

6141. Comea 74. At informal meeting yesterday Strang and Gousev accepted our reservation regarding limited provision of American troops for occupation of Austria in the following text: “The United States Delegate states that his Government does not contemplate contributing more than a small contingent of United States forces for the occupation of Austria.”

No further progress was made in clearing protocol on Austria since Russians do not accept British reservation of discretion to employ contingents of other Allies among occupation forces under British command.

You will remember from my 5998, July 28 (Comea 73)70 that the Russians agreed to take the phrase “auxiliary contingents” in the German protocol only on the condition that the British would not insist on similar discretion in the Austrian protocol. The British and the Russians therefore are locked on this point which affects both protocols.

The question was again brought forward by Gousev as to the respective zones of occupation to be allocated to the British and ourselves. Strang and I explained to Gousev that we had no further information on this subject.

Due largely to Mosely’s complete command of the Russian language we were able to straighten out the very complicated question of frontier delineation.

I tried again to persuade Gousev to expedite consideration of control machinery and the proclamations and orders but he refused to discuss either subject until the German and Austrian protocols had been cleared.

Winant

70  Ante, p. 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135].

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang) 740.00119 EAC/8–2344

[Document 238]

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)71

E.A.C. (44) 24 London, 21 August, 1944.72

Control Machinery for Austria

I circulate, for consideration by the European Advisory Commission, the annexed memorandum containing proposals for Control Machinery for Austria.

W[illiam] S[trang]

[Annex]

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Delegation to the European Advisory Commission

Control Machinery for Austria

introduction

1. The present memorandum deals with the machinery of control which will be required in Austria, and on the relation between such machinery and that already proposed for Germany (E.A.C. (44) 3, 14 and 17).73

2. The three Powers have declared that they wish to see re-established a free and independent Austria. It is therefore desirable that the measures taken for the occupation and control of Austria should be dissociated at the earliest possible moment from those taken in regard to Germany.

policy for the control of austria

3. The United Kingdom Delegation propose that the higher control of Austria shall be on a tripartite basis irrespective of the nationality and relative strength of the occupying forces.

separation of austria from germany

4. In 1939 Austria ceased to exist as an administrative entity. The central administrative machine in Vienna has disappeared. There is, however, a head Criminal Police Office for Austria as a whole. Mines, Airways, Waterways and Weights and Measures are also administered centrally from Vienna. The various civil administrative regions, Reichsgaue, into which the country is divided, are largely self-contained, and themselves deal with a great many aspects of civil administration. As regards military organisation, Austria is divided into two Wehrkreise. There are also two economic regions with the same boundaries as the Wehrkreise and with headquarters at the same places, namely, Vienna and Salzburg. Justice, Finance, Railways, Posts and Telegraphs are administered direct from Berlin through special local offices in Austria.

5. Since the purpose of the three Powers is to re-establish an independent Austria, it will clearly be necessary to set up in Austria, at the earliest practicable moment, a central administrative machine. It will also be necessary to detach the Austrian from the German administration, and to disentangle Austrian life, and especially economic life, from that of Germany. This latter task is likely to be both complicated and lengthy and involves the planning of Austrian affairs on new and independent lines.

6. In order to encourage the spirit of independence in Austria and to differentiate her treatment from that meted out to Germany, it is desirable that the Allied control machinery in Austria should be from the start separate from, and not subject to, that set up in Germany. For the same reason all contact between the Austrian Reichsgaue and the German administration in Berlin should be severed as soon as possible.

stages of control for austria

7. There are likely to be three stages of control in Austria:— Stage I.—The period immediately following the cessation of hostilities.

Stage II.—The period of Allied central Government.

Stage III.—When an Austrian Government is established.

Stage I.—The period immediately following the cessation of hostilities.

8. For a period, supreme authority must rest with each Commander-in-Chief in the area occupied by his forces. He would exercise control of civil administration through his own civil affairs organisation.

Stage II.—The period of Allied central Government.

9. As soon as the Allied Commanders consider that conditions in Austria permit, supreme authority should be transferred to a tripartite Allied Commission in Vienna. The different civil affairs organisations of the occupying forces would then be controlled by this Commission. Initially, the Allied Commission should consist of the three Allied Commanders. It is desirable, however, that the military character of the Allied Government should not be emphasised for longer than necessary, and that, as soon as the military situation permits, the Allied Commanders should be replaced by civilian commissioners.

10. The Allied Commanders would preserve the right of appeal to their respective Governments and that of declaring a state of martial law within their respective zones of occupation.

11. The Allied Commission in Vienna would have four main tasks:— (a) To enforce in Austria the application of the terms of surrender.

(b) To ensure that the government of Austria is carried on.

(c) To build up an Austrian administrative machine as rapidly as possible.

(d) To disentangle the Austrian from the German administration.

Initially, the existing autonomy of the Reichsgaue on matters of civil administration should be utilised, but should not be increased as this might make it more difficult eventually to centralise government in Vienna.

12. As soon as any department of a central Austrian administration has been sufficiently established, it should take over its particular function in Austria. The Allied Commission would then work through it. Direct government by the Allied Commission would thus progressively give place to indirect control. It is desirable that this control should be relaxed as rapidly as conditions in Austria allow, in order to encourage Austria to attain her independence.

13. Organisation.—The proposed layout of the Allied administrative machine is set out in the Appendix.74 The Commission would require a number of sections, the heads of which would form an Executive Committee of Control.

14. Personnel.—To preserve the tripartite character of the control, it is desirable that the staffs of the Allied Commission at the higher levels should be provided on a three-Power basis. Other Allied personnel might also be associated with the work of control.

15. United Nations Organisations.—The Allied Commission would give local direction to the operations in Austria of the various United Nations agencies, e.g., E.I.T.O.75

Stage III.—When an Austrian Government is established.

16. It will probably take considerably longer for an Austrian Government to emerge than to establish an Austrian administrative machine. It may therefore be hoped that, by the time an indigenous Government is able to function, the Austrian administration will be in a large measure established. The nature and extent of Allied control that will be required at this stage cannot be foreseen.

relationship between the austrian and the german control machinery

17. There will be a great many problems requiring concerted action in both Austria and Germany. This will necessitate the closest liaison between the Military or High Commission for Germany and the Allied Commission for Austria. Direct contact will be required between the sections of the control machinery in Austria and their corresponding sections in Germany, and this will probably have to continue for some time after the Austrian administration has been established.

Furthermore, there will be a number of matters, e.g., the elimination of Nazi laws, in which instructions drafted for Germany could appropriately be applied to Austria. Such matters could be transmitted to the appropriate Austrian authorities through the Allied Commission for Austria.

In the case of disarmament the Control Commission for Germany will have to co-ordinate the work in Germany and in Austria as may be necessary.

preparatory planning

18. The United Kingdom Delegation recommend that a British-American-Soviet planning body, and nucleus staffs, should be set up at an early date. This body, working within the agreed directives to the Allied Commanders and, of necessity, in close co-operation with their staffs, would undertake the detailed planning for the establishment of a central administrative machine in Vienna. It is important that it should work in conjunction with the similar body which it is proposed to set up in London to undertake similar planning for Germany (see paragraph 19 of memorandum enclosed in E.A.C. (44) 17).

London, 18 August, 1944.

71 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 17616, August 23; received August 28.

72 Memorandum originally circulated in the European Advisory Commission by the United Kingdom Representative on August 19.

73  Ante, pp. 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], and 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], respectively.

74 Not printed.

75 European Inland Transport Organization.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/8–2244: Telegram

[Document 239]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 22, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received August 22—3 p.m.]

6799. Comea 76. Strang has informally written to Gousev and myself setting forth his delegation’s suggestions for the organization of the tripartite occupation of Austria. Exclusive of Vienna, Austrian territory would be divided into two zones which would be occupied respectively by armed forces of the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom. Vienna would be occupied as a combined zone by forces of the three powers. The small American contingent would be stationed in the Vienna zone. The proposed U.K. zone would include the Reichsgaue of Salzburg, Tyrol, Carinthia and Styria. The Soviet zone would include upper Austria and lower Austria, exclusive of the Reichsgau of Vienna. The proposed line of delimitation would coincide with the boundary between the two Wehrkreise. Full text is being forwarded by courier.76 I am likewise forwarding a British proposal for tripartite control machinery for Austria which the United Kingdom delegation has circulated in the Commission as EAC 44/24.77

Winant

76 Transmitted in despatch 17617, August 23; received August 28; neither printed.

77  Ante, p. 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 238].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/8–2344: Telegram

[Document 240]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, September 11, 1944—11 p.m.

7373. Eacom 31, in reply to your Comea 76 of August 22 and with reference to despatch no. 17617.78 In general, the British proposal to divide Austria into two zones to be occupied by U.K. and U.S.S.R. forces, respectively, with U.S. representation on a central body in Vienna, appears to be consistent with the position taken here that U.S. personnel will participate equally at the national level on the understanding that U.S. occupational forces will be on a token basis, similar in size for those planned for Berlin. In these circumstances, we believe that the U.K. and U.S.S.R. should take the initiative with respect to the form of control machinery. Our view is that control machinery for Austria might well follow the general scheme of a Control Council, as proposed for Germany and outlined in WS–15c,79 with such modifications as may be necessary to take into account the different situation in Austria, particularly with respect to the elimination of any U.S. zone of occupation.

Referring to telegram no. 13967 of August 24 from your Military Adviser to the War Department, our view is that the drafting of proclamations and general orders for Austria might well await the formulation of general policies for the treatment of Austria and its separation from the Reich.

Hull

78 Latter not printed.

79 Dated January 27, p. 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 98].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 863.01/9–844

[Document 241]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

No. 4535 Washington, September 14, 1944.

The Secretary of State encloses herewith a copy of a memorandum received from the Combined Chiefs of Staff together with its enclosure entitled “Directive from the Combined Chiefs of Staff to Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean.” The directive concerns the planning for military government in Austria and, in compliance with the request of the Combined Chiefs of Staff, the Ambassador is instructed to present it to the European Advisory Commission for information.

[Enclosure]

Memorandum by the Combined Chiefs of Staff 80

Washington, 8 September, 1944.

In the absence of agreed instructions from the European Advisory Commission, the Combined Chiefs of Staff have forwarded the enclosed directive to the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean, for purposes of planning for military government in Austria. The Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force,81 has been furnished a copy of this directive.

The Combined Chiefs of Staff request that a copy of this directive be transmitted to the European Advisory Commission for information.

For the Combined Chiefs of Staff: A. T. Cornwall-Jones,
Brigadier A. J. McFarland
Brigadier General, U.S.A.

Combined Secretariat

[Subenclosure]

Directive From the Combined Chiefs of Staff to the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson)

1. The Governments of the U.S., U.K., and U.S.S.R. have at present under consideration proposals for the military government of Austria in the post-surrender period. It is possible that Rankin “C”82 conditions may obtain in Austria before you have received a directive containing policies agreed upon by the three governments. In view of this contingency, you are now directed to prepare a plan for the military government of Austria.

2. As a basis for planning until further material is made available by tripartite planners in London, you should work on the pre-surrender directive for Germany and Austria83 issued to SCAEF84 in C.C.S. 551 and C.C.S. 551/2, of which papers copies are being forwarded to you separately. The financial guide in C.C.S. 551/2 does not apply to Austria. A financial guide on Austria will be transmitted to you separately.

3. You will also assume as a basis for planning that: a. In the period immediately following the cessation of hostilities, you will have the supreme authority in those parts of Austria occupied by forces under your command. You will exercise control of the administration through your civil affairs organization.

b. In the subsequent period of tripartite central military government, supreme authority will be transferred to a tripartite Allied Commission in Vienna. Initially, this Allied Commission will be military and will consist of the three Allied Commanders. As soon as any department of an acceptable central Austrian Administration has been sufficiently established, that department should take over its particular function in Austria and the Allied Commission would then work through it.

c. Ultimately, when an Austrian Government acceptable to the three powers is established, it may progressively take over functions performed by the Allied Commission which will retain only indirect control.

d. The tripartite planning organization which it is hoped to be set up in London will be responsible for the planning of control by military government at the national level. The American and British groups of this organization are being assembled. Pending Russian concurrence to the setting up of this tripartite organization and provision of the Russian group, the American and British groups will proceed with this work and will prepare combined plans for the approval of the Combined Chiefs of Staff. This paragraph is subject to any subsequent instructions that may be issued by the Combined Chiefs of Staff.

e. The frontiers of Austria should be taken as those of 31 December 1937.

f. A clear administrative separation of Austria from Germany should be effected as soon as possible.

g. In the period immediately following the cessation of hostilities and subject to the absolute power over the whole of Austria vested in the three powers by the unconditional surrender of Germany and pending the arrival of Russian forces, supreme authority in Austria will be vested in and will be exercised by you as the Commander in Chief of the occupation forces.

h. In the subsequent period of tripartite central military government the control of Austria at the center will be on a tripartite basis irrespective of nationality and relative strength of the occupying forces.

4. a. With respect to U.S. participation in Austria, the U.S. policy is that U.S. personnel will participate equally at the national level with U.S.S.R. and Great Britain in a tripartite control of Austria with the understanding that the U.S. occupational forces will be on a token basis similar to the size of the force planned for Berlin.

b. The British intention is that all British civil affairs personnel now attached to Allied Military Government and Allied Control Commission in Italy, and with civil affairs Middle East less those in settled British military administrations should be pooled and re-distributed as necessary to meet the requirements of control in Italy and in Austria and for British military administration in the Dodecanese and for the Balkans. In the event of a shortage or surplus of British civil affairs personnel after meeting such requirements you should notify the War Office.

5. With reference to paragraph one of Naf 749 you will receive instructions separately.

6. Political, Financial, Economic and Relief Guides will be transmitted to you at a later date.

80 Addressed to the Department of State and the British Embassy.

81 Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower.

82 Code name of Allied military plans for actions to be taken in case of a German unconditional surrender and the cessation of organized resistance.

83 For text of the directive, see p. 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 112].

84 Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 Control (Austria)/9–2244

[Document 242]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

No. 4620 Washington, October 9, 1944.

The Secretary of State has now received a letter of September 22, 1944 from the Joint Chiefs of Staff85 commenting on the two policy documents transmitted to London with the Department’s instruction no. 4278 of July 8, 1944, namely, PWC–218 entitled “The Treatment of Austria” and PWC–217a entitled “Summary: The Treatment of Austria: Policy Recommendations.”

For your information and guidance a copy of the comments of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is enclosed herewith, with the Department’s reply given in parentheses after each paragraph of the comments.

[Enclosure]

Comments of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the Papers PWC–217a and PWC–218 86

1. It is suggested that these papers be modified to conform with the most recently stated views of this government (C.C.S. 320/21) to the effect that “There is no change in the policy of the United States Government as regards occupational forces for Austria except that a token force similar to the force planned for Berlin may be sent to Austria in connection with a tripartite control of Austria that may be agreed upon.”

(The Department of State concurs in the arrangement whereby only token forces of the United States should be sent to Vienna in connection with the tripartite control of Austria and the local administration of Vienna.)

2. Paragraph II–(A) 16 of PWC–217a provides that the occupation and control of Austria should be separate from the military government of Germany. It is suggested that consideration may well be given to placing Austria, in the initial period following the defeat or surrender of Germany, under the over-all control of the Control Council which it is proposed to establish in Berlin. Inasmuch as consideration is now being given to placing both Germany and Austria under tripartite control of the U.S., U.K. and U.S.S.R., it is believed that the inclusion of Austria in the initial period within the jurisdiction of the Control Council in Berlin might facilitate sound administration, particularly in view of the fact that Austria is presently controlled by the German Government in Berlin. It is agreed that the occupation and control of Austria should be separated from the military government of Germany as soon as conditions warrant, but the possible desirability of controlling Austria through the combined machinery in Berlin at least for a brief initial period and until existing German controls can be untangled, should not be overlooked.

(The Department recognizes the administrative soundness and necessity of vesting control of Austria in the Allied Authority in Berlin for a brief initial period. Political considerations and the attitude toward Austria expressed in paragraph I–A–1 of PWC–217a, however, make it desirable that a separate administration be established for Austria as quickly as military and administrative conditions make it feasible. Rather than postpone the establishment of a separate regime for Austria until German controls can be disposed of, the Department of State believes that the untangling of Austro-German affairs should be carried forward through liaison offices in each capital.)

3. Paragraph II–(A)17 of PWC–217a and paragraph III–(A)2 of PWC–218 suggest that control of Austria be transferred at an early date from the military authorities to an inter-Allied civilian agency which would be supported by military garrisons as needed. The transfer of control of what must presently be considered as enemy territory to civilian control is a question involving consideration of many factors, and the time when such transfer could be effected would be dependent in large part upon conditions as they existed in Austria at the time such transfer should be proposed. It is not believed that any decision could be made on this point at the present time.

(The Department of State agrees with the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the time of transferring control of Austria from military to civilian authorities will need to be determined in the light of future developments.)

4. Paragraph II–(B)21 of PWC–217a provides that “Austrian members of the Wehrmacht should be sent home without unnecessary delay.” It is believed that this should be a general objective to be sought rather than an indiscriminate policy without qualification. There may be violent Nazis among this group whom the occupational authorities may wish to retain in custody as prisoners of war or otherwise. Their Austrian nationality would not necessarily be the controlling factor. It is believed that the policy referred to is more properly stated in paragraph III–(B)1 of PWC–218.

(The brief statement with respect to Austrians serving in the Wehrmacht in paragraph II–B–21 of PWC–217a properly requires the qualifications contained in paragraph III–B–1 of PWC–218. The viewpoint back of the two statements is that Austria’s political reconstruction should be started as expeditiously as possible, and this process is dependent in large measure on the return of politically acceptable soldiers to their homes. If it becomes established Allied policy to hold active Nazis in custody or exact labor services from them, Austrian Nazis should receive the same treatment as the German.)

5. Paragraph II–(C)26 of PWC–217a and paragraph III–(C)3 of PWC–218 provide that Germans whose residence in Austria is connected with Nazi exploitation should be promptly deported to Germany. It is believed possible that there may be Germans in this category, such as war criminals, et cetera, whose deportation to Germany would be neither necessary nor advisable.

(The stated policy with respect to the deportation of Germans from Austria is limited to “those Germans whose residence in Austria is directly connected with the Nazi exploitation of that state.” It is not intended to prejudice treatment to be meted out to war criminals or other Germans liable to legal proceedings. The objective here envisaged is the elimination of carpet-baggers whose presence in Austria would be injurious to orderly political and economic reconstruction.)

6. Paragraph II–(B) 3 of PWC–218 provides for the maintenance of a civil police force composed “exclusively of Austrian nationals.” Such a provision is considered inadvisable inasmuch as there may be members of the civil police force who are not Austrian nationals whom it may be desirable to retain. The hands of the occupational authorities should not be tied by a restriction of this character.

(The provision that the police force should be composed “exclusively of Austrian nationals” grows out of the necessity to rid Austria of Nazi and pan-German influence and to prevent a new infiltration into such a critically important function as the police. However, this represents a general statement of policy which the Department does not regard as preventing the military government from retaining any particular individuals in the interest of security.)

7. Paragraph III–(D)3 of PWC–218 provides for “border control over trade between Austria and Germany.” It is believed that trade between Austria and all countries should be controlled by the occupational authorities during the military government period.

(The Department of State concurs in the view that the occupation authorities should control the whole of Austria’s foreign trade during the period of military government. The paragraph calling for control of trade with Germany in particular was not intended to exclude control of other trade.)

8. It is believed that the reference in paragraph III–(D) 5 of PWC–218 to “special commitments on the part of the United Nations with respect to Austria” should be clarified, as its meaning is not understood in its present form.

(The policy with respect to reparation payments by Austria will be given specific formulation later. Paragraph III–D–5 of PWC–218, therefore, may be considered held in abeyance.)

9. Paragraph III–(E)1 of PWC–218 provides for the reestablishment of Austrian political life on an enduring constitutional basis “as soon as political conditions have become reasonably stable and there is clear evidence of a desire by the Austrian people to act.” It is believed that this recommendation should be amended to assure consideration of the paramount requirements of military necessity.

(The reference in paragraph III–E–1 of PWC–218 to reasonably stable political conditions as a prerequisite to beginning the work of political reconstruction is interpreted in the Department of State to mean that no steps should be taken without due consideration of the requirements of military necessity.)

85 Not printed.

86 File copy not dated.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/10–1444

[Document 243]

The British Embassy to the Department of State 87

Aide-Mémoire

The new situation in respect of Hungary88 makes it probable that the Russians will occupy a considerable part of Austria including Vienna while SACMED’s89 forces are still held up in Italy, possibly until after the winter.

His Majesty’s Government consider it essential that as soon as Vienna has been occupied by any Allied forces, a tri-partite control commission be at once established in Vienna in anticipation of eventual tri-partite control of the whole of Austria.

His Majesty’s Government suggests that the United States Government join them in approaching the Soviet Government without delay through diplomatic channels inquiring as to their plans and stating that just as if Anglo-American forces reach Vienna first, the two Governments will certainly invite the Soviet Government to send representatives to establish tri-partite control, so they also expect to receive a similar invitation if Russian forces reach Vienna.

Washington , October 14, 1944.

87 Marginal note reads: “Handed by D. D. Maclean of the British Embassy on Oct. 14. Telegram to Moscow drafted Oct. 17. British Embassy informed of telegram to Moscow. CE [Division of Central European Affairs]/J[ames] W. R[iddleberger]”.

88 For correspondence regarding the Allied armistice with Hungary, see vol. iii, pp. 847 ff.

89 Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (General Wilson).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 740.00119 Control (Austria)/10–1444: Telegram

[Document 244]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, October 17, 1944—8 p.m.

2453. British Embassy here informs us that its Government considers it essential that a tripartite control commission be at once established in Vienna as soon as that city has been occupied by any Allied forces, with a view to an eventual tripartite control of the whole of Austria. The British Government has therefore suggested that the United States join them in approaching the Soviet Government to state that whatever forces reach Vienna first, the other Governments should be invited at once to send representatives to establish tripartite control.

The Department has advised the British Embassy that it will make a parallel approach along these lines to the Soviet Government. You are therefore requested to concert with your British colleague and, making reference to paragraph 2 of the Joint Four-Nation Declaration,90 to the Declaration on Austria (both emanating from the Moscow Conference) and to discussions in the European Advisory Commission on Austria, to bring this question to the attention of the Soviet authorities as indicated above.

Hull

90 Declaration of Four Nations on General Security, November 1, 1943, Annex 1 to the Secret Protocol of the Moscow Conference of 1943; for text, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 755.

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/l 1–344: Telegram

[Document 245]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, November 3, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received November 4—6:30 a.m.]

4214. On October 31, I addressed a letter to Molotov91 along the lines of the Department’s 2453, October 17, 8 p.m., concerning the establishment of a Tripartite Control Commission in Vienna. I have today received a reply from Molotov stating that the Soviet Government considers that this question should be examined in the EAC simultaneously with the question of zones of occupation and Allied Control mechanism for Austria. Accordingly, the letter continues, the Soviet Government, as shown in its memorandum92 delivered to the Foreign Office on October 26 by the Soviet Chargé d’Affaires93 in London, has given instructions to its representatives in EAC to submit to the Commission a draft protocol of agreement concerning the occupation of Austria.

In considering questions of our participation in a Tripartite occupation and control of Austria, I hope that our representatives in EAC and all interested parties in our Government are weighing carefully the dangers to which such participation can lead in case we do not have a firm and detailed understanding with the Russians over the political purposes toward which Tripartite Control should be directed. The pursuance of divergent policies by the different governments involved can plainly impair the efficacy of the Central Tripartite Administration, encourage a tendency toward virtual partition of the country and react unfavorably on Russian-American relations.

It is quite possible that the Russians may be willing to join us in defining the purpose of Tripartite Control as the restoration of a democratic and independent Austria, With all due satisfaction over such a community of expressed purpose, we should remember that their interpretation of these words is not always the same as ours. Previous experience has not indicated that they are inclined to view as truly democratic or truly independent any eastern or central European country where political leadership is not exercised, and vigorous police control not maintained, by political groupings devoted in large measure to the cultivation of friendship with the Soviet Union.

Repeated to London as No. 247 and to AmPolAd95 Caserta, No. 18.

Kennan

91 Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov, People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union.

92 See telegram 9227, October 26, from London, p. 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182].

93 Konstantin Mikhailovich Kukin, Counsellor of the Soviet Embassy in London.

95 American Political Adviser at Caserta (Alexander C. Kirk).

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/11–344: Telegram

[Document 246]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 3, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received November 3—6:35 p.m.]

9549. Department’s 9178, November 2, 7 p.m.96 Directive from CCS to SACMED enclosed with Department’s instruction 4535 has not been presented to the EAC.

On October 4 Strang wrote to Mr. Winant suggesting that they send Gousev identical letters summarizing the pertinent parts of that directive. Strang later withdrew this suggestion in favor of that outlined in Embassy’s 8840 (October 17, 6 p.m., Comea 113).97

Gallman

96 Not printed; it stated that the Department did not wish its instruction No. 4535 of September 14 (printed on page 460), presented to the European Advisory Commission (740.00119 Control (Austria)/11–244).

97 Not printed; it reported that the British Foreign Office felt that it would be desirable to approach the Russians with a proposal that as soon as any part of Austria was occupied by any of the Allied armies, a tripartite control commission should be set up (740.00119 Control (Austria)/10–1744).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) 740.00119 Control (Austria)/11–1444: Telegram

[Document 247]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman)

Washington, November 22, 1944—9 p.m.

9838. With reference to your Comea 130, telegram no. 9972, November 14, 10 p.m.,98 this is Eacom 40 and following is text of Department’s 2453, October 17, 8 p.m., to Moscow:

[Here follows text of telegram printed on page 466.]

As you will have noted from Moscow’s 4214, November 3, 5 p.m., to the Department, repeated to London as no. 247, the Soviet Government prefers to keep planning for a tripartite control commission for Austria within EAC.

Since this represents a Soviet reply to Strang’s proposal outlined in Comea 11399 and in view of the last sentence of your 9549, October [November] 3, 7 p.m., all tripartite planning for the occupation and control of Austria is thus thrown back into EAC.

Since no American proposals for control machinery for Austria have been formulated you may proceed in EAC with formulation of final EAC recommendations for control machinery for Austria on the basis of our proposals for machinery for Germany in WS–15C1 and Department’s instruction 4704 of November 2, 19442 (with appropriate modifications) and the British proposal for zoning Austria with the provisos already communicated to you, in particular the reservation that the United States will contribute only token forces, to be located in Vienna, for the actual occupation, although United States will participate fully in the tripartite central administration of Austria.

We assume that in such participation proclamations and orders with nationwide scope would be issued by the representatives of the three Governments acting jointly, and that American liaison officers would be attached to the staffs of the two zonal commanders.

We agree with your 9972, November 14, 10 p.m., Comea 130, that it would be desirable to begin early discussion in EAC of occupation and control of Austria, and consider it desirable to complete EAC recommendations regarding them as soon as possible.

This Government’s views regarding general policies for the treatment of Austria and its separation from the Reich were transmitted to you with Department’s instruction 4278 of July 8, 1944, cataloged WS–173 of July 3, and the comments of the JCS thereon with Department’s instruction 4620 of October 9, 1944.

Stettinius

98 Not printed.

99 See footnote 97, p. 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, and Doc. 247].

1 Dated January 27, p. 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 98].

2  Ante, p. 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187].

The Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of State 740.00119 Control (Austria)/11–2344

[Document 248]

The Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of State 3

Washington, 23 November, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: Upon the recommendation of the United States Chiefs of Staff, the Combined Chiefs of Staff have authorized the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean, to plan for United States military government participation in the tripartite occupation of Austria on the following basis: (1) A token force of one United States division under United States command may be employed in the tripartite occupation of Vienna with the understanding that the minimum strength of the United States force to be employed there will not be less than the equivalent of a regimental combat team, reinforced as required.

(2) The United States force will not be used in the occupation of Austria outside of the tripartite area of Vienna Gau.

The United States Chiefs of Staff request that the Department of State advise the United States representative on the European Advisory Commission of the above decision of the Combined Chiefs of Staff.

Sincerely yours,

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
William D. Leahy ,
Admiral, U.S. Navy,
Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy

3 A copy of this letter was forwarded to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom with instruction 4817, November 29, 1944, not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 E. W./11–2444: Telegram

[Document 249]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 24, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received November 24—5:01 p.m.]

10348. Personal for Mr. Dunn. The Russians in considering assignment of zones in Austria and division of Vienna into areas for occupation will under most recent instructions want us to take a western zone in Austria bordering on our southern zone in Germany rather than limiting our occupation to a part of Vienna and with a small force as had been previously agreed in principle in our earlier conversations. For political reasons believe we would be wise at this time to insist on tripartite control in Austria. In dealing with the Russians we have already seen from developments in Rumania4 and Bulgaria5 that there must be reasonable sharing in occupation if there is to be an effective sharing of political authority.

You will remember Moscow Declaration on Austria and also will recall that when this matter was up before I was uncompromising in pressing for the Northwestern Zone in Germany which may [apparent omission] any occupation of Austria a separate area from the logistic point of view. It occurs to me that in view of the necessary prohibition of fraternization in Germany occupation of an Austrian zone contiguous to our German zone might provide convenient recreation centers and rest areas for US forces stationed in southern Germany. Apparently it is the understanding of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CCS 481/6 of September 8) that the total force necessary to occupy the whole of Austria after German collapse would amount to four divisions and a small tactical air force.

I would greatly appreciate an informal opinion from you personally on this question.

Winant

4 For correspondence regarding the Allied armistice with Rumania of September 13, 1944, see vol. iv, pp. 133 ff.

5 For correspondence regarding the Allied armistice with Bulgaria of October 28, 1944, see vol. iii, pp. 300 ff.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/11–2744: Telegram

[Document 250]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 27, 1944—3 p.m.
[Received November 27—11:55 a.m.]

10441. Personal for Mr. Dunn. In connection with my 10348 (November 24, 7 p.m.). The Soviet representative on the European Advisory Commission has submitted a draft protocol on zones of occupation in Austria. Full text is being forwarded by air.6

Summary begins: Soviet forces to occupy an eastern zone, bounded on the west by a line separating the district of Ober-Hollabrunn and the district of Horn and running south from the Czechoslovak frontier; the Cenuj along the boundary between districts of Krems and Tuelln; thence along western boundaries of districts of Sankt Poleten, Lilienfeld and Bruck; thence along northwestern boundary of the Gratz district and western boundary of Voitzberg district; thence south along the eastern boundary of province of Carinthia to the Yugoslav frontier; with the exception of the city of Vienna.

British forces to occupy zone lying to the west of the Soviet zone and bounded on the west by a line starting at the Czechoslovak frontier and separating the provinces of upper Austria and lower Austria; thence southwest along the southern boundary of upper Austria to its junction with the boundary of the province Salzburg; thence south along the boundary of Salzburg province to the boundary of Carinthia; thence west and then south along the northern and western boundaries of Carinthia to the Italian frontier.

Remaining territory of Austria to be occupied by United States forces.

City of Vienna to be occupied by forces of the three powers and divided into three parts. Soviet forces to occupy northeastern part (districts of Floridsdorf, Brigittenau, Leopoldstadt, Innere-Stadt, Landstrasse). British forces to occupy northwestern part (districts of Doebling, Alsergrund, Waehring, Hernals, Ottakring, Josefstadt, Fuenfhaus, Rudolfsheim) United States forces to occupy southern part (districts of Hietzing, Meidling, Neubau, Mariahilf, Margaretenr Wieden, Favoriten, Simmering).

Administration of Vienna to be organized on model set forth for Greater Berlin. The agreement to come into force on signature by Germany of the unconditional surrender. End of summary.

Winant

6 Text transmitted as an enclosure to despatch 19521, November 28, from London (not printed).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/12–444: Telegram

[Document 251]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 4, 1944—midnight.
[Received December 4—10:18 p.m.]

10732. My 10441 and my 10442, November 27, 3 p.m.,7 also please read my 10348 November 24, 7 p.m. addressed to Dunn, which crossed with Department’s 9838, November 22, 9 p.m. I hope the Department has had time to consider the new political factors involved in the Soviet proposal for zones of occupation in Austria. In the discussions so far in the European Advisory Commission I have avoided taking an irrevocable stand in order to allow time, if desired, for fresh consideration of this question in Washington.

In view of my strong stand of last June and July, when I made it plain that we envisaged providing only a small contingent, approximately of the size planned for Berlin, to be stationed in Vienna, it is doubly significant that the Russians, in spite of their earlier oral acceptance of our position, are now pressing us so strongly to accept a zone in Austria. The British have likewise reiterated the view that Allied occupation and control of Austria would operate more effectively if we took an equal share (at the latest EAC meeting Strang stated that his Government was proceeding on the assumption that, once German resistance is ended and the initial pacification of Austria is completed, one division will be adequate to maintain order in the United Kingdom zone).

I feel you should also know that the Russians insist on completing agreement on zones before discussing concrete arrangements regarding control machinery in Austria. In the EAC Gousev has stated that it is not practicable to consider control machinery until it is decided whether to have two or three zones. Gousev in private has strongly stated the Russian view that we would not be taking an equal responsibility for the fulfilment of the Moscow Declaration on Austria unless we occupy a zone. From the discussion so far I have a definite impression that unless we have a zone in Austria it will not be possible for us to secure really equal participation in control. Without a zone of responsibility, the United States members of the control body may prove to be little more than advisers or even onlookers, as the British and the Russians will share effective control of the entire country except for our one third participation in controlling Vienna.

The discussion of the Bulgarian armistice has shown the importance of adequate physical participation in the occupation of enemy countries in which we wish to make our views felt and see our interests respected. In connection with the British assumption that one division will be sufficient for policing their zone, I note that the Joint Chiefs of Staff have assumed that after defeat or collapse of Germany SACMED would be able to occupy all of Austria with four divisions and a small air force (CCS 481/6, September 8). With the decision to accept a southern zone in Germany the logistic difficulty on occupying a zone in Austria seems pretty much to have disappeared, since any American zone in Austria, whether equal in size to the other two zones or smaller, would be contiguous to our zone in Germany.

At bottom we need to weigh the military disadvantage of providing a small force to occupy a part of Austria against the political difficulties of trying to exert an equal influence on the reconstruction of Austria while limiting military participation to a small contingent stationed in one third of Vienna. I should very much appreciate the Department’s views on these aspects of the problem. The next meeting of the Commission has been postponed to December 7, to allow Massigli8 time to secure French views regarding the occupation of Austria.

Winant

7 Latter not printed.

8 René Massigli, French Ambassador in the United Kingdom and Representative to the European Advisory Commission.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EW/11–2744: Telegram

[Document 252]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 5, 1944—10 p.m.

10190. Embassy’s 10348, November 24 and 10441, November 27. Russian proposal for United States zone in western Austria has been discussed with War Department where we were informed that the use of additional forces for occupational purposes in Austria would require a reconsideration of the entire program of the use of United States forces after German defeat. The whole question was therefore submitted to the President who has now requested that you be instructed to state in the European Advisory Commission that this Government does not wish to extend its undertaking with respect to the number and location of American troops to be used in Austria. Although we appreciate the force of the arguments enunciated in your 10732 of December 4, you should maintain your original attitude on this question in view of the President’s reply to us.

Stettinius

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/12–844: Telegram

[Document 253]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 8, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received 9:45 p.m.]

10864. Personal for the President and the Secretary. Please read my 10348, November 24, 7 p.m. to Dunn and also my 10732, December 4, midnight. I have received the Department’s 10190 (December 5, 10 p.m.) instructing me to state in the European Advisory Commission that our Government does not wish to extend its undertaking with respect to the number and location of troops to be used in Austria.

I hesitate to again trouble you with this question but I feel, after the most careful consideration, that recent developments have warned us that this is more than a local Austrian question and that the issues involved dig deep into the background of future world security.

Several months ago, when the question of the Austrian protocol first came up before the European Advisory Commission, I was able, by your consenting to furnish a small token force for Austria, to get both Strang and Gousev to agree to our stationing this force in one of the three areas of Vienna without our taking over a zone elsewhere in Austria, and with the further understanding that there would be complete tripartite control within Austria. We believed at that time that this would satisfy our obligation under the Moscow Declaration on Austria.

It was because of our delay in settling the assignment of the German zones that the Russians refused to complete agreement on Austria at that time. They have now come forward with a very different proposition, as outlined in my 10441 (November 27, 3 p.m.), for an American zone in western Austria, contiguous to our zone in southern Germany.

In the intervening period since July armistice terms have been worked out for Rumania, Finland9 and Bulgaria. The first two were settled in Moscow and the latter, which was being handled in the European Advisory Commission, was interfered with by British intervention in Moscow. Mr. Churchill10 and Mr. Eden,11 while in Moscow, also discussed Greece and Yugoslavia.12 Among other comments made there, you will recall the acceptance by Molotov and the British of British control in Greece; Molotov’s frank statement of 80% Soviet control and 20% Anglo-United States control in Rumania and Bulgaria, with a similar proportion suggested for Hungary; and 50% Soviet and 50% Anglo-United States control in Yugoslavia.

It is important to note that in the case of Bulgaria, prior to Russia’s declaration of war and her 5 hours [days?] state of war, we had an agreement for Anglo-American control over the fulfillment of the armistice terms.12a Delays by all parties interfered with the consummation of this agreement. After Russia’s declaration of war Soviet demands for increased control grew daily in direct proportion as they extended their occupation. In other words, actual physical occupation has been the constant and determining factor in apportioning the degree of control.

Certain implications of Soviet dominance in Rumania and Bulgaria can already be seen. Department’s circular information telegram of December 1, 9 p.m.,13 describes our reaction to the Russians moving American owned oil equipment out of Rumania. Department’s 10192 (December 5, midnight)14 outlines the difficulties arising from exercise of Soviet predominance in Bulgaria and in Bulgarian politics.

The question of dominant control during military operations and until the surrender of Germany can be defended within limits. This would not run contrary to our own insistence on top military control by our Supreme Commanders in Africa, Sicily, Italy and Western Europe. But it is the insistence of the Russians that their control shall continue after the surrender of Germany and until the conclusion of peace that disturbs me most as I believe this interim period will seriously influence the pattern of postwar settlement.

Certainly we can draw at least two lessons from the experiences of these last few months. One is that, from a Soviet point of view, occupation is directly related to control, or, to put it in common law language, possession is 9 points of the law. Two, it is also clear that failure to work out in advance agreed arrangements with the Russians and the British in areas in which we share responsibility, as in Germany and Austria, will inevitably lead to a grab as grab can policy.

I note that the main reason for the decision not to accept a zone in western Austria is the desire of our Government “not to extend its undertaking with respect to the number and location of American troops to be used in Austria”. I should like to suggest that we could enlarge the geographical area in which the American contingent would be stationed without increasing the size of our force. In this connection a distinction needs to be drawn between the period of active military operations and the period of peaceful occupation. The commitment of forces in the operational period must naturally be determined by the conditions encountered in overcoming the enemy’s resistance as judged by the Commander in the field. Presumably Austria will be occupied first by SACMED or Soviet forces, probably by the latter.

On the other hand, the period of peaceful occupation, to which the proposals before the European Advisory Commission relate, calls for a military force to serve as a kind of reserve police force in case the reconstructed Austrian police operating under Allied control should prove inadequate to maintain order. The British envisage providing approximately one division in the period of peaceful occupation, to occupy one third of Austria together with one third of Vienna. I understand that we intend to provide one division for the occupation of one third of Vienna alone (CCS paper 481/11 of November 23). We might also want to take advantage of airfields in western Austria for policing Germany from the periphery.

The question is whether it would not be militarily more convenient and politically more effective to use approximately the number of troops we have already allotted for garrisoning one third of Vienna, in order to occupy a zone as well. We could shorten the size of the zone suggested in the Soviet plan. For the period of peaceful occupation the question is one of extending the location but not necessarily the number of American troops.

To understand the Soviet eagerness to have us take a zone in Austria we must go back to Eden’s discussions in Moscow on percentages of control in the various countries. The Russians, being literal minded folk, consider that in Austria we, the British and themselves are supposed to have one third each of the responsibility, both by virtue of our contributions to the common victory and because of the Moscow Declaration on Austria. If we now confine our direct responsibility in Austria to occupying one third of Vienna, the Russians will draw the conclusion that we do not want one third of the responsibility for Austria as a whole. As a result, we will probably be confronted with control machinery proposals which, while leaving us with one third of the responsibility in the eyes of American and world opinion, will give us much less than one third of effective power and influence in Austria. In a very tactful way, Gousev has been putting us on notice to expect this. Hence, in view of our leading position in the conduct of the war and the settlement of the peace, and in view of Austria’s key position in Central Europe, or refusal to take a zone of occupation may be interpreted as a sign that we are willing to leave this area to the free play of Soviet and British interests.

When Soviet and British bloc politics threaten to dominate the scene, it is perhaps wiser for us to stay on the job and to work against the bloc concept which, if left unchecked by strong outside influences like our own, may pull Europe to pieces, both in its international relationships and within the individual countries, as we unfortunately see happening in Greece.

I have grave doubts as to the ultimate wisdom of leaving British interests pitted against Russian interests in Austria. The basis of our policy of tripartite control in Germany, instead of permitting an Anglo-American force of occupation and a separate Soviet force, rests on the concept of the three powerful military countries, which will be responsible for the defeat of Germany, having authority and responsibility. If we had failed to share this responsibility on a tripartite basis it would have been sure to create suspicion and ill will on the part of the Soviet Government. We have felt all along that even [if?] civil government was substituted for military government in this part of Europe and our forces were largely withdrawn, we did not want to leave behind a legacy of conflict between an angry Russia and a weak Britain. Trouble in Austria might spread to Germany and interfere with the constructive approach we have adopted.

At bottom both the British and the Russians feel that our full and equal participation in Austria would help not only to steady developments there but also to work out relations between our two major Allies in a sensitive area.

As I understand it, we have two primary interests in the smaller states. One is to support their sovereignty and freedom, and the other to see that nothing can again take place in any part of the world that might disturb the peace of the world. Twice in 25 years we have been drawn into world war because of disturbances in European areas far distant from us and in which we had exercised little influence. In neither instance did we control the events which ultimately involved us in war.

In view of all these considerations, I earnestly hope you will review the question of our accepting a zone of occupation in Austria. Until I hear from you I shall avoid committing us on this matter.

Winant

9 For correspondence regarding United States interest in the Allied armistice with Finland of September 19, 1944, see vol. iii, pp. 608 ff.

10 Winston S. Churchill, British Prime Minister.

11 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

12 For correspondence regarding the meetings of Prime Minister Churchill and Premier Stalin in Moscow between October 9 and 18, 1944, see vol. iv, pp. 1002–1024.

12a The Soviet Union declared war on Bulgaria on September 5, 1944, at 7 p.m. Soviet troops ceased hostilities in Bulgaria on September 9 at 10 p.m. With respect to these events, see telegrams 3321, September 5, and 3420, September 11, from Moscow, vol. iii, pp. 396 and 410, respectively. American and British representatives reached tentative agreement on a draft armistice for Bulgaria on August 25, 1944; see telegram 6928, August 25, from London, ibid., p. 367.

13 Not printed; for correspondence regarding Soviet actions in occupied Rumania, see vol. iv, pp. 233 ff.

14 Not printed; for correspondence regarding Soviet actions in Bulgaria, see vol. iii, pp. 481 ff.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 EW/12–844: Telegram

[Document 254]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 9, 1944—midnight.

10317. Personal for the Ambassador. With reference to your No. 10732, December 4, midnight, we took this up again with the President and have received a statement from him that he would be willing to accept a zone next to Bavaria, in other words, a zone contiguous to the German zone which has been allocated to us. The President desires, however, that we consult with the Joint Chiefs of Staff about this before sending you further instructions. This we are doing urgently and shall inform you promptly of the results.

In the meantime, we have transmitted your No. 10864 of December 8 to the White House and this message will no doubt serve to confirm the President’s present inclination in this matter.

Stettinius

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang) 740.00119 EAC/12–1544

[Document 255]

Memorandum by the United Kingdom Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Strang)15

E.A.C. (44) 45 London, 14 December, 1944.16

The Establishment of Self-Government for Austria

1. I circulate, for the consideration of the European Advisory Commission, the annexed paper on the Establishment of Self-Government for Austria.

2. This paper has been prepared in the light of the fact that in the Moscow Declaration on Austria the Governments of the U.K., the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. expressed their wish to see re-established a free and independent Austria. In consequence the reconstruction in Austria of the machinery of democratic government will be a matter of concern to the Allied Governments.

3. The Commission has now begun its consideration of Austrian problems; and I put forward the annexed paper in the hope that it may help to clarify some of the issues involved. It should be regarded rather as a contribution to our discussions than as a definite plan of action.

W[illliam] S[trang]

[Annex]

Establishment of Self-Government for Austria

a.—administrative reconstruction

1. When a tripartite Allied Commission is established in Vienna one of its tasks will be to build up an Austrian administrative machine as rapidly as possible. It will be recalled that there is now virtually no central Austrian administration and that the Reichsgaue, into which the country is divided for purposes of civil administration, are governed directly from Berlin. The reconstruction of effective forms of political life in Austria, and the establishment of an Austrian Government, will be dependent upon the prior establishment of an efficient administrative machine. As this machine is built up, direct administration by the Allied Commission would give place to indirect control, and this control would be relaxed as rapidly as conditions allowed in order to encourage Austria to attain her independence. A new stage of control would begin when an Austrian Government was established.

b.—provisional government

2. The establishment of a fully representative Austrian Government will raise difficult problems. It will be essential that elections to a constitutent assembly should be held as soon as practicable, and that they should be conducted by Austrians and not by the Allies. It is for Austrians, under Allied supervision, to undertake such matters as the compilation or revision of electoral registers and to decide the method of election. For this task an Austrian administrative machine will be inadequate; there will be need for some kind of provisional Austrian Government, taking the form perhaps of a Committee of Liberation. To find a body of Austrians in whom sufficient confidence will be felt may not prove an easy task.

3. It is impossible to predict what will be the exact complexion of the Austrian political situation immediately after the collapse of enemy resistance. But it appears in any case desirable that the Allied representatives should, as soon as possible after the establishment of an Austrian administrative machine, encourage the formation, on a provisional and ad hoc basis, of an Austrian coalition body to act as a kind of National Committee of Liberation. The method of constituting this Committee must depend upon prevailing conditions. If political life revives quickly, all political parties in Austria should be required to nominate representatives to a National Committee. The membership should be roughly proportionate to the strengths of the parties as far as these can be ascertained. Recognition on a provisional basis would be accorded to this Committee, which would act as a stop-gap and prepare general elections under Allied supervision.

4. If, however, there is something approaching a political vacuum, more positive action will be required on the part of the Allied representatives. The Allied representatives may well find it necessary themselves to determine to a greater or lesser extent the constitution of a National Committee. Nominees might be sought either from among seemingly qualified political leaders and party representatives or from among the heads of the Civil Service in the reconstituted central administrative machine, or perhaps by a combination of the two.

5. Whatever the process by which the National Committee is nominated, particular regard should be paid to two major factors:— (a) Every effort should be made to ensure that the National Committee is an adequate coalition body, particularly in order to minimise the danger that renewed political activity might take the form of a revival of that cleavage between the urban and rural populations which so sharply conditioned Austrian politics between 1918 and 1938. The occupying authorities may be faced with an Austrian political body claiming to represent the nation, but in fact representing only one or other of the traditional groups. To recognise such a body as a national authority might well prove fatal to the unity of the new Austria.

(b) During the initial process of constituting a National Committee it will be preferable to draw upon Austrians who have been resident in Austria rather than upon returned émigrés.

c.—general elections

6. The advantages of holding an early general election for a constituent assembly as the basis for a representative Austrian Government are obvious. In no other way could the new free and democratic Austria be born. A long period of authoritarian rule, whether by an Allied commission or by a nominated body of Austrians under Allied control, would damp democratic ardour and offer opportunity for the emergence of crypto-fascists and other undesirable elements, not excluding pan-Germans.

7. Thus, general elections should be held as soon as possible, but some delay will be inevitable in view of the practical limitations which will exist, e.g.:— (a) Detailed preparations for general elections throughout Austria can only be undertaken after a National Committee has been constituted.

(b) Time will be needed in which to compile even approximately accurate electoral registers. Very many Austrians, primarily those serving in the German army, are dispersed abroad. And there are the Germans in Austria to be combed out.

(c) It is desirable to purge Austria as far as possible of Nazi influence before elections are held.

(d) It may well be that Austrian political life and the reconstitution of political parties will not be far enough advanced to enable general elections to be held promptly and in a satisfactory manner.

d.—local government

8. While provisional arrangements are being made at the centre with the formation of a central National Committee, it should be possible to begin building from below, from the lowest level of the commune (Gemeinde).

9. The local population should be encouraged to take an active part in the reconstitution of its communal life. In most cases it will probably be necessary in the first place to reconstitute the communal councils and administrations, partially at least, by direct nomination on a provisional and ad hoc basis. This nomination would ideally be made by the local inhabitants by whatever process was locally practicable and acceptable, subject to confirmation by Allied authority. If the process of nomination were to approximate to a rough-and-ready election, so much the better. (Uniformity of procedure in communes would not be essential.) But in practice it may well be that in many cases the Allied authority will have to nominate the provisional communal or urban councils.

10. These provisional communal pr urban councils would as far as possible approximate to local committees of liberation in liberated territories. The functions of the provisional communal administration would be broadly twofold: (a) the maintenance and, where necessary, reform of communal administration in accordance with any general directions from Allied authority,

(b) the preparation of regular communal elections and in particular of local electoral registers.

11. Many of the obstacles to early general elections would also apply to regular communal elections, but probably in lesser degree, and to this extent it might be possible to hold local elections throughout Austria before general elections. If this were practicable it would be desirable, and in this case it is possible that some system might be devised whereby the elected communal councils might nominate representatives to form a provisional national assembly alongside the National Committee.

e.—provincial government

12. In the federal State of republican Austria, provincial (Lander) administrations and assemblies stood between those on the communal and national levels; there were no assemblies on the level of the districts (now called Kreise, but known up to 1938 as Verwaltungsbezirke), which were only subordinate units of administration. Under German administration the provinces have become Reichsgaue without undergoing any very radical territorial modification.

13. The Allied authorities will need to ensure the continued functioning of provincial administrative machinery, and it may well prove advantageous that provincial administrations should be headed by-provincial committees of Austrians. These provincial committees would probably have to be constituted in the first place in much the same way, mutatis mutandis, as the central National Committee; they would be coalition bodies nominated ad hoc, preferably by Austrian party organisations, but not improbably with more or less active Allied participation. In the provinces, as at the centre, it will be important not to grant recognition to bodies claiming a representative character which they do not in fact possess.

14. Some such ad hoc procedure for constituting provincial committees would be necessary if, as appears probable, the limitations on early provincial elections are much the same as in the case of national elections. It will be necessary to decide whether provincial committees should prepare forthwith for regular provincial elections or whether the question of these elections should be postponed for settlement by the Austrian constituent assembly. This decision must largely depend upon conditions prevailing in the Austrian provinces after Allied occupation.

f.—conclusions

15. The conclusions are:— (a) The Allied representatives should take steps as soon as possible after the establishment of an Austrian administrative machine to secure the formation on a provisional and ad hoc basis of an Austrian National Committee of all parties to act as a stop-gap and prepare general elections under Allied supervision.

(b) Members of the National Committee should preferably be nominated by the Austrian political parties. If, however, there is something approaching a political vacuum, the Allied representatives may well find it necessary themselves to determine the constitution of the committee to a greater or lesser extent.

(c) It will be particularly desirable that the National Committee should be an adequate coalition body in view of the previous cleavage between the urban and rural populations of Austria. It will be important to try to prevent a revival of this cleavage, and care should be taken not to grant recognition to any body claiming a representative character which it does not in fact possess.

(d) During the initial process of constituting a National Committee it will be preferable to draw upon Austrians who have been resident in Austria rather than upon returned émigrés.

(e) Detailed preparations for general elections throughout Austria can only be undertaken after a National Committee has been constituted. Despite the practical limitations which will inevitably cause delay, free elections to a constituent assembly should be held as soon as they can be arranged. They should be conducted by Austrians, not by the Allies.

(f) Simultaneously with the provisional constitution of a National Committee at the centre, arrangements should be made for the emergence of democratic local government. Provisional communal councils should be constituted and they should make preparations for communal elections.

(g) It may well prove advantageous that provisional committees be constituted at the head of provincial administrations. The provincial committees should be constituted in the same way, mutatis mutandis, as the National Committee. The holding of provincial elections had best be reserved for decision in the light of conditions prevailing after Allied occupation.

13 December 1944.

15 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 19893, December 15, not printed.

16 Originally circulated in the European Advisory Commission by the United Kingdom Representative on December 13.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 Control (Austria)/12–2644: Telegram

[Document 256]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 26, 1944—8 p.m.

10719. For your informal preliminary information, we are actively working with our military authorities on the Soviet zone proposals and hope to give you formal advice shortly.

In our informal discussions it has seemed very desirable to both State and War Department officials that the Vienna administration extend to the whole Vienna Gau rather than to the narrow limits of the city itself and that it would be desirable for all three zones to converge inside the Innere Stadt.17 It is noted that the former question was raised at the last EAC meeting on Austria and left open for further discussion.

With reference to the Vienna zoning, the Soviet proposal could probably meet our desires with slight changes. These would include having the three zones fan out from a central point within the Innere Stadt such as the principal church, with boundary lines running from there to the nearest junction of each pair of adjacent zones as they already appear in the Soviet proposal. We consider this important as a means of facilitating access by all three forces to the Innere Stadt where most of the hotels, government buildings and centers of interest are located.

Stettinius

17 The Inner City of Vienna.

Consideration of the application of “unconditional surrender” terms to Germany; unofficial peace feelers from GermanyConsideration of the application of “unconditional surrender” terms to Germany; unofficial peace feelers from Germany1

1 For previous correspondence on unofficial peace feeler approaches from Axis nations, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 484 ff.; also ibid., vol. iii, pp. 621–708, passim. For correspondence regarding consideration of surrender terms and controls for Germany in the European Advisory Commission, see pp. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75] ff. For information on the application of the principle of unconditional surrender to Bulgaria, Hungary and Rumania, see bracketed note, pp. 39–40 [Pgs. 39–40 include portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]. For other 1944 documentation on political and economic policies toward Germany, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, 1945, pp. 134 ff.

[257] Mr. William Phillips, Political Adviser at the Headquarters of the Supreme Allied Commander, to the Secretary of State

London, December 17, 1943. [Received December 17—8:02 p.m.]

740.00119 European War/2035: Telegram

[258] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 24, 1943—10 p.m.

740.00119 European War 1939/2057½: Telegram

[259] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington ], December 27, 1943.

740.00119 European War 1939/2088

[260] Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Dunn) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] December 30, 1943.

740.00119 EW 1939/2088

[261] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, January 3, 1944—noon. [Received 1:16 p.m.]

740.00119 European War 1939/2050: Telegram

[262] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] January 3, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/2090

[263] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, January 10, 1944—midnight. [Received January 11—8:53 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/32649: Telegram

[264] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] January 14, 1944.

740.0011 European War 1939/32572

[265] Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

Washington, January 17, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/2113

[266] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, January 18, 1944—9 p.m. [Received January 18—7:18 p.m.]

740.00119 European War 1939/2076: Telegram

[267] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, January 19, 1944—8 p.m. [Received January 19—7:56 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/32760: Telegram

[268] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson)

Washington, January 19, 1944—11 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/32649: Telegram

[269] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

[Washington,] February 2, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/2499

[270] The Ambassador of the Soviet Union (Gromyko) to the Secretary of State

Washington, February 3, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/2254

[271] The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, February 7, 1944. [Received February 16.]

862.01/562

[272] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 10, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/2330

[273] Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Washington, April 1, 1944.

Department of Defense files

[274] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Long) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 3, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/2498

[275] Memorandum by Brigadier General John Magruder, Deputy Director of Intelligence Service, Office of Strategic Services, to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn)

Washington, 5 April, 1944.

740.0011 European War 1939/33979

[276] The Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

London, April 13, 1944. [Received April 13—4:31 p.m.]

740.00119 European War 1939/2491: Telegram

[277] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, April 15, 1944—5 p.m.

740.00119 European War 1939/2491: Telegram

[278] President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

[Georgetown, S.C.,] 15 April, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/2491: Telegram

[279] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] April 17, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/2491

[280] Memorandum by Brigadier General John Magruder, Deputy Director of Intelligence Service, Office of Strategic Services, to Mr. Fletcher Warren, Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

Washington, 17 May, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/2635

[281] President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill)

[Washington,] May 18, 1944.

740.0011 European War 1939/5–1844: Telegram

[282] The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt

[London,] May 22, 1944.

740.0011 European War 1939/5–2344: Telegram

[283] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger) to Mr. Fletcher Warren, Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

[Washington,] May 22, 1944.

740.00119 EW 1939/2635

[284] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, May 24, 1944—5 p.m. [Received June 2—7 p.m.]

740.00119 European War 1939/2644: Airgram

[285] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, May 24, 1944—6 p.m. [Received June 2—7 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/34447: Airgram

[286] The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt

[London,] May 25, 1944.

740.0011 European War 1939/5–2644: Telegram

[287] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger) to Mr. Hathaway Watson, Jr., in the Office of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

[Washington,] May 26, 1944.

740.0011 EW/5–2644

[288] The Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars of the Soviet Union (Stalin) to President Roosevelt

May 26, 1944.

[289] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton) to the People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union (Molotov)

Moscow, May 28, 1944.

Embassy Files: Lot F–96, Box 2

[290] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] June 3, 1944.

740.0011 EW/6–344

[291] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] June 7, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/6–744

[292] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] June 7, 1944.

740.0011 EW/6–744

[293] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Spain (Butterworth)

Washington, June 13, 1944.

862.20200/265

[294] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, June 26, 1944—9 p.m. [Received June 27—11:58 a.m.]

103.918/6–2644: Telegram

[295] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, June 27, 1944—2 p.m. [Received June 27—11:50 a.m.]

740.00119 EW/2710: Telegram

[296] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, June 27, 1944—9 p.m. [Received June 28—1:03 a.m.]

740.00119 EW/6–2744: Telegram

[297] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, July 3, 1944—10 p.m. [Received July 3—8:48 p.m.]

740.00119 European War 1939/7–344: Telegram

[298] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, July 8, 1944—9 p.m. [Received July 8—8:14 p.m.]

740.00119 European War 1939/7–844: Telegram

[299] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] July 11, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/7–1144

[300] Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

Washington, July 17, 1944.

740.0011 European War 1939/7–1744

[301] The Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to the Secretary of State

Washington, 18 July, 1944.

862.00/7–1844

[302] The Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)

Washington, July 20, 1944.

740.0011 EW/7–2044

[303] Summary Record of Interviews With First Secretary of German Embassy in the Vatican (Von Kessel), July 22–August 2, 1944

July 22 to August 2, 1944

762.0011/10–1244

[304] Miss K. Isabel Poate, Attaché in the British Embassy, to Mr. Fletcher Warren, Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

Washington, 26 July, 1944.

740.0011 European War 1939/7–2644

[305] The Second Secretary of the British Embassy (King) to the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger)

Washington, 7 August, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/8–744

[306] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , August 7, 1944.

862.01/8–744

[307] Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, to the Secretary of State

Washington, 17 August, 1944.

740.0011 European War 1939/8–1744

[308] Memorandum by the Combined Chiefs of Staff

Washington, 18 August, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/8–1844

[309] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] August 21, 1944.

740.0011 European War 1939/8–1744

[310] Memorandum by Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 24, 1944.

740.0011 European War 1939/8–2444

[311] Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of War

[Washington,] August 26, 1944.

[312] The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

San Sebastian, August 27, 1944—5 p.m. [Received August 28—8:30 a.m.]

862.01/8–2744: Telegram

[313] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, September 1, 1944—10 p.m.

862.01/8–21744: Telegram

[314] Mr. Carmel Offie, of the Office of the United States Political Adviser (Kirk) on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State

Caserta, September 4, 1944—midnight. [Received September 5—8:24 p.m.]

740.00119 EW/9–444: Telegram

[315] Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State

Caserta, September 7, 1944—noon. [Received 9:40 p.m.]

740.00119 European War/9–744: Telegram

[316] Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean, Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State

Caserta, September 7, 1944—1 p.m. [Received 9:15 p.m.]

740.0011 E.W./9–744: Telegram

[317] Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State

Caserta, September 7, 1944—midnight. [Received September 8—12:35 p.m.]

740.0011 E.W./9–744: Telegram

[318] Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State .

Caserta, September 12, 1944—11 a.m. [Received 8:54 p.m.]

740.00119 EW/9–1244: Telegram

[319] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, September 12, 1944—10 p.m. [Received September 13—1:34 a.m.]

740.00119 E.W./9–1244: Telegram

[320] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, September 14, 1944—6 p.m. [Received 9:40 p.m.]

862.01/9–1444: Telegram

[321] Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State

Caserta, September 19, 1944—midnight. [Received September 20—9:37 p.m.]

740.00119 E.W./9–1944: Telegram

[322] Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State

Caserta, September 21, 1944—midnight. [Received September 22—8:26 a.m.]

740.0011 E.W./9–2144: Telegram

[323] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, September 23, 1944—7 p.m. [Received 11:39 p.m.]

740.00119 E.W./9–2344: Telegram

[324] The Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs, Department of State (Dunn)

Washington, October 2, 1944.

740.0011 European War 1939/10–244

[325] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, October 13, 1944—10 p.m. [Received October 14—4:11 a.m.]

740.00119 E.W./10–1344: Telegram

[326] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 17, 1944—6 p.m. [Received 7:48 p.m.]

740.0011 EW/10–1744: Telegram

[327] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 20, 1944—midnight.

740.0011 E.W./10–1744: Telegram

[328] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 3, 1944—noon.

740.0011 EW/10–1744: Telegram

[329] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, November 14, 1944—8 p.m. [Received 9:58 p.m.]

740.00119 EW 1939/11–1444: Telegram

[330] President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill)

[Washington,] 22 November, 1944.

[331] The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt

London, 24 November, 1944.

[332] Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to President Roosevelt

Washington, 1 December, 1944.

103.918/12–144

[333] The Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs, Department of State (Dunn)

Washington, 11 December, 1944.

740.00119 E.W./12–1144

[334] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, December 15, 1944.

103.918/12–1544

[335] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , 16 December, 1944.

740.00119 EW/12–1644

[336] The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, December 21, 1944—9 a.m. [Received 3:14 p.m.]

740.0011 EW/12–2144: Telegram

[337] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , December 28, 1944.

740.0011 E.W./12–2844

[338] The Counselor of the British Embassy (Wright) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Matthews)

Washington, January 6, 1945.

740.00119 EW/1–645

[339] The Assistant Secretary of State (Dunn) to the Assistant Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Buxton)

Washington, January 11, 1945.

740.00119 E.W./12–1144

Mr. William Phillips, Political Adviser at the Headquarters of the Supreme Allied Commander, to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War/2035: Telegram

[Document 257]

Mr. William Phillips, Political Adviser at the Headquarters of the Supreme Allied Commander, to the Secretary of State

London, December 17, 1943.
[Received December 17—8:02 p.m.]

W–8636.2 For Dunn.3 It appears that at the Teheran Conference4 some objection was raised by Marshal Stalin5 to the formula “Unconditional Surrender” and that the Prime Minister6 agreed with the Marshal’s viewpoint. There is, however, no record of the attitude of the President, although it is said that he did not dissent.

2. The Foreign Office suggest for consideration that the term “Unconditional Surrender” should be avoided until a final decision has been reached between the US and British Governments, and for the time being that the phrase to be used should be “prompt surrender.” Have you any comment?

[File copy not signed]

2 War Department telegram.

3 James C. Dunn, Adviser on Political Relations.

4 See Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehran, 1943, pp. 513, 854–855, 862–863.

5 Marshal Iosif Vissarionovich Stalin, Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars of the Soviet Union.

6 British Prime Minister Winston S. Churchill.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 European War 1939/2057½: Telegram

[Document 258]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 24, 1943—10 p.m.

8144. The Department has been informed by the British Embassy7 that when the question of a joint declaration to the German people on the basis of unconditional surrender arose at Tehran, Marshal Stalin expressed the opinion that this would be bad tactics as far as Germany was concerned, and that he suggested the three Governments work out terms together with a view to making them known generally to the German people. The Embassy’s memorandum stated that Mr. Eden8 suggested that this matter should be dealt with by the European Advisory Commission.

I asked the President for his views9 and he told me this was not brought up in any way at Tehran in his presence. He feels that you should take it up with the Prime Minister as soon as he returns to London.10

Hull

7 In an aide-mémoire of December 22, 1943; for text, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehran, 1943, p. 854.

8 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

9 See Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehran, 1943, pp. 854–855.

10 See ibid., pp. 862–863.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2088

[Document 259]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington ], December 27, 1943.

The British Ambassador11 called at his request and handed me an aide-mémoire in regard to a peace feeler by the Germans, a copy of which is hereto attached. I thanked him. He said that of course he did not know what was in it, but that it was the most serious proposal from Germany his Government has thus far received.

C[ordell] H[ull]

[Annex]

Text of a Telegram Dated December 25th, Sent by Mr. Eden to His Majesty’s Ambassadors at Moscow 12 and Washington

His Majesty’s Minister at Stockholm13 reported on December 17th that he had learnt through responsible Swedish channels that a Swedish pro-Nazi business man (Mr. X.) whose identity has not been revealed to us, had recently had talks at the German Foreign Office with certain officials including State Secretary Von Steengracht,14 who had expressed a general desire to contact British officials in Stockholm. This had been followed by a meeting on December 13th between Mr. X. and Himmler.15 According to Mr. X., Himmler had said that he had had consultations with Goering,16 Milch17 and Rommel18 and that he was now authorized by Hitler to seek personal contact clandestinely between representatives of Germany and Britain. Eibbentrop19 had not been consulted but Bormann20 was present during most of the interview with Mr. X. Himmler had proposed that Germany should send two representatives, one army and one party, to confer with two British representatives in order to clarify what was meant by the term “unconditional surrender”. Himmler added that though he and Hitler realised that the political system must be changed this could not be brought about at the present time before terms of surrender have been considered, since the whole country would fall into a state of anarchy and no responsible representatives would thus be available for negotiations. Himmler concluded by saying that he would nominate representatives from the two categories specified, if the British would agree to the meeting. His only conditions were that the party must be represented and he must be told clandestinely in advance whom they were to meet from the British side.

2. Mr. X. was stated to be ready to return by air to Berlin at short notice in the event of some British message being forthcoming.

3. The Cabinet considers our reply should be to the effect that we have nothing to say to Hitler or Himmler or those associated with him except that our terms are unconditional surrender.

4. Please inform the Government to which you are accredited of this approach and enquire urgently whether they agree that a reply should be sent in terms proposed in paragraph 3 above.

11 Viscount Halifax.

12 Sir Archibald Clark Kerr.

13 Sir Victor A. L. Mallet.

14 G. A. von Steengracht, State Secretary of the German Foreign Office.

15 Heinrich Himmler, German Minister of the Interior.

16 Hermann Goering, German Minister for Aviation.

17 Field Marshal Erhard Milch, German State Secretary for Air.

18 Field Marshal Erwin Rommel.

19 Joachim von Ribbentrop, German Minister for Foreign Affairs.

20 Martin Bormann, Chief, Party Chancellery, National Socialist German Workers’ Party.

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Dunn) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW 1939/2088

[Document 260]

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Dunn) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] December 30, 1943.

Referring to the last paragraph, numbered 4, of the British memorandum containing the text of telegram dated December 25 from Mr. Eden, hereto attached,21 I informed Mr. Michael Wright, Secretary22 of the British Embassy, that this Government was fully in accord with the proposed reply to be made by the British Government to the reported approach from German sources.

James Clement Dunn

21  Supra.

22 First Secretary.

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2050: Telegram

[Document 261]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, January 3, 1944—noon.
[Received 1:16 p.m.]

3. Norwegian who is in Norwegian military intelligence work gave following information in utmost confidence to trusted Norwegian member my staff.

In German Wehrmacht23 circles in Norway there have been for long time some responsible non-Nazi officers who have wanted bring war to end soon as possible. They might even be willing to collaborate with United Nations if given certain assurances regarding future of German people. Among these officers are several of high rank including at least one on Falkenhorst’s24 staff.

Approximately two years ago they tried through some of their Norwegian non-Quisling25 friends who were members of Norwegian civil home front to establish contact with British in order discuss question. Their proposal was passed on to representatives of Norwegian exile government in Stockholm who, informant understands, communicated with British in Stockholm. Informant believes matter aroused no interest that time and certainly no action was taken.

Norwegians having contacts with these Germans have already used them to advantage. One case Germans let their Norwegian friends know in advance certain number German soldiers would arrive certain place in Norway from Denmark on certain date, information which later proved correct in every detail. Same Germans on other occasions gave similar valuable military information.

Informant believes these Germans still want to talk responsible British or American of one kind or another.26 Impression was gathered these men do not consider themselves traitors and should not be approached as such but that they might be willing to agree on important subversive action provided certain conditions presumably regarding nature of future peace were agreed upon. Informant felt it would not be difficult to establish contact as one of higher German officers could readily arrange to pass through Stockholm (as civilian) on trumped-up excuse for trip to Germany.

Message repeated to London as my 3, January 3, noon.27

Johnson

23 German Armed Forces.

24 Gen. Paul N. von Falkenhorst, German Military Governor of Norway.

25 Vidkun Quisling was Minister-President of the Norwegian puppet government set up by the German occupation forces.

26 In telegram 51, January 10, 1944, 9 p.m., to Stockholm the Minister was instructed to meet any approach “with the statement that the only terms which we are prepared to give are those of unconditional surrender.” (740.00119 European War 1939/2050)

27 In a memorandum for the file, dated December 30, 1944 [1943], William C. Trimble, Assistant Chief of the Division of Northern European Affairs, stated that Charles E. Bohlen, Chief of the Division of Eastern European Affairs, considered this information not sufficiently detailed to warrant its being sent to the Soviet Embassy. Accordingly, draft notes prepared for transmission to the British and Soviet Embassies were not sent. (740.00119 EW/2050)

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2090

[Document 262]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] January 3, 1944.

The British Ambassador called at his request and handed me the text of a telegram addressed to him by Mr. Eden on the matter of German peace feelers, a copy of which is hereto attached. I thanked him very sincerely and expressed keen interest, but discounted its purported importance.

C[ordell] H[ull]

[Annex]

Text of a Telegram From Mr. Eden to Viscount Halifax Dated December 31st, 1943

On December 22nd the Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs28 informed His Majesty’s Ambassador,29 after emphasizing that he was giving the information privately as news and not in any sense as a communication from his Government, that he had received the following information from the Roumanian Minister at Ankara30 who had had it from the Roumanian Minister for Foreign Affairs.31

2. The German Minister in Bucharest32 had called in uniform on the Roumanian Minister for Foreign Affairs a few nights previously and, while the latter took notes, made a statement to the following effect:

Germany is prepared to accept peace on the following terms: (a) Surrender of fleet, submarines, merchant fleet and Air Force.

(b) Complete military disarmament.

(c) Evacuation of all occupied territories.

(d) Undertaking never to ask for return of colonies.

(e) Europe to be organized according to the wishes of the Allies.

(f) The only condition asked for by Germany is economic freedom thereafter but this is to be arranged as found suitable by the Allies.

3. The Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs had informed the Roumanian Minister that he flatly refused to pass this communication on to His Majesty’s Ambassador or to have anything to do with it. He even urged His Majesty’s Ambassador not to pass it on to me lest I might interpret his action as an attempt to find a way out as regards Turkey coming into the war.

4. Please inform the Government to which you are accredited, adding that I find it difficult to take this story seriously and am passing it on merely à titre d’information. The only action I am taking is to instruct His Majesty’s Ambassador at Ankara to report any developments that may throw light upon it.

28 Numan R. Menemencioğlu.

29 Hughe M. Knatchbull-Hugessen.

30 Alexander Cretzianu.

31 Mihai A. Antonescu.

32 Manfred von Killinger.

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/32649: Telegram

[Document 263]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, January 10, 1944—midnight.
[Received January 11—8:53 p.m.]

83. Mr. Abram Hewitt,33 whose connections with government service are known to Department, has given me a memorandum of which following is summary.

Early in October a Swedish businessman of high position, friend of Hewitt’s, arranged for a Dr. Felix Kersten to meet Mr. Hewitt. Kersten was private physician to late husband34 of Queen Wilhelmina35 and is said to have a European reputation as a nerve specialist. After German invasion of Holland, Kersten moved to Berlin where he lived until present time. He is known to have treated many high German officials including Himmler36 and Hitler. He has Finnish citizenship. Doctor called by arrangement of Mr. Hewitt in a professional capacity and gave him some treatments which continued until he returned to Berlin about first of December. Conversation between Dr. Kersten and Hewitt was in German. Following represents Hewitt’s digest of points Doctor made during his conversations: 1. He treated Himmler 1938. When Germans invaded Holland he was forced in 1941 to move to Berlin where he again was physician to Himmler. Shortly after he was put under contract to treat 21 members of German Government each year. Hewitt says that while Dr. Kersten put matter in this precise way, from other things he said it seemed apparent that most of his time was put in at SS37 Headquarters treating Himmler and his staff.

2. Doctor claims to have been largely instrumental through mediation with Himmler in having sentence of seven Swedish engineers who had been caught working with Polish underground commuted from death to life imprisonment. Head of Swedish Match Monopoly in Germany, Alvin Moller, whom Hewitt knows, went to Kersten and asked him to use his influence with Himmler to have sentence commuted. Moller is said to have offered large sum of money to doctor (one hundred thousand kronor mentioned) if lives of these men could be saved. Doctor refused to take money but said he would see what he could do. He reported he discussed matter with Himmler several times and had two interviews on subject with Hitler. Sentence of death was then commuted. As reward for his effort Swedish Government invited him to Sweden for two months’ holiday.

Above is doctor’s account of how he got to Sweden. Hewitt says he believes that something along following lines may have happened: Swedish engineers were caught and in fact condemned to death. Money was offered to doctor to get them off. He at once told Himmler who told him not to accept money but arranged to have sentence commuted. Himmler knew Swedes were bound to offer doctor some other reward and instructed him to accept invitation to visit Sweden where as a Finn he would have considerable freedom of movement and opportunity to establish contact with Americans. Hewitt states he believes that it was no accident that Doctor Methim as Swede who was medium of introduction and whom Hewitt says he sees regularly had urged that he talk to Doctor. This Swede has intimate contacts in Germany and moves at highest level. It was plain he wanted to make contact between Hewitt and Doctor.

3. As acquaintance between Hewitt and Doctor developed latter talked quite freely and gave a number of military facts which have been reported elsewhere (to OSS) some of which Hewitt says have been borne out.

4. Doctor states that Himmler since becoming Minister of Interior38 is most important man in Germany, that all cells of resistance to Hitler which had been crystallizing have been wiped out. Many individuals are bitterly opposed to Hitler but no effective organization exists to handle matter. Even communications between generals and other high army officers now has to pass through hands of Gestapo39 or SS.

5. Himmler himself has now reached point where he knows war is lost. For time being he is loyal to Hitler but Doctor intimates time would come when he would not be.

6. As illustration of this changed point of view Doctor cited Denmark where Himmler gave his men orders to allow Jews to escape to Sweden without injury.

7. Himmler is fanatically anti-Russian but is neither anti-British nor anti-American. He is anxious to reach an arrangement with them which will leave something of Germany. He knows it is impossible for Allies to treat with Hitler and is quite prepared to oust him. Hewitt says he asked Doctor if in his opinion Himmler’s patriotism was such that he would oust Hitler, make himself responsible for keeping order in Germany for very limited period and then retire. Doctor said he thought Himmler would. Hewitt says he pointed out that everyone in America and Britain is convinced we will win war and it is useless for Himmler to think about a compromise peace favorable to Germany.

8. Doctor added that in event no such arrangement proved possible he had heard considerable discussion at SS Headquarters about German plans. When point is reached that they believe further military resistance is futile Himmler intends to destroy all property possible in occupied countries and in Germany as well, with a view to depriving individuals of all property and valuables. Purpose of this is to precipitate a wave of communism. Himmler and his crowd would announce themselves as communists and count on riding in upon this wave into some sort of collaboration with Russia.

9. Kersten pressed Hewitt on four separate occasions to go to Germany to confer with Himmler at once. Hewitt says that he pointed out that he is purely a private citizen and in no way represented Government of United States, and further that he had no way of knowing what policies or intentions of Government are at this time.40 Kersten then suggested that Hewitt return to Washington and after getting general picture there come to Lisbon where he would be met and taken to confer with Himmler. Hewitt states that technical arrangements were made to establish contact at Lisbon in event that he came there and that no promise of any kind was made by him.

10. Kersten stated peace proposals from Russia were brought to Germany by Prince Wied, former German Minister to Stockholm, and by von Papen,41 Minister [Ambassador] to Turkey, the first just after Stalingrad and the second last May. Details of these proposals as discussed at SS headquarters and reported by Kersten were in general that Russia was to have a free hand in Balkans, to extend her territory to Salonika, Istanbul and Adriatic port, to keep Baltic Provinces and that part of Poland taken in 1939.

11. Kersten said that it would be all right if Hewitt arrived in Lisbon as late as February 15. Hewitt says that since that time word has reached him from Germany that due to damage wrought by air raids they are very anxious that he should arrive in Lisbon as soon as possible.

Hewitt also reports that since Kersten’s return to Germany in December a German Army Colonel named Walter Schellenberg42 who was wounded in Africa has been in Stockholm and got in touch with CPM [him?] through Kersten’s instructions. Hewitt states he stressed point with the Colonel that he was purely a private person and in no way represented United States Government. He also stressed point that in his private opinion American Government would never deal with Hitler. Schellenberg is said to have remarked that he understood this and intimated that it was not necessary. He asked Hewitt to come to Germany to see Himmler and discuss possibilities of peace. Hewitt replied that there was no point in doing so at time because he knew almost nothing of current policies of American Government but if invitation were left open he might come later. Schellenberg intimated that bombing was devastating so much of Germany that time was rather short in which something could be initiated. Hewitt says technical arrangements were made for him to be met in Lisbon by Schellenberg and taken to Germany for talks with Himmler. Hewitt states that all of these matters had previously been discussed with Dr. Kersten and claims that Schellenberg’s appearance in Stockholm is confirmation from SS Headquarters of Dr. Kersten’s good standing with Himmler.

I have told Mr. Hewitt that in my opinion propositions such as Dr. Kersten’s were useless, that Allied Government would never deal with Himmler and I have also expressed opinion that the secret acts of his were dangerous. Hewitt is leaving Stockholm in a day or two as soon as transportation is available having already procured highest priority. He expects to go to Washington and to expand on this account with officials there. I think he even hopes to see the President.… If Kersten’s overtures are made with authorization it looks like another desperate bid on part of Himmler to save himself at all costs. Such ideas as those advanced by Kersten are those of men in desperation. Germans have in past made many attempts to sow distrust in Allied camp and it is difficult to find reason to put faith in statements of a Finn who is obviously a Gestapo agent himself.…

Johnson

33 Mr. Hewitt was an official of the United States Commercial Company in Sweden.

34 Prince Henry of Mecklenburg-Schwerin.

35 Queen of the Netherlands.

36 For Kersten’s own account of his association with Himmler, see Felix Kersten, Totenkopf und Treue, Heinrich Himmler ohne Uniform; aus den Tagebuchblättern des finnischen Medizinalrats (Hamburg, Robert Mölich Verlag, n.d.).

37 Schutzstaffel, Elite Corps (black shirts) of the Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei (N.S.D.A.P.), used for military and police purposes.

38 Himmler had become Minister of the Interior on August 24, 1943.

39 German Secret Police.

40  In aide-mémoire dated January 24, 1944, not printed, the Department of State transmitted to the British and Soviet Embassies an account of this peace feeler approach containing the following statement: “The American stated that in each instance his answer was a flat refusal made on the grounds first, that he was a private citizen with no authority from the United States Government, and, second, that, in any event, he was convinced that a compromise peace with Germany would not even be considered by the American Government.” (740.0011 European War 1939/33121b and 33121a).

This procedure whereby the U.S., British, and Soviet Governments informed one another of any peace feelers which they might receive was in accordance with item 13 of the Secret Protocol signed November 1, 1943, at the Tripartite Conference of Foreign Ministers, October 18–November 1, 1943, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 749, 753.

41 Franz von Papen.

42 Walter Schellenberg was Chief of Amt VI of the German Office of Security Police and Security Service. Amt VI dealt with intelligence on foreign countries.

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.0011 European War 1939/32572

[Document 264]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] January 14, 1944.

In his telegram no. 43, January 6,43 Ambassador Harriman44 reported that Mr. Molotov45 on his own initiative brought up with the Ambassador, on December 31, the definition of the term “unconditional surrender” and inquired what was the attitude of this Government on the question. It is my understanding that the Soviet interest in this matter is not based on any desire to weaken the principle of unconditional surrender or to offer milder terms to enemy countries but rather on the belief that the present undefined term “unconditional surrender” affords enemy propaganda an opportunity to play on the natural fear of the unknown in the minds of their people and consequently stiffens their will to fight. As I understand it, the Soviet Government believes that some definition, however general and severe, of the conditions of surrender which will be imposed on the enemy countries would deprive the enemy of this propaganda advantage and consequently weaken the morale of their armed forces and people. In view of the Soviet interest in this matter, do you approve of discussions with the Soviet and British Governments to explore the desirability of some public definition for propaganda exploitaton of the terms of unconditional surrender to be imposed on the respective enemy countries?

C[ordell] H[ull]

43  Post, p. 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 340].

44 W. Averell Harriman, American Ambassador in the Soviet Union.

45 Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov, Soviet People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs.

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2113

[Document 265]

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State 46

Washington, January 17, 1944.

Frankly, I do not like the idea of conversation to define the term “unconditional surrender”. Russia, Britain and the United States have agreed not to make any peace without consultation with each other. I think each case should stand on its own merits in that way.

The German people can have dinned into their ears what I said in my Christmas Eve speech48 —in effect, that we have no thought of destroying the German people and that we want them to live through the generations like other European peoples on condition, of course, that they get rid of their present philosophy of conquest. I forget my exact words but you can have them looked up.

Secondly, the German people and Russia should also be told the best definition of what “unconditional surrender” really means. The story of Lee’s surrender to Grant is the best illustration. Lee wanted to talk about all kinds of conditions. Grant said that Lee must put his confidence in his (Grant’s) fairness. Then Lee surrendered. Immediately Lee brought up the question of the Confederate officers’ horses, which belonged to them personally in most cases, and Grant settled that item by telling Lee that they should take their horses home as they would be needed in the Spring plowing.

A few little incidents like the above will have more effect on the Germans than lots of conversations between the Russians, British and ourselves trying to define “unconditional surrender”. Whatever words we might agree on would probably have to be modified or changed the first time some nation wanted to surrender.

F[ranklin] D. R[oosevelt]

46 The substance of this memorandum was transmitted to Moscow in telegram 144, January 25, 2 p.m., p. 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341].

48 For text, see Department of State Bulletin, January 1, 1944, p. 3.

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2076: Telegram

[Document 266]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, January 18, 1944—9 p.m.
[Received January 18—7:18 p.m.]

184. Pravda 49 dispatch from Cairo to effect that two Englishmen had conferred with Ribbentrop about a separate peace was not published here until this morning but was reported on radio last night. It has aroused considerable interest but has not yet been given an alarming character. Boheman50 told me this afternoon that he considered it a typical Russian maneuver and in his view linked with case of Poland. It could well be, he said, a form of blackmail on Anglo-Saxon Powers warning them to keep hands off of Eastern European questions and carrying intimation that Anglo-Saxon advice and interest in this area are not desired in Moscow. It is basically a stupid statement but one which Russians probably consider clever. It may be part of Russian design to alarm British by making this charge against them and thus indirectly suggesting that Russia might possibly make a separate peace, if events do not develop according to her liking. Boheman doubts that any real harm will come from it other than muddying waters which everyone had hoped were clearing up. Worst aspect he thinks is that it will undoubtedly give renewed hope to Germans. He told me that he has good evidence that some Germans even in high places and at army command headquarters still cling to belief that a separate peace with Russia for Germany way [may?] be possible. He commented on extreme difficulty of dealing with Russians and of getting any real meeting of minds with them on important matters. He thinks Poles from practical point of view are acting unwisely and said that in his opinion Russian suggestion of Curzon Line51 was basically sound but that their uncompromising attitude of declaring a reply to be unsatisfactory merely because it is not a simple yes to every Russian proposal further demonstrates difficulty in coming to any agreement with Russians.52 General view of Swedish Government and of informed opinion very much same as his own. War Department may be interested in this Swedish view.

Johnson

49 Official newspaper of the Central Committee and Moscow Committee of the All-Union Communist Party.

50 Erik C. Boheman, Secretary General, Swedish Ministry for Foreign Affairs.

51 In regard to the origin of the Curzon Line, and for a description of it, see Foreign Relations, The Paris Peace Conference, 1919, vol. xiii, pp. 793–794. Further details are in H. W. V. Temperley (ed.), A History of the Peace Conference of Paris (Oxford, 1924), vol. vi, pp. 233–283, 317–322, and summary descriptions in S. Konovalov (ed.), Russo-Polish Relations: an Historical Survey (London, 1945), pp. 33–38, 57–63.

52 For correspondence regarding the interest of the United States in the Polish Government in Exile, and in its relations with the Soviet Union, see vol. iii, pp. 1216 ff.

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/32760: Telegram

[Document 267]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, January 19, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received January 19—7:56 p.m.]

199. Embarrassments and difficulties occasioned by Pravda despatch to effect that there had been contact between British and Germans with view to separate peace, whatever may be final explanation from Moscow, that report, emphasizes in my opinion extreme danger of activities of government agents similar to those of Mr. Hewitt described in my 83, January 10, midnight.

Mr. Hewitt is still in Stockholm waiting transportation. He informed me this morning that he had received word indirectly from his German contacts urgently inquiring when he was leaving. Mr. Hewitt mentioned to me that it had been agreed that he would meet them in Lisbon by February 15 if his Government approved of his doing so. I have told Mr. Hewitt again that I disapproved of these contacts and that I consider them extremely dangerous. He should be got out of Sweden as soon as possible and I venture to suggest to Department instructions to London Embassy to request of British authorities highest possible priority for him on British transport plane.53 I understand he is now No. 28 on Stockholm list which might possibly mean that he could not get away within a fortnight or a month should unexpectedly bad weather intervene, or British interpose new and higher priorities.

Johnson

53 The Department accordingly instructed the Ambassador in the United Kingdom, who discussed the situation with the appropriate British authorities. On February 3, 1944, the Minister in Sweden reported that Mr. Hewitt had left for London on the previous night.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson) 740.0011 European War 1939/32649: Telegram

[Document 268]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson)

Washington, January 19, 1944—11 p.m.

91. Your 83 of January 10, midnight. Should Hewitt still be in Stockholm, you are instructed to inform him that Kersten’s proposition should not even be considered. For Hewitt’s information the only terms which this Government is prepared to give are those of unconditional surrender. The substance of this “peace feeler” will be communicated to the British and Soviet Embassies here.54

Hull

54 This was done by aide-mêmoire dated January 24, 1944, not printed; see footnote 40, p. 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 263].

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) 740.00119 European War 1939/2499

[Document 269]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)55

[Washington,] February 2, 1944.

The attached secret telegram, relating to a German military group which has made overtures to OSS informants, has two points of interest, the latter disquieting.

First, the group intimates the possibility of a putsch, followed by a “surrender to the West” and asks for “political ammunition”, which, of course, would mean assurances or the like of use to them. OSS, of course, is not following this up in any way and has no desire to, which is in line with the consistent policy of the Department.

Second, this group indicates that certain of their associates in Spain and/or Lisbon have been in touch with Beaulac56 and with Campbell,57 the British Minister [Ambassador] in Lisbon. True or not, this means that a German military group, composed in part of former German intelligence people and perhaps in touch with present German intelligence, is saying that it has established contact with a Britisher and an American, and that they have received encouragement from Campbell.

So far as I am aware, nothing of the kind has been heard in respect to Beaulac.

My fear is that attempts will be made by German intelligence groups to create some situation which they can later represent to the Soviets as preliminary steps to a separate peace. This would be in line with their present known strategy of endeavoring to find ways and means of dividing the three powers.

I wonder if it would not be well to cable Beaulac to be on his guard, and take up with the British a similar warning to Campbell.

You may also wish to consider informing the Soviet representatives. Here is a matter which is already being discussed in Switzerland, where everything eventually becomes known, relating to matters which appear to have occurred in Lisbon and, perhaps, Spain, where most things are discovered pretty promptly.

OSS officials have told me that the cable has been suppressed and that they have no further interest other than to lay it before the Department for its information.

A[dolf] A. B[erle], Jr.

[Annex]

Breakers

The German oppositional group, called Breakers, is composed of various intellectuals from certain military and Government circles. They have a loose organization among themselves. I57a have been given to understand that the member of the group whose surname is John58 is one of Canaris’59 men for Spain and Portugal, intended especially for Anglo-Saxon contacts. You may be interested to know that for the most part, Breakers maintain their foreign contacts and communications through Canaris organization and both X and Y act as intermediaries here in Bern.

For a number of reasons, I have not talked with the British about the Breakers’ situation at this particular time, and pending further developments I recommend that you also refrain from doing so on the basis of information in my messages.

These groups are made up of well-educated and liberal individuals, but nevertheless, they do not have rightist tendencies and are confident that in the future the Government will have to be really leftist.

We have at the present time, by means of Y, secured a line to Breakers which we think can be used now for staying in close touch with events. Since any slight break would be disastrous, no constructive purpose would be served by cabling particulars. The Breakers contain three tendencies, on the whole, i.e. evolutionary, revolutionary, and military. The first of these factions takes the stand that, in the face of history and the people, complete responsibility should be shouldered to the grim conclusion by the leader and his cohorts. In general, the other two groups think that drastic action should be taken to get rid of the leader, and that a new government should be organized before the fighting stops so that it could thereupon join in the negotiations. In spite of these contrary opinions, these groups keep in touch and are very eager to obtain political ammunition from our side. They consider this to be sadly wanting, and they wish it to reenforce their movement at the present time and following the collapse, as well. Western orientation is preferred by the Breakers over Eastern orientation, but they fear that their nation is being directed by events toward the influence of the East. They are in favor of extensive social changes.

Are you able to check, in an extremely judicious manner, the word which we have received that an associate of Y, whose name is John, has been in contact with Campbell and Beaulac? It is very likely that this is exceedingly secret. I am informed by Y that he and his friends are inclined to doubt the encouragement which John has received from Campbell regarding the idea that negotiations would be facilitated by putting the Military in power and changing the government.

I would appreciate hearing of any indication with which you could supply me regarding what you would be interesting [interested] in achieving via the Breakers, and could be pursued effectively at this time. I do not understand what our policy is and what offers, if any, we could give to any resistance movement.

55 Addressed to the Secretary of State and to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn).

56 Willard L. Beaulac, Counselor of the American Embassy in Spain.

57 Sir Ronald H. Campbell, British Ambassador in Portugal.

57a Presumably Allen W. Dulles; see the account of this episode in his Germany’s Underground (New York, Macmillan, 1947), pp. 134 ff.

58 Otto John, head of the Legal Department of Lufthansa.

59 Adm. Wilhelm Canaris, Chief of German Military Intelligence.

The Ambassador of the Soviet Union (Gromyko) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2254

[Document 270]

The Ambassador of the Soviet Union (Gromyko) to the Secretary of State

Washington, February 3, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: The Soviet Government has authorized me to inform the Government of the United States, that at the end of January, 1944 a correspondent of Tass60 in Stockholm was called on by a member of the STB (Scandinavian Telegraph Bureau) in Denmark and [who?] at the beginning introduced himself as a Dane. The visitor stated, that everybody knew now about the approaching end of Nazism and that in Germany the military group would come to power, and that even now the position of Keitel,61 who is considered as an “apolitical General”, was growing stronger.

The visitor informed that he had flown in from Copenhagen on January 26, where, before his departure, he had a talk with the emperial [imperial] deputy Best.62 According to him, Best, acting on behalf of the German government, asked him to get in touch with someone in Stockholm, so that the Soviet Government could learn about it, that the German government was ready to send at any time to Stockholm a high official with official credentials from the German government to start peace negotiations between the U.S.S.R. and Germany. Having listened to the above, and having learned that the visitor was not a Dane but a German, the Tass correspondent terminated the conversation and asked the visitor to leave his office.

The Ambassador in London63 is informing the Government of Great Britain regarding the aforesaid.

Sincerely yours,

A. Gromyko

60 Official News Agency of the Soviet Union.

61 Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel, Chief of the High Command of the German Armed Forces.

62 Werner Best, German Minister to Denmark.

63 Fedor Tarasovich Gusev.

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State 862.01/562

[Document 271]

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

No. 2005 Madrid, February 7, 1944.
[Received February 16.]

Sir: I have the honor to refer to my Secret despatches Nos. 1320 of September 13 and 1728 of December 13, 1943 and 1965 of January 31, 1944,64 in which mention was made, particularly in despatch No. 1728, of the proposal that a Dr. Keller, a German liaison officer with the chief of the Military Administration at Paris, was interested in conversing with some officer of the Embassy.

Dr. Hermann Keller unexpectedly came to Madrid and saw two members of the Embassy staff. While he gave certain general information on German activities in France, memoranda herewith enclosed,64 he stated he was unwilling to impart any military information. He was, however, extremely interested in informing us of a group of Catholic Centrists comprised of industrialists, nobility, scientists, individual military figures and bishops, with some 250 members located principally in the Rhineland, Southern Germany, Austria and along the Danube. This group have comprehensive plans for taking control of the economic administration of Germany upon termination of the war. The Vatican has been fully informed of the plans. The plans specifically cover post-war organization of economic, labor and political life in Germany.

The contact mentioned the Stenz Transportation Company as one of the supporters of the group, probably Monsignor Kass65 (phonetic) and a General Von Bachmann. Contact states that he does not know personally more than twelve members, but in any future discussions he may develop sufficient confidence in us to give further names.

The group believes that German military authorities have no real political sense and that accordingly political responsibility should be entrusted to a group not antagonistic to the military but able to influence them. Immediate steps to prevent anarchy must be taken upon the fall of the present Government, and I gather that the group will be in a position to designate leaders for this purpose, at least in all large communities.

He is interested in the provision of food and employment upon German collapse and believes propaganda regarding our plans would have great effect in bringing about a collapse.

The Catholic Centrists, he said, persuaded many youths to enter the SS in the endeavor to prevent many of its worse steps, and he believes these individuals still remain decent.

Contact has made arrangements to continue to keep in touch with us, and it is proposed to supply him, if no objection is seen, with general Allied propaganda material and such specific material on organization of possible occupation as may be available here.

It is requested that the Department supply, in any language, suitable material on government and restoration of occupied countries and the programs of the relief, food, and control agencies already set up.

The Department’s guidance on the policy to be adopted in further contacts with Dr. Keller would be appreciated.66

See, in this connection, my Secret despatch No. 1337, dated September 17, 1943.67 I do not know whether or not the group referred to in that despatch is the same group referred to above.

Respectfully yours,

Carlton J. H. Hayes

64 None printed.

64 None printed.

65 Presumably Msgr. Ludwig Kaas, former chairman of the German Centre Party.

66 Telegram 555, February 28, 9 p.m., to Madrid, made the following reply: “The Department believes the contact with Keller should be broken and should not be resumed by any member of your staff.” (862.01/562)

67 Not printed.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2330

[Document 272]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 10, 1944.

Subject: Proposal of peace terms to the German people over the heads of the Nazi Government.

Mr. Secretary: There is a great deal of agitation of certain groups that before the actual invasion commences this Government should take every possible step in the direction of the surrender of Germany, and the suggestion is being made by certain organized groups that before the actual invasion starts a proposal be made to the German people as a whole over the heads of the Nazi Government.

I am not sympathetic personally with this point of view, but it is bound to be an active issue in the weeks to come.

I think it is important that you and the President have your views definitely crystallized on the matter because some day we might have to answer certain criticisms.

E[dward] S[tettinius]

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Joint Chiefs of Staff Department of Defense files

[Document 273]

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Washington, April 1, 1944.

I have spoken with Admiral Leahy68 in regard to a memorandum from the Joint Chiefs of Staff of March 25th.68a

I cannot agree with the proposed statement or the advisability thereof.

The trouble is that the reasoning of the memorandum presupposes a reconstituting of a German state which would give active cooperation apparently at once to peace in Europe.

A somewhat long study and personal experience in and out of Germany leads me to believe that German philosophy cannot be changed by decree, law or military order. The change in German philosophy must be evolutionary and may take two generations.

To assume otherwise is to assume, of necessity, a period of quiet followed by a third world war.

I think that the simplest way of approaching this whole matter is to stick to what I have already said, (a) that the United Nations are determined to administer a total defeat to Germany as a whole (b) that the Allies have no intention of destroying German people. Please note that I am not willing at this time to say that we do not intend to destroy the German nation. As long as the word “Reich” exists in Germany as expressing a nationhood, it will forever be associated with the present form of nationhood. If we admit that, we must seek to eliminate the very word “Reich” and all that it stands for today.

F[ranklin] D. R[oosevelt]

68 Adm. William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy.

68a Not printed; in this memorandum the Joint Chiefs of Staff noted that “the unconditional surrender formula in its present form has apparently enabled the Nazis to envoke the spectre of annihilation and thus has stiffened the German will to resist.” They recommended a restatement of the formula, “elaborating on the points already made by the President and other United Nations Leaders,” and urged that this step be taken at an early date, in order to “establish a favorable condition precedent to Overlord.” For information on the background of the JCS memorandum, see Maurice Matloff, Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare, 1943–1944, in the official Army history, United States Army in World War II: The War Department (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1959), pp. 428–430.

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Long) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2498

[Document 274]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Long) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 3, 1944.

Mr. Secretary: I attach the following comment to the secret communication concerning unconditional surrender delivered to you by Lord Halifax on March 20, the same being a copy of a telegram to him from Mr. Eden as of March 17.69

For some time I have had the personal opinion that the phrase “unconditional surrender” could be used by Germany to frighten her people and through fright to bind them together and make stronger their resistance to the Allied forces, consequently prolonging the war.

It has been my thought that some modification or explanation of the term “unconditional surrender” would contribute to the surrender of the satellites of Germany and even to the surrender of Germany itself.

Consequently my mind is somewhat sympathetic to the proposals in Lord Halifax’ communication.

The President transmitted to the Congress the Eleventh Report on Lend-Lease under date of August 23, 1943.70 In that message he said in part, as you recently quoted in a letter to a number of members of the Congress: “Except for the responsible fascist leaders, the people of the Axis need not fear unconditional surrender to the United Nations. I have said that we shall bring food for the starving and medicine for the sick in the areas liberated by the United Nations. We have done so, under lend-lease, in North Africa. We are doing so in Sicily. We shall continue to do so in other areas, as they are liberated, to prevent economic breakdown and to aid the liberated peoples to produce and to help themselves. We shall provide these necessary civilian supplies in support of our military operations and as a matter of simple humanity. The people of Axis-controlled areas may be assured that when they agree to unconditional surrender they will not be trading Axis despotism for ruin under the United Nations.”

The quotation from the text above does not include the full text, for the President then proceeded to state: “The goal of the United Nations is to permit liberated peoples to create a free political life of their own choosing and to attain economic security. These are two of the great objectives of the Atlantic Charter.71

“But until the day of unconditional surrender, the United Nations will continue with the force of all their power to hit the enemy. We are striking hard and ready to strike harder. Greatly increased United States forces and greatly increased lend-lease supplies are on the way to the battle fronts. The longer this war goes on, the stronger the United Nations will become.”

It will be noted that in the quotation immediately above the President was speaking for the United Nations. It would seem to be unnecessary to redefine the term “unconditional surrender” in the name of the United Nations and further that it would be necessary only to come to some understanding with Great Britain and Russia to the extent to which it would be modified in case it is decided to make any modification or explanation.

What does not appear in the note of Lord Halifax or in any of the other documents on the subject with which I am familiar is the fact that “unconditional surrender” is a military term. It applies to a period of armistice. It does not relate to the treatment to be extended to the civilian population and to the events of their daily life.

It is further realized that an unconditional surrender must be followed by an action on the part of the conquering powers that would deprive the authorities of the surrendering government control of their communications (all of them), their public utilities, their war factories and their government offices. However, it would be the intention of the conquering powers to permit the ordinary activities of daily life, the carriage of food from producing areas to consuming areas, the operation of public utilities for public benefit such as telephones, water, sewage, garbage, hygiene, and the establishment of markets for the exchange of produce as well as such ordinary little affairs as are necessary to carry on the daily life.

The difficulty with the present situation is that the people of the enemy countries are convinced by their government that not only all of these activities will be interrupted but that they themselves may be butchered or led off into slavery. At least the situation permits their government to impress upon them that thought.

As we do not intend to carry our activities after victory to the extremes which have been portrayed to the minds of these people it would seem advisable from the interest of military as well as political policy to come to some understanding with our two great allies and to make some expression which would relieve the apprehensions of those people as to the extent to which they are personally and collectively to be subjected and thereby induce a “softening up” in their collective resistance.

Since the President has stated in terms the inference from which is patent and since our intentions are not those of mass murder and slavery or even total disruption of civilian life it would seem wise policy to make some declaration to that effect. Either one of the three governments might find opportunity to do so on some particular occasion in the near future with the approval of the other two governments or there might be issued a joint statement of policy to be released simultaneously.

In an effort to make a concrete proposal for consideration I have reduced to writing a suggested statement.

B[reckinridge] L[ong]

[Annex]

Suggested Statement on Unconditional Surrender, Prepared by the Assistant Secretary of State (Long)

In speaking of our coming victory over the evil forces of Nazi Germany we have used the phrase “unconditional surrender.” That is a military term. It applies to the armed forces of the enemy. From them we shall expect unconditional surrender. By that term is meant that the German military authorities will be unable to place any conditions upon their own surrender to the Allied forces.

The term does not apply to the civilian population except that they will be individually and collectively expected immediately to cease all activities which have any bearing upon the military effort of Germany whether it be in transportation, in factories engaged in war production or in any other activity in support of the armed forces.

The term does not apply to the ordinary dealings of the people in the ordinary affairs of their daily life in their homes and farms and in the market places. Nor does it forbode any harsh treatment of women and children or those citizens dissociated from the activities of the Nazi party, except those individuals who may be branded as, war criminals.

As regards the satellites of Germany, they may be assured that their desertion of Germany and in recognition of any material contribution they make toward hastening Germany’s defeat will earn them some reward and after their surrender we may be able to discuss with them such questions as military collaboration against Germany, the rendering to them of assistance against the German armed forces, and, the reestablishment of a government of their own choosing.

The same statements as made above concerning the civilian population of Germany would apply as a matter of course to the civilian, populations of the satellite countries immediately upon their surrender to the Allies.

B[reckinridge] L[ong]

(Note: The last paragraph is a paraphrase of part of Article 4 of Mr. Eden’s telegram to Lord Halifax under reference above.)

[In a memorandum of April 5, 1944, to Secretary of State Hull, President Roosevelt summarized his position on modification of the principle of unconditional surrender regarding the Axis satellites. as follows: “I understand perfectly well that from time to time there will have to be exceptions not to the surrender principle but to the application of it in specific cases. That is a very different thing from changing the principle.”

For complete text of the memorandum of April 5, see page 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352].]

69 Not printed; for a summary, see memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt, March 25, p. 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343].

70 For complete text, see Department of State Bulletin, August 28, 1943, p. 124.

71 Joint statement by President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill, August 14, 1941 Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. i, p. 367.

Memorandum by Brigadier General John Magruder, Deputy Director of Intelligence Service, Office of Strategic Services, to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn) 740.0011 European War 1939/33979

[Document 275]

Memorandum by Brigadier General John Magruder, Deputy Director of Intelligence Service, Office of Strategic Services, to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn)

Washington, 5 April, 1944.

Transmitted herewith for your information is a copy of a dispatch, from the Bern office of this agency, giving reported German reactions, to three major Allied propaganda lines.

John Magruder

[Annex]

Bern, 31 March, 1944.

Germany: Reaction to Allied Psychological Warfare

On the basis of numerous reports and extended consultation, the OSS representative in Bern transmits the German reactions to three major Allied propaganda lines: 1. The trend toward a German defeat is inescapable. The Germans are certainly aware of this inescapable trend. Their hopes at present consist solely in: (a) diminution of Russian interest upon attaining the 1941 boundaries, or else friction between the USSR and the western Allies; (b) frustration of attempts to land in the Balkans or in France, added to war fatigue on the part of the western countries, the forthcoming elections in the US, and the degree to which the US views the war against Japan as its primary concern; (c) a miracle of some sort, such as a secret weapon, although this hope is fading; (d) an era of chaotic confusion throughout Europe, from which Germany would emerge in as good shape as any other country.

2. Unconditional surrender does not mean total disaster. The majority of Germans suspect that the Allies wish to ruin the economic as well as the military strength of Germany; “unconditional surrender” therefore signifies to most of them total catastrophe for the country and for the individual German. We ourselves have done nothing to offer them a more hopeful meaning for this expression; we have never, for example, indicated that it refers only to military and party leaders. The Germans’ pessimistic interpretation of “unconditional surrender” is also supported by the widespread feeling that the Atlantic Charter has been discarded or at least does not hold good for Germany, and by Churchill’s mention of compensation to Poland by giving her German territory. In the face of Goebbels’73 propaganda system, it would be difficult to “sell” the German people on a new and more optimistic interpretation of “unconditional surrender”; however, granting the issuance of authoritative and harmonizing proclamations from Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin, it probably could be achieved in time. Thus far, back-handed encouragement from the Free German Committee74 in Moscow has been the only source of hope for the Germans, and many Germans regard this Committee as a trap.

3. Overthrow of the Nazis by a minority group. Unless Hitler and certain other Nazi leaders were murdered, and the Army takes over, most Germans believe that no minority faction could now seize authority over the existing ruler. Moreover, no effective opposition group, military or civilian, exists which favors the western powers. Most anti-Nazis who desire western orientation see no justification for risking their lives to promote any plans for Germany thus far submitted by the western powers. Other anti-Nazi elements in the Reich prefer to have the authority and responsibility maintained by the Nazi and military cliques until the ultimate debacle, so that the whole blame for the war and for Germany’s downfall will rest for all time on the shoulders of Hitler and the military. The German Socialists, especially, do not intend to assume control, as they did the last time, and thus have to answer for the armistice and peace terms. The Catholics’ point of view is much the same. The Communists possess no known leader. Of course, a new group probably would be created in case we chose to offer any indication that such a group could deal with us; until the capitulation, however, the strength of this group would be insignificant.

73 Joseph Goebbels, German Minister for Propaganda.

74 This Committee was created in July 1943 and was composed of German prisoners of war in the Soviet Union.

The Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2491: Telegram

[Document 276]

The Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)75 to the Secretary of State

London, April 13, 1944.
[Received April 13—4:31 p.m.]

S–50325.76 Conversing this morning with General Eisenhower77 and General Smith78 they raised with me and expressed the considered opinion that the term “Unconditional surrender” should be clarified by announcing the principles on which the treatment of a defeated Germany would be based. This seemed to them highly desirable in view of the accumulated evidence that German propaganda is interpreting the words “Unconditional surrender” to strengthen the morale of the German Army and people. In order to offset this the Generals thought it very necessary to create, if possible, through our own propaganda: A. A mood of acceptance of unconditional surrender in the German Army such as would make possible a collapse of resistance similar to that which took place in Tunisia; and

B. To create a mood in the German General Staff as a result of which necessary political steps might be undertaken by a German Badoglio79 for unconditional surrender.

It was suggested that the following trend of propaganda would be of great use as far as possible in advance of D day: A. Tri-Party American-Anglo-Russian statement to define unconditional surrender and the guarantee of promotion of law and order;

B. A summary of Anglo-American principles upon which the Anglo-American Military Government will be conducted. The Anglo-American statement might be followed by a political directive which would include: Para 1. Methods of demilitarization;

Para 2. Purge of Nazis from the government machine;

Para 3. Seizure of war criminals;

Para 4. Orderly transfers of population;

Para 5. Restoration of religious and trade unions freedom.

C. Once we have a bridgehead the Commander in Chief should make a statement calling for surrender and at the same time recapitulate the terms of other declarations.

It was said that a period of at least 4 weeks would be necessary to make effective these declarations in the minds of the German people.

General Smith rather than General Eisenhower felt that governmental statements must be followed, at the appropriate time, by a declaration from the Supreme Commander to the German Commander in the west,80 which would presumably not be made until after the bridgehead is well established and the west wall broken. This in General Smith’s opinion would be the psychological moment for the call to surrender, reciting in soldierly language, the principal points of the Tri-Party declarations and the principles of the Anglo-American Military Government.

General Smith expressed the opinion that from all available evidence, in default of such declarations, it would be impossible to exploit the crisis in the German Army which will undoubtedly arise immediately after a successful Allied landing.

For your information the British political officer81 at SHAEF82 has been asked to express these views to the Foreign Office. It would be most helpful if the General could have your reaction as soon as possible which I suggest you send through Phillips.83 Phillips is in hearty accord with the views expressed. Assume you will wish to review with Mister Stimson84 the matter.

75 Mr. Stettinius was on a special mission to London April 7–29; for correspondence, see vol. iii, pp. 1 ff.

76 War Department telegram.

77 Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower, Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force.

78 Lt. Gen. Walter Bedell Smith, Chief of Staff to the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force.

79 Marshal Pietro Badoglio had formed a new government in Italy on July 26, 1943, following the resignation of Benito Mussolini. It was the Badoglio government that surrendered to the Allies on September 8, 1943. For correspondence on the overthrow of the Fascist regime in Italy, and Italian surrender and recognition as a co-belligerent, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. ii, pp. 314 ff.

80 Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt.

81 Charles B. P. Peake.

82 Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force.

83 William Phillips, Political Adviser at the Headquarters of the Supreme Allied Commander.

84 Henry L. Stimson, Secretary of War.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 European War 1939/2491: Telegram

[Document 277]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, April 15, 1944—5 p.m.

3004. For Phillips. Reference telegram from SHAEF to War Department, S–50325, 13th April 1944. Of course, as you know, the President holds very strongly to maintaining the principle of unconditional surrender for Germany. I feel, however, that case for action along lines indicated in reference telegram should be given every consideration but before going into it further would like to have you suggest that Stettinius ascertain from the Ambassador whether the EAC85 has progressed in its work to the point where it would be possible to arrive at a tripartite declaration on the principles upon which military government for Germany is to be based. As this is a matter which comes under the Commission’s terms of reference, I question whether we should proceed on this subject by other means than through the Commission unless both of the other two Governments were willing to do so.

Hull

85 European Advisory Commission.

President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2491: Telegram

[Document 278]

President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State 86

[Georgetown, S.C.,] 15 April, 1944.

Referring to S50325 from Stettinius, any reply thereto should have my approval before being sent.

86 Transmitted through the White House Map Room, where it was received at 7:40 p.m. on April 15, 1944. At this time, President Roosevelt was recuperating from an attack of bronchitis at Bernard Baruch’s estate in Georgetown, South Carolina.

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.00119 European War 1939/2491

[Document 279]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] April 17, 1944.

As Telegram S–50325 from Stettinius raised the question regarding a Tripartite American-Anglo-Russian Statement to define unconditional surrender, I thought it well to send a message87 immediately to the effect that you are holding very strongly to the principle of unconditional surrender for Germany. I also asked for information as to whether the European Advisory Commission had progressed far enough in its study of terms to be imposed upon Germany to form a basis as to what treatment of Germany would be agreed to by the Soviets, British, and ourselves.

This subject was raised by General Eisenhower and General Smith with Stettinius, and I thought it was necessary to remind them all that no discussion as to the treatment of Germany should be carried on outside of the European Advisory Council, to which this matter was expressly referred by the three Governments. I am immediately informing them in London that no further consideration should be given to this matter without your approval.89

C[ordell] H[ull]

87 Telegram 3004, April 15, 5 p.m., to London, above.

89 Such was the substance of telegram 3056, April 17, 1944, 10 p.m., to London (700.00119 EW/2491).

Memorandum by Brigadier General John Magruder, Deputy Director of Intelligence Service, Office of Strategic Services, to Mr. Fletcher Warren, Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) 740.00119 European War 1939/2635

[Document 280]

Memorandum by Brigadier General John Magruder, Deputy Director of Intelligence Service, Office of Strategic Services, to Mr. Fletcher Warren, Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

Washington, 17 May, 1944.

Attention: Mr. A. A. Berle, Jr.

Subject: Overtures by German Generals and Civilian Opposition for a Separate Armistice.

There is enclosed herewith copy of a document90 concerning the above subject, which has been prepared by this agency. The information contained therein was obtained from a series of cables from our Bern office, the most recent of which is dated May 13.

A copy of this document has been transmitted formally to the Secretary of State by the Acting Director, OSS.91

John Magruder

[Enclosure]

Overtures by German Generals and Civilian Opposition for a Separate Armistice

Washington, May 16, 1944.

1. Since early 1944 the OSS representative in Bern92 has been approached periodically by two emissaries of a German group proposing to attempt an overthrow of the Nazi regime. The group includes Leuschner,93 socialist leader and former Minister of Interior in Hesse; Oster,94 a general formerly the right-hand man of Canaris, arrested in 1943 by the Gestapo, kept under surveillance after his release, and recently discharged from official functions by Keitel; Goerdler,95 former Mayor of Leipzig; and General Beck.96 The last two men have been described by the OSS representative as leaders of the group; it is from them that the two emissaries have brought proposals for negotiation.

2. Early in April the emissaries talked with the OSS representative in Bern, conveying the suggestion of a deal between this German opposition group and the Western Allies. The group expressed their willingness and preparation to attempt ousting Hitler and the Nazis. They stated their belief that the time in which successful action could be carried out was rapidly shortening. They said they were the only group able to profit by personal approach to Hitler and other Nazi chiefs, and the only one controlling enough arms and enough influence in the Wehrmacht to accomplish the purpose of Nazi overthrow. The group stated that the German generals now commanding in the West—particularly Rundstedt and Falkenhausen—would be ready to cease resistance and aid Allied landings, once the Nazis had been ousted. They thought that similar arrangements might be worked out for the reception of Allied airborne forces at strategic points in Germany. While ready to attempt a coup, the group did not guarantee success.

3. The condition on which the group expressed willingness to act was that they would deal directly with the Western Allies alone after overthrowing the Nazi regime. As precedent for excluding the USSR from all negotiations they cited the recent example of Finland, which they said dealt solely with Moscow.97 This condition the group based on the conservative character of their membership and supporters. However, the group declared their willingness to cooperate with any leftist elements except the Communists; in February they had described Leuschner as an acceptable type of head for an interim government, assuming that neither the military nor the Communists would dominate during the transition period. The group feared political and ideological sway over Central Europe by Bolshevism, with a mere exchange of Nazi totalitarianism for a totalitarianism of the radical left accompanied by the submergence of democracy and Christian culture. They stated that if capitulation were to be made primarily to the Soviet Union, it would have to be carried out by another group in Germany.

4. The OSS representative expressed to the emissaries his conviction that the United States and Great Britain would not act regarding Germany without the concert of Russia. In commenting on the opposition group’s proposal, he expressed skepticism of their capability since Beck and Goerdler have been so prominently mentioned as potential leaders that the Gestapo must be aware of the situation and is only waiting to crack down until plans have gone farther or because the Gestapo may wish to keep an anchor to westward.

5. In May 1944, approximately one month after the April visit of the emissaries to the OSS representative, they received an oral message by courier from the opposition group. Now mentioned as members were also Halder,99 Zeitzler,1 Heusinger2 (chief of operations for Zeitzler), olbr[i]cht3 (chief of the German Army Administration), Falkenhausen, and Rundstedt. The group was reported ready to help Allied units get into Germany if the Allies agreed that the Wehrmacht should continue to hold the Eastern Front. They proposed in detail: (1) three Allied airborne divisions should land in the Berlin region with the assistance of the local Army commanders, (2) major amphibious landings should be undertaken at or near Bremen and Hamburg, (3) landings in France should follow, although Rommel4 cannot be counted on for cooperation, (4) reliable German units in the area of Munich would isolate Hitler and other high Nazis in Ober Salzburg. The opposition group is reported to feel that Germany has lost the war and that the only chance of avoiding Communism in Germany is to facilitate occupation of as large a section of Europe as possible by American and British forces before collapse on the Eastern Front.

6. The emissaries, who had remained in Switzerland, replied to the courier that discussion of the plan would be unavailing because of the proviso concerning the USSR. Later the group dispatched to them a telegram advising no further action “for the time being”. The emissaries think nevertheless that the subject is still open. They have characterized the group’s proviso as unrealistic, and regard as the core of the proposal only the plan that American and British forces should become entrenched in Germany before the Russians; they urged that it was entirely a military matter if some of the German generals wish to assist the Allied invasion and try to take over the Nazi regime. The OSS representative reiterated to the emissaries that Great Britain and the United States would adhere to their Russian commitments. In answer to the objection that point (1) of the group’s plan (paragraph 5, above, on page 3) might be regarded by the Allies as a trap, they stated that since they were not military men they could only say that sufficient opportunity for requisite precautions would be presented in the form of direct prior contact with German military authorities. The emissaries said that Zeitzler had been won over by Heusinger and Olbr[i]cht; they added that he was preoccupied in respect of military matters with the Eastern Front, that he would cooperate in any plan to bring about a systematic liquidation of that front in order to escape the blame for a military disaster there—which he greatly fears.

7. One of the opposition group’s emissaries acknowledged his lack of confidence in the political courage of the German generals, on the basis of past experience, and said the Allies might do well to ignore their propositions if there were assurance of early victory and a speedy Allied occupation of Germany. The OSS representative at Bern is convinced of the sincerity of this intermediary, as the result of investigation and of experience with him. The representative is of the opinion that there are some German generals who wish to liquidate their responsibility in the war by collaborating in the construction of an Anglo-American bulwark against the pressure of the USSR in Europe, and he is convinced that the two emissaries are in contact with such a group. Doubtful that the group would have the determination to act effectively at the appropriate time and sensitive to the problem of Soviet relations in the effectuation of any plan in which the group might participate, he believes that the group’s activities may nevertheless be useful to undermine the morale of the top echelon in the Wehrmacht.

90 The substance of the enclosed document was transmitted in aide-mémoire dated May 24, 1944 (not printed), to the British and Soviet Embassies in Washington.

91 G. Edward Buxton.

92 Allen W. Dulles.

93 Wilhelm Leuschner.

94 Maj. Gen. Hans Oster, Chief of the Central Office of German Military Intelligence until 1943.

95 Carl Friedrich Goerdeler.

96 Col. Gen. Ludwig Beck, Chief of the General Staff of the German Army, 1935–1938.

97 For correspondence regarding the failure of Finland to withdraw from the war with the Soviet Union, and the rupture of American-Finnish relations, see vol. iii, pp. 556 ff.

99 Col. Gen. Franz Halder, Chief of the General Staff of the German Army, from 1938 until his retirement in 1942.

1 Col. Gen. Kurt Zeitzler, Chief of the General Staff of the German Army.

2 Lt. Gen. Adolf Heusinger, Director of the Military Operations Branch and Deputy Chief of the General Staff of the German Army.

3 Gen. Friedrich Olbricht, Deputy Commander of the German Home Army.

4 Field Marshal Erwin Rommel.

President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill) 740.0011 European War 1939/5–1844: Telegram

[Document 281]

President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill)5

[Washington,] May 18, 1944.

[541.] Instead of a tripartite statement to be issued by the U.S., U.K. and Soviet Governments, and in place of a Message to the Congress, what would you think of a statement by me alone along these lines, to be issued after D Day?6

“It has been suggested that the Allied Governments join in a general statement to the German people and their sympathizers emphasizing the landings recently made on the Continent of Europe.7 I have not been in agreement with this because it might overemphasize the importance of these landings. What I want to impress on the people of Germany and their sympathizers is the inevitability of their defeat. What I want to emphasize to them is their continuation of the war from now on is unintelligent on their part. They must know in their hearts that under their present leadership and under their present objectives it is inevitable that they will be totally defeated.

Every German life that is lost from now on is an unnecessary loss. From a cold-blooded point of view it is true that the Allies will suffer losses as well, but the Allies so greatly outnumber the Germans in population and in resources that on a relative basis the Germans will be far harder hit—down to every family—than the Allies. And in the long run mere stubbornness will never help Germany. The Allies have made it abundantly clear that they do not seek the total destruction of the German people. They do seek total destruction of the philosophy of those Germans who have announced that they could subjugate the world.

The Allies are seeking the long range goal of human freedom—a greater true liberty—political, religious and intellectual; and a greater justice, social and economic.

Our times are teaching us that no group of men can ever be strong enough to dominate the whole world.

The Government and people of the United States—with nearly twice the population of Germany—send word to the people of Germany that this is the time to abandon the teachings of evil.

By far the greater part of the world’s population of nearly two billion people feel the same way. Only Germany and Japan stand out against all the rest of humanity.

Every German knows this in his heart. Germany and Japan have made a terrible and disastrous mistake. Germany and Japan must atone reasonably for the wanton destruction of lives and property which they have committed; and they must give up an imposed philosophy the falsity of which by now must be very clear to them.

The more quickly the end of the fighting and the slaughter the more quickly shall we come to a more decent civilization in the whole world.

The attacks which are now being made in the European theatre by the Americans, by the British, by the Russian armies and their associates will, we hope, continue with success, but the German people can well realize that they are only a part of a series of attacks which will increase in number and volume until the inevitable victory is completed.”

Roosevelt

5 On May 23, 1944, a similar message for Marshal Stalin was sent to the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton), who transmitted it to Mr. Molotov on May 24.

6 Reference here is to the Allied invasion of Europe, which took place on June 6, 1944.

7 See telegram S–50325, April 13, p. 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276].

The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt 740.0011 European War 1939/5–2344: Telegram

[Document 282]

The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt 8

[London,] May 22, 1944.

679. Personal. Your 541. I will bring this matter before the Cabinet today Monday. Personally I think it would be best you should speak for all three of us. I can easily do a follow up on some of the points later on. But main principle of note we should strike towards Germany seems to require considerable thought. Also the time of any such statement should have relation to the success or otherwise of our operation.

8 The text of this telegram was transmitted to the Secretary of State as an enclosure to a note (not printed), from the British Ambassador, Halifax, on May 23, 1944.

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger) to Mr. Fletcher Warren, Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) 740.00119 EW 1939/2635

[Document 283]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger) to Mr. Fletcher Warren, Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

[Washington,] May 22, 1944.

Mr. Warren: I return herewith the O.S.S. report9 on the most recent German peace feeler in Switzerland. Under arrangements made at Moscow,10 the three powers are supposed to inform one another of any peace feelers which they may receive. I have consequently drafted communications to the British and Soviet Embassies advising them of this matter.11

Could you request O.S.S. to inform its representative in Switzerland of the position of this government with respect to such peace feelers.12

James W. Riddleberger

9 Dated May 16, p. 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280].

10 For correspondence on the Tripartite Conference of Foreign Ministers, October 18–November 1, 1943, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. 1, pp. 513 ff.

11 See footnote 90, p. 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280].

12 Marginal note in text, presumably in reply to this request, read as follows: “This will be done when file is returned to me after aide-m[émoire]’s are sent.” See footnote 90, p. 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280].

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2644: Airgram

[Document 284]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, May 24, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received June 2—7 p.m.]

A–293. Vague symptoms of desire certain German elements sound out possibilities early peace with Anglo-Americans, if not general peace, have been observed in confidential reports received from mid-April onward. Incoming emissaries seemingly charged with recommending procedure whereby United Nations might hasten end of war included Scapini,13 blind Vichy official, who sojourns much in Germany, and several German businessmen, one of whom from Stuttgart openly called twice at our Zurich Consulate General and another of whom used intermediary seek contact with British Consul General, Basel.14 Although varied in presentation, all recommendations had common substance which obviously was intended suggest that they originated in conservative German circles. Their general theme is summarized in my A–294 today.15

This mild incitement to peace by unimportant individuals who risks nobody’s prestige is probably Wilhelmstrasse activity to help extricate Germany from desperate position (cf. my 2259, April 1116 ). As German difficulties grow and become more insoluble, additional indirect peace probing can be expected.

Harrison

13 Georges Scapini, delegate of the French Government for prisoners of war.

14 Joseph Pyke.

15  Infra.

16 Not printed.

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/34447: Airgram

[Document 285]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, May 24, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received June 2—7 p.m.]

A–294. Believing Anglo-Americans, not to speak of Russians, intend either deport or massacre them, German masses in despair, can only gather more around detested Nazi leaders. Consequently it behooves Anglo-Americans take lead among United Nations and publish clearcut terms for surrender German armies and cessation of war, to broadcast terms to German troops and people and to communicate them to Pope through religious organizations and neutral governments. German leaders should be confronted with two alternatives, either accept last chance surrender or bear responsibility before own people and world opinion for horrible carnage which would follow invasion and massive air bombardments of continent. To promote chances acceptance their ultimatum, Anglo-Americans must envisage several-day suspension of hostilities. Wehrmacht should be specially urged save Germany by overthrowing Nazis and preserving order in country. Popular will to prolong war would be greatly weakened were Stalin to proclaim immunity German people as a whole from maltreatment in the event of German collapse. Avoidance by Allies of utterances which stifle hopes German people for future self-administration and which persuade German soldiery they will as group be held equally guilty with Nazi and SS, would much shorten war and spare hundreds of thousands soldier lives both sides. Finally, by ending war this year German-occupied Europe would be saved from anarchy.

Paralleling this pioneer peace work, propagandists from Germany carried on another campaign to spread conviction.

1. German will to fight is unbroken.

2. Each war industry has two idle plants elsewhere Germany in reserve which in the event of substantial air-raid damage to principal plant receive its workers and start production.

3. German material and men under arms are still adequate prolong war more or less indefinitely. And

4. To invade continent would cost paralyzing losses in invader lives and if successful would only encounter masses of massacred civilians and wasted areas in former German-occupied countries.

Harrison

The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt 740.0011 European War 1939/5–2644: Telegram

[Document 286]

The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt 17

[London,] May 25, 1944.

680. Personal. I brought your No. 541 before the Cabinet yesterday, Curtin18 and Smuts19 also being present. Considerable concern was expressed at the tone of friendship shown to the Germans at this moment when troops are about to engage. There was a feeling that the message, if sent before the battle is won, might be distorted by the enemy into a sort of peace appeal. If there were nothing between us except that the Germans have an evil philosophy, there would be little grounds for the war going on. I think myself that the message might conceivably be taken as a peace feeler and that the Germans might reply that they accepted your note as a basis for further discussion.

2. In truth there is much more between them and us than a philosophy. Nearly all of Europe cries for vengeance against the brutal tyrant. At Tehran my suggestion for the isolation of Prussia20 was considered far too modest by you and Uncle Joe.21 Everybody expects complete forcible disarmament of Germany, possibly extending to civil aviation, to be made and maintained. There are other very grave questions open. For instance how are the Poles going to be compensated if they do not get East Prussia and certain territories up to the line of the Oder in return for the Curzon Line22 which Russians will certainly demand?

3. I do not know what Uncle Joe will say about your declaration but we here earnestly hope that you will not make it in its present form and above all at this present time. There was also a feeling that a document so grave addressed to the enemy should emanate from the three principal Allies. I may add that nothing of this document would get down to the German pillboxes and front lines in time to affect the fighting troops.

17 Copy transmitted to the Secretary of State by note of May 26, 1944, from the British Minister, Sir Ronald Campbell (not printed). According to a pencilled marginal note the copy was “Rec’d. May 27—10:45 a.m.”

18 Prime Minister John Curtin of Australia.

19 Prime Minister Jan Christian Smuts of the Union of South Africa.

20 See Churchill, Closing the Ring, pp. 400–403, 706. For documentation on the Tehran Conference, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehran, 1943, pp. 459 ff.

21 Reference here is to Marshal Stalin.

22 See Churchiil, Closing the Ring, pp. 394–397, 403; for information on the Curzon Line, see footnote 51, p. 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267].

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger) to Mr. Hathaway Watson, Jr., in the Office of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) 740.0011 EW/5–2644

[Document 287]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger) to Mr. Hathaway Watson, Jr., in the Office of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

[Washington,] May 26, 1944.

Mr. Watson: In accordance with our conversation several weeks ago, I asked the Foreign Broadcast Intelligence Service of FCC23 to prepare material for me on the use of the term “unconditional surrender” in German propaganda. Attached is a memorandum which FCC has prepared.24

You will note that the memorandum is devoted more to the argument that “unconditional surrender” has worked in favor of Germany rather than an objective statement of how this term has been employed. The reason for this is, no doubt, to be found in paragraph 2 where it is admitted that the term “unconditional surrender” has been used rarely in German propaganda.

The writer’s argument is that Goebbels has handled this subject most effectively by indirect means and he then proceeded to present his point of view. It is a matter of opinion whether or not you agree with the arguments presented in the memorandum. It is a matter of fact, however, that the German propaganda has made little use of the term “unconditional surrender”.

James W. Riddleberger

23 Federal Communications Commission.

24 Not printed.

The Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars of the Soviet Union (Stalin) to President Roosevelt [Document 288]

The Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars of the Soviet Union (Stalin) to President Roosevelt 25

[Translation]

I have received your message regarding the appeal to the German people.26

Taking into consideration the whole experience of war with the Germans and the character of the Germans, I think that the proposed by you appeal cannot bring positive effect, since it is timed to the moment of the beginning of the landing but not to the moment of sign of serious successes as a result of the landing of Anglo-American troops and as a result of the coming offensive of the Soviet Armies.

We could return to the question of character of the appeal itself when favorable circumstances for such an appeal arrive.

May 26, 1944.

25 Copy of telegram obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.

26 See footnote 5, p. 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281].

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton) to the People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union (Molotov) Embassy Files: Lot F–96, Box 2

[Document 289]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton) to the People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union (Molotov)

Moscow, May 28, 1944.

Dear Mr. Molotov: I refer to my secret letter of May 24, 1944, transmitting a secret and personal message of May 23 from President Roosevelt to Marshal Stalin.26

I have today received the following very secret and personal message dated May 27 from President Roosevelt to Marshal Stalin: “Secret and personal from President Roosevelt to Marshal Stalin.

With reference to my message of May 23 proposing for consideration a message to be issued by me with the purpose of influencing the German people, I am informed that the suggestion is not approved by the Prime Minister of Great Britain and his Cabinet.

Because the proposed statement is not of essential importance and in view of a definite and positive objection by the British Government, I propose to do nothing in the way of a statement of that nature at the present time.”

I would appreciate it if you would be so good as to transmit the above message to Marshal Stalin.

Sincerely yours,

Maxwell M. Hamilton

26 See footnote 5, p. 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281].

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.0011 EW/6–344

[Document 290]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] June 3, 1944.

Since receiving your memorandum of May 18,29 we have been giving constant study to the question of a statement designed to weaken the German will to resist.

We feel strongly that some such statement should be issued. General Eisenhower feels likewise. Ambassador Phillips, who has given considerable thought to it, has recently submitted a draft prepared jointly by him, Mr. Sherwood30 and officers of General Eisenhower’s staff and placing more emphasis on military factors. We have accordingly prepared a new draft, which takes into account Mr. Phillips’ and other suggestions and which is directed specifically at the German Army. A copy is enclosed herewith for your consideration.

If this statement meets with your approval, we would suggest submitting it to the Prime Minister and probably also to Stalin. We feel it would be wise to invite them to join with you in making it or to follow it with statements of their own, as they may think best. We realize, of course, that a Russian call for the German Army to surrender would not have much appeal but Stalin might consider such a message by you alone or by you and Churchill as an attempt to lighten only the task of our Armies in the west.

We believe the best timing for the statement would be as soon after D-Day as substantial progress has been made on the various fronts.

E. E. Stettinius, Jr.

[Annex]

Draft Statement by the President 31

Soldiers of Germany, attention! The first assaults from the West have begun. The assaults from the East and South continue relentlessly. New blows will fall.

Your defeat is inevitable. In your hearts you know this is true. You know that you have nothing to hope for from prolonging the struggle. Nothing you can do can change the outcome.

Your Nazi leaders led you into war to satisfy their lust for power and conquest. They told you it would be a quick and easy victory. You know now how wrong they were. Your Nazi leaders caused you to bomb unprepared and unprotected peoples. For what? You have begun to learn what our bombs, which Goering and Hitler boasted could never touch the Reich, mean to you and to your loved ones. You marched across Europe—to Narvik, to Bordeaux, to Stalingrad, to Alamein. For what? Your comrades have died. For what? You who have escaped from Russia, from Africa, from Italy, have known the long and bitter road of defeat. You have begun to tread the same road back from the West. Where does that road end? You know the answer. It ends in crushing, total defeat, and in your own homeland.

Your leaders foolishly believed that they could conquer the free countries one by one before we could unite to forge our overwhelming strength. You have only begun to feel the weight of that limitless strength. It grows day by day while that of Germany is shattered and bled away.

Your leaders have one remaining hope. It is that they can get a compromise peace if you can be made to resist long enough. How utterly senseless. The Allied leaders—Churchill, Stalin and I—have said again and again that we will accept from Germany nothing less than unconditional surrender. I say it again. The leaders of the German army must surrender unconditionally.

Every German life lost from now on, soldier or civilian, is a needless loss. You who will die will die without hope, without faith in your cause. For what?

Allied life, too, will be lost, but our men will die strong in the certainty that their cause is just and that their sacrifice brings nearer the day of certain, overwhelming victory.

Soldiers of Germany, what fate awaits you and your country when you lay down your arms?

We promise you nothing. Germany made terrible and disastrous mistakes. Germany must atone for the wanton destruction of lives and property she has caused. That atonement will be hard. The false philosophy of Naziism, whose falsity, evil and futility must by now be very clear to you, must be totally destroyed. I repeat, we promise you nothing, but I tell you again certain fundamental things.

The Allied leaders—Stalin, Churchill and I, have made it abundantly clear that we do not seek the destruction of the German people. I repeat, we do not seek the destruction of the German people.

We seek the goal of human freedom, for all men—a greater true liberty—intellectual, political and religious; and a greater justice, social and economic. We seek a world in which all men may live and work together in freedom and in peace. In that free and peaceful world, Germany, in due time and as she makes and proves herself worthy, will have her place.

Until you cease your hopeless fight, until your leaders surrender unconditionally, the blows of the Americans, the British, the Russians and our associates will increase in number and in intensity by land, by sea and by air until our inevitable victory is complete.

29 The memorandum read: “What do you think? F.D.R.”, and was attached to President Roosevelt’s telegram of May 18 to Prime Minister Churchill, printed on p. 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281].

30 Robert E. Sherwood, Director of the Overseas Branch of the Office of War Information.

31 Filed separately under 740.0011 European War-1939/5–1844.

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/6–744

[Document 291]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] June 7, 1944.

The President sent to us yesterday, asking for our comment, a proposal32 which had been made to him by a person unidentified to us,33 suggesting that as a propaganda move of psychological warfare, a fake Hitler voice should broadcast to the Germans to make only a token resistance to our invasion from the west and to cooperate with the Anglo-American forces on the basis that the first duty of the Germans is to defend Europe from Asiatic Bolshevism. For your information I enclose a copy of our reply.34

E[dward] S[tettinius]

32 Not printed. Copies of two reports on the proposal referred to and other correspondence relating to it are at the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y., filed under FR–224, PSF–Box 141 and FR–225, PSF–Box 141.

33 The originator of the proposal was John Franklin Carter, American newspaper columnist.

34  Infra.

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.0011 EW/6–744

[Document 292]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] June 7, 1944.

Subject: Proposal for Fake Hitler Propaganda Speech.

We have carefully considered this proposal,35 the outline of which I return herewith.36 We feel that even if the scheme were feasible, which we think is doubtful, it would be impossible to convince the Soviet Government that it represented only psychological warfare. We believe that they, and many other people in Europe besides the Germans, would believe the suggested broadcast represented the secret policy of the United States and England. In our opinion, therefore, the proposal should not be considered seriously.

E. R. Stettinius, Jr.

35 See supra.

36 Not found in Department files, but see footnote 32, above.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Spain (Butterworth) 862.20200/265

[Document 293]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Spain (Butterworth)

No. 973 Washington, June 13, 1944.

The Secretary of State refers to the Embassy’s secret despatch no. 2466 of May 12, 194437 on the subject, “German Activities”.

Considering the material which the German informant has made available, and because of the security factor arising from his wide acquaintance with Spaniards and Germans in Spain, the Department is of the opinion that the Embassy should not enter into any agreement with the informant whereby he would be offered protection or payment. Should the Embassy in its discretion desire to continue receiving the informant’s submissions on a “no remuneration” basis as mentioned in paragraph one of despatch no. 1761 of December 17, 1943,37 the Department perceives no objection.

Because of the location of Madrid in relation to present events in Europe, numerous informant cases no doubt will arise as the certainty of allied successes becomes more apparent. Caution should be exercised in dealing with informants who desire to furnish information gratuitously with an expectation of later receiving some favor of an official nature from the Embassy. The Department does not desire that such persons entertain the false impression that this government is desirous of readily condoning their previous Axis associations. From a security standpoint, the practice of encouraging such informants is potentially dangerous despite thorough investigations.

With reference to the case under consideration, the Embassy in its discretion may desire to consult with the Madrid representative of the OSS. That organization may wish to consider the value of the information of a “slightly military character”.

37 Not printed.

37 Not printed.

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 103.918/6–2644: Telegram

[Document 294]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, June 26, 1944—9 p.m.
[Received June 27—11:58 a.m.]

2309. Friedrich Adam von Trott [zu Solz], 35 year old Legationsrat38 in German Foreign Office in Berlin and allegedly a specialist on the Far East, arrived in Sweden on June 19 on (official business). His last previous visit to Sweden on (official business) was in March of this year (please repeat to Creeks people).

According to a Swedish friend of von Trott (who reported to Legation officials informant, a reliable person), von Trott has been active for some time in an illegal group in Germany and has been the channel through which much illegal literature has been reaching Germany.

Von Trott reported to this friend on June 22 that there is a “Free Germany committee” now active inside Germany. The organizers were sent in by parachute from the Soviet Union. Further, his own illegal group had no political objections to cooperating with this committee because it desired contact with Russians as well as with “Anglo-Americans”. However, no contact has been made with the committee because von Trott’s group had learned through a friend in the Gestapo that there were certain Gestapo stooges in the ranks of the committee, and that some arrests had already been made.

The group of which von Trott is a member is allegedly composed of members of the bourgeoisie, especially Catholics, and some former Social Democrats. It is also said to include a few ex-Communists and to have contact with certain officer circles. This group hopes to play some political role after Hitler’s downfall and is now making plans for a coup against the Nazis.

Von Trott has asked his Swedish friend to contact Madame Kollontay40 and to ascertain possible Russian plans for Germany. The Legation’s informant says the Swede is in a position and plans to approach Madame Kollontay with this request. Around July 3 or 4 another German will be despatched to Sweden by von Trott’s group to secure the answer.

In addition von Trott was put in touch with John Scott, local correspondent of Time and Life magazines by Professor Gunnar Myrdal.41 Scott understands that von Trott requested Myrdal to arrange a meeting with “some American” and Myrdal suggested Scott. The Swede who heard of the meeting reported to my informant that the initiative was taken by Myrdal and that von Trott hesitatingly agreed. In any case the conference was held in Myrdal’s office in the Riksdag42 Building on June 23 and lasted 2 hours. Myrdal was present and the conversation was conducted in English which von Trott speaks perfectly.

On the same day Scott submitted a written report of the meeting to above mentioned Legation official. A summary of the report follows: Trott was interested in knowing about “Anglo-American”–Soviet relations, could not believe that future relations between these countries would be good and insisted on possibilities of serious difficulties almost immediately.

Trott says he is in opposition to the Nazi regime in Germany but can’t leave because he has a wife and children there. He is risking his life to talk with Americans because he believes such contact must and should be continued.

German propaganda is still at least 50 percent effective and Germans will under existing circumstances go on fighting. The rail system is working well and cannot be destroyed by bombing. The morale among urban people is still pretty good. The Germans will continue fighting on German territory even better than Russians fought on Russian territory primarily because “Anglo-Americans” offer Germans no hopes even to the right to live if they are defeated.

The “unconditional surrender” line plays perfectly into the hands of Goebbels. The Russians have been cleverer with their Free Germany movement, and this has been a factor in the increase of pro-Russian sentiment in Germany. At present there is neither hope in Germany for any effective peace movement nor for successful revolt against the Nazis. The Germans will fight on and the Allies will find a serious revolutionary situation within when they arrive. The Allied administration will be largely in the hands of American military officials whose understanding and respect for the honor and feelings of the Germans are lower than that of the Russians. What will probably happen, he said, now that the Russians will occupy a part of Germany and most of the good anti-Nazi elements will gravitate to that part. Under present circumstances von Trott would act in this fashion.

Asked what type of program he considered to be expedient under present circumstances, von Trott said there were at least two elementary points. First, German military demobilization should be carried out by German officers themselves and should be done slowly enough to avoid complete confusion. Second, Germans must be permitted some type of territorial integrity. (Report ends here).

Myrdal assured Scott that von Trott has been anti-Nazi as early as 1939. Scott does not know the purpose of von Trott’s visit to Stockholm, but believes the German is possibly a Nazi propagandist. At the same time, it is clear that von Trott is accepted in certain church circles in Sweden because of his contacts with similar circles in Germany. Von Trott is returning to Berlin today.

Johnson

38 Counselor of Legation.

40 Alexandra Mikhailovna Kollontay, Minister of the Soviet Union in Sweden.

41 Senator in the Swedish Parliament.

42 Swedish Parliament.

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/2710: Telegram

[Document 295]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, June 27, 1944—2 p.m.
[Received June 27—11:50 a.m.]

2322. Personal for the Secretary. Entirely reliable American source known to Lyon43 informs me that Dr. Kleist,44 a special representative of Ribbentrop, is now in Stockholm trying to contact Allied officials with peace offer and is already in touch with an old Polish friend designing to use him as contact man. Informant is not certain but believes it probable contact was made by Kleist through the Pole with British last night or will be today.

Johnson

43 Presumably Frederick B. Lyon, Chief of the Division of Foreign Activity Correlation.

44 Peter Kleist.

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/6–2744: Telegram

[Document 296]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, June 27, 1944—9 p.m.
[Received June 28—1:03 a.m.]

2340. Personal for the Secretary. See my 2322, June 27, 2 p.m. I asked Secretary General of the Foreign Office, Boheman, this afternoon if he knew anything of Kleist’s visit to Stockholm and if there were anything he could tell me. He answered without hesitation that Kleist, whom he thinks may now have left Stockholm, had tried to contact the Russians and had given the Foreign Office a letter with the request that it be delivered. The letter was delivered and was returned by the Russian Minister with the tart comment that they were not interested in receiving communications from the Germans. Boheman said he knew of no effort on the part of Kleist to contact the British but thought it not improbable.

Boheman went on to tell me that Kleist had been in some ways an extremely useful man; that through his influence with Himmler (whose man Boheman described him to be) he had been directly instrumental in the Swedes evacuating 4,000 Swedish farmers and fishermen from Estonia with the strong probability that the remaining Swedes there numbering about 3,000 will soon arrive in this country. They were brought on an Estonian boat flying the German flag. Boheman says he is certain that Himmler’s motives were far from humanitarian and suggested that both Kleist and he are trying to build up a case for future use. Himmler is now assiduously spreading a story that all the killings and persecutions in occupied countries are Hitler’s direct responsibility.

Johnson

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/7–344: Telegram

[Document 297]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, July 3, 1944—10 p.m.
[Received July 3—8:48 p.m.]

2442. During past week Legation’s Estonian radio monitor has been visited two times by two German SS officers, who were introduced by Pastor Hjalmer Poehl, Swedish Estonian who is officially helping to evacuate the Swedish Estonians to Sweden. Germans are Lieutenant Doctor Lienhardt and Doctor Schuddekopf (rank unknown), former station[ed] in Tallinn, latter in Berlin.

Germans are in their thirties and represent themselves as part of a group of young German university graduates scattered over Germany but in close contact with one another, who were formerly members of the German youth movement, interested in creating international understanding and goodwill. Particular two Germans in question were supporters of campaign for “agricultural regeneration” sponsored by Rolf Gardiner in England and the then Viscount Lymington.45 They automatically joined Hitler movement in 1933 but were disappointed by its imperialistic and racial doctrines. They now conclude that Hitler must disappear and that rapprochement with western democracies must be sought in order to save Germany from Bolshevism. They believe Hitler served important purpose as antidote to Bolshevism, they justify Germany’s rearmament on same grounds but they believe Prussian militarism must be exterminated, Germany can claim no hegemony over other countries and one party regime must disappear. Group represented by two spokesmen is absolutely opposed to unconditional surrender as driving Germany into arms of Bolshevism.

Two Germans stated their desire for contact with Allied circles.

Legation’s alien radio monitor will naturally receive any further information which comes from this source but understands that Legation itself has nothing to say to Germans concerned.

Johnson

45 George Vernon Wallop, Viscount Lymington, became ninth Earl of Portsmouth in 1943.

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/7–844: Telegram

[Document 298]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, July 8, 1944—9 p.m.
[Received July 8—8:14 p.m.]

2534. Reference Legation’s telegram 2442, July 3, Legation learns from reliable source that Hjalmer Poehl, mentioned as intermediary between two German SS officials and Legation’s alien radio monitor, is known as one of most important German agents operating in Baltic States and has been operating on behalf of German Intelligence Service during trips between Sweden and Estonia.

Johnson

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.00119 European War 1939/7–1144

[Document 299]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] July 11, 1944.

The favorable progress on the Eastern, Western and Southern fronts recalls a suggestion made in a memorandum on June 3, 1944 regarding a tripartite statement to the German Army. You and your associate heads of Government may deem it advisable to give this further consideration at this stage. For that reason a revised draft, shortened and brought up to date, is attached.

If Churchill and Stalin are agreeable to the idea, I would suggest that the views of the Russian and Anglo-American military leaders be obtained both as to timing and substance.

[Annex]

Draft Statement by the President

Soldiers of Germany, attention! Our assaults from the East, West and South continue relentlessly and with ever increasing force. New blows will fall.

Your defeat is inevitable. In your hearts you know this is true. You know that you have nothing to hope for from prolonging the struggle. Nothing you can do can change the outcome.

Your Nazi leaders led you into war to satisfy their lust for power and conquest. They told you it would be a quick and easy victory. You know now how wrong they were. You marched across Europe—to Narvik, to Bordeaux, to Stalingrad, to Alamein. That was long ago. Since then you have begun to feel the force of our overwhelming power. Your homes are smoking ruins. Your comrades have died. You who have escaped from Russia, from Africa, from Italy, from Normandy, have known the long and bitter road of defeat. Where does that road end? You know the answer. It ends in crushing, total defeat, and in your own homeland.

Every German life lost from now on, soldier or civilian, is a needless loss. You who will die will die without hope, without faith in your cause. For what?

Your only escape lies in unconditional surrender.

Soldiers of Germany, what fate awaits you and your country when you lay down your arms?

We promise you nothing. Germany has made terrible and disastrous mistakes. Germany must atone for the wanton destruction of lives and property she has caused. That atonement will be hard. The false philosophy of Naziism, whose falsity, evil and futility must be [by] now be very clear to you, must be totally destroyed. I repeat, we promise you nothing, but I tell you again certain fundamental things.

The Allied leaders—Stalin, Churchill and I—have made it abundantly clear that we do not seek the destruction of the German people. I repeat, we do not seek the destruction of the German people.

We seek the goal of human freedom, for all men—a greater true liberty—intellectual, political and religious; and a greater justice, social and economic. We seek a world in which all men may live and work together in freedom and in peace. In that free and peaceful world, Germany, in due time and as she makes and proves herself worthy, will have her place.

Until you cease your hopeless fight, until your leaders surrender unconditionally, the blows of the Americans, the British, the Russians and our associates will increase in number and in intensity by land, by sea and by air until our inevitable victory is complete.

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/7–1744

[Document 300]

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

Washington, July 17, 1944.

I have given careful consideration to the proposed draft tripartite statement to the German Army forwarded with your memorandum of July 11, 1944.

It does not appear to me that Allied progresall the fronts has yet been sufficiently impressive to promise the best results that might be obtained from such a tripaerrtite statement.

Later when our combined attack shall have made further and more impressive advances an approach to Churchill and Stalin suggesting a tripartite statement may give better promise of agreement and more prospect of advantage to our attack.

F[ranklin] D. R[oosevelt]

The Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to the Secretary of State 862.00/7–1844

[Document 301]

The Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to the Secretary of State

Washington, 18 July, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I am enclosing herewith copy of two dispatches received from the Bern office of this agency,46 which I feel will be of interest to you. These dispatches form a sequel to a report dated 16 May 1944 (forwarded to you on 17 May) concerning an opposition group in Germany, including some high military figures, which favors peace.

Respectfully,

William J. Donovan

[Enclosure]

Washington, 18 July, 1944.

Germany: Nazi Opposition Group Reports Progress

The following, transmitted by the OSS representative in Bern, is a sequel to a report dated 16 May concerning an opposition group in Germany, including some high military figures, which favors peace:

The objectives of this group have received new stimulus from the Soviet gains, the Soviet threat of invading German soil, and the Allied landings in Normandy. The group is receiving cooperation from another group composed of a number of anti-Hitler elements which are described as working independently of the Gestapo. The former group believes that the next few weeks represent the final opportunity to initiate steps to prove the desire of the German people to overthrow Hitler and his organization and to set up a “respectable government”. It is the wish of the group that as much of Germany as possible be kept from falling into Soviet hands. The group’s proposed plan of action would call for an ordered retreat from the west and the transfer of the best divisions to the defense of the eastern front.

The group also has been encouraged by their alleged acquisition of Colonel-General Fritz Fromm47 because he has charge of reserves in the Berlin area.

[Washington Comment: General Fromm, Chief of the Home Command, is in charge of army equipment and commander of replacement training for the army.]48

According to the group, the OKW49 has shifted its headquarters from East Prussia to a locality near Berlin. The group views this transfer as favorable to its purposes, for General Frederich Olbricht, Chief of the General Army Office, under General Fromm, and Colonel-General Kurt Zeitzler, Chief of Staff, as well as other generals supposedly in the opposition, are now accessible in the vicinity of Berlin.

(OSS Official Dispatches, Bern, 13 and 15 July)

46 Presumably the two despatches here referred to were combined into the one document enclosed, below. No other enclosure was found in the Department files.

47 Commander-in-Chief of the German Home Army.

48 Brackets appear in the original.

49 Oberkommando der Wehrmacht, High Command of the German Armed Forces.

The Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) 740.0011 EW/7–2044

[Document 302]

The Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)

Washington, July 20, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Hoover: Some time ago a memorandum entitled “Prospective Program to encourage German nationals to desert their Government”50 was submitted for comment. Briefly, the memorandum indicated that serious consideration be given to the suggestion that the Office of War Information be employed to broadcast that this Government is willing to receive any German officials connected with the Nazi regime who would desert their posts.

While the idea has merit and we should not overlook any possibility of shortening the war, the suggestion certainly presents difficulty. The following might be mentioned.

1. It is doubtful whether there be among the Nazi officials any trustworthy individuals who would be willing to work for our cause against Germany.

2. The possibility that the guiltiest among our enemies would be the first to avail themselves of such an offer.

3. The possibility that thousands of the so-called collaborationists might accept the offer as it becomes clear to them that defeat is inevitable.

4. The likelihood that any German who has anything worthwhile to contribute and is sincerely willing to collaborate would not need to be told that we would be interested in what he might have to offer.

5. The giving of special consideration to any German willing to collaborate with us is inconsistent with our announced policy of unconditional surrender.

6. It is now too late to use Germans effectively for propaganda purposes in behalf of the United Nations.

As indicated in Five, above, this suggestion seems inconsistent with our policy of unconditional surrender. If it is decided to carry it out, we should keep in mind that the consideration shown any collaborationist should be strictly commensurate with the value of the information he supplies. In order to act on the suggestion it will be necessary to clear it with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the President.

Your thoughtfulness in submitting the above suggestions is greatly appreciated and, as I have already stated, these suggestions do obviously merit consideration. However, it is my considered opinion that at this time, the departure from our present policy, which would be required, does not appear to outweigh the adverse potentialities inherent in the suggestions.

Sincerely yours,

Adolf A. Berle, Jr.

[For the comment of Secretary of State Hull on the day following the July 20 attempt on the life of Adolf Hitler, see Department of State Bulletin, July 23, 1944, page 83.]

50 The memorandum was by a staff member of the Federal Burean of Investigation; not printed.

Summary Record of Interviews With First Secretary of German Embassy in the Vatican (Von Kessel), July 22–August 2, 1944 762.0011/10–1244

[Document 303]

Summary Record of Interviews With First Secretary of German Embassy in the Vatican (Von Kessel), July 22–August 2, 1944 51

July 22 to August 2, 1944

You may care to see the following account of conversations between Von Kessel and an official52 of P.W.B.53 which took place in the Vatican between July 23rd54 and August 2nd. The conversations took place on Von Kessel’s initiative and with the permission of Baron Weiszacker,55 and, of course, the British authorities.

First Interview

Von Kessel claims to be member of “putsch” group

(i) Von Kessel said that he, and many of his colleagues, had long been in the dilemma of hating the Régime and yet, as patriots, being bound to serve under it. He then claimed that the putsch had been carried out By an organised group of which he was a member, and which had been in existence since before the War. Their object was to set up a strong civil government in Germany, to make peace with all the Allies including Russia, but to shape the future policy of their country towards co-operation with the Western Powers rather than the U.S.S.R. “They are your friends whom they have killed” was the way Von Kessel expressed himself. The elements comprising the Group were taken from both Conservatives and Social Democrats. The Cabinet which would have been formed would have had in most cases a Social Democrat Minister and Conservative Under Secretary.

No connexion with Seydlitz 56 movement

(ii) The Group, however, were not thinking in terms of a simple return to 1932. They wished to maintain a strong even authoritarian central Government, while, at the same time, fostering the growth of democracy in local government and in the restored Länder.57 The Gau58 system was to be destroyed, and the Länder were once more to become the basis of the German State.

(iii) The leaders of the present movement had not taken their tune from Seydlitz or from Generals on the Russian Front. Von Kessel said he could be fairly certain of that, though he had been out of Germany two months, for a similar putsch had been planned for after Stalingrad, but had been called off when the decision of Unconditional Surrender had been proclaimed at Casablanca. No patriotic German could rise against an existing Government in those circumstances.

Tripartite occupation of Germany may lead to civil war

(iv) The choice of the date for action was probably to take the last possible chance of giving a united Germany a Civil Government before she began to be partitioned by the Allies. Von Kessel said that he would rather see Germany wholly occupied by the Russians or wholly occupied by the Allies rather than divided up by the victorious armies of occupation. In those circumstances, it was possible that Germany would become a prey to Civil War. Free Corps would be formed in the Russian part, while the Allies would retaliate by forming similar bands. Germany might become the battleground in a future strategic struggle between Russia and the Western Powers.

Unconditional surrender demand harms Allied cause in Germany

(v) Von Kessel claimed that the demand for unconditional surrender, coupled with threats such as that issued by Sumner Welles59 for the partition of Germany had done the Anglo-American cause enormous harm in Germany. There were 10,000,000 homeless there. The Allies had given them no future to look forward to. The Russians were showing themselves as effective diplomatists as well as great leaders in the field. Von Kessel considered that the failure of the present coup would place the country under the leadership of the political S.S., which would swing nearer and nearer towards collaboration with Russia. Russia would not lack Quislings.

(vi) Von Kessel said that there was no hatred in Germany of the British on account of the raids—though in Hamburg 100,000 had lost their lives. There was, however, a growing indifference. England was ceasing to count as a power factor.

Second Interview

Criticism of Allied policy to Germany reiterated

(vii) The Group desired a firm Anglo-German understanding, which would extend to the other Western Powers. They hoped to maintain central Europe within the Western rather than the Russian orbit. They were opposed, both to the Nationalist Generals under Seydlitz and to Nazi extremists under Bormann, who regard future Russo-German collaboration on the basis of united armed strength as both inevitable and desirable.

(viii) Von Kessel made it clear that no patriotic German, however anti-Nazi he be, could cooperate with the Anglo-Americans so long as the latter maintain a “wholly destructive” outlook toward Germany. “Unconditional surrender” should not be coupled wih threats of undefined yet ruthless punishment, promising no hope for a better future for those who do surrender, and threatening the permanent division of the country.

Envoy sent to Stockholm to contact Allies

(ix) Von Kessel stated that about two months ago his Group had sent an envoy to Stockholm to contact Allied authorities there. He bore the specific proposal that if they were able to get rid of Hitler and his immediate associates, the Allies should make “some gesture of approval” e.g. refrain from bombing Berlin. Von Kessel added that Berlin was 50% destroyed as it was, and that there was not much left worth saving. No answer was returned.

No post-war collaboration between Group and Nazis intended

(x) The Group at one time had hoped to work with some of the “more reasonable” Party officials, but moderate men had been replaced by even more extreme Nazis. After the War the people would not stand for the retention of any Party official who was a known Nazi.

Dangers of handing East Prussia to Poland

(xi) Informant emphasised the danger of handing over East Prussia to Poland. “Reasonable Poles” did not want the province, and the earliest Nazis were to be found among the one million Germans who had been driven from Silesia and Poznan after the last War.

(xii) Enforced immigrants from East Prussia would perpetuate bitterness after this War. He instanced German Catholic priests from Polish Silesia who proclaimed that “of course the Church is Nazi”. They were as bigoted as the rest of the Germans from that area.

Pro-Russian sympathies amongst certain Nazis

(xiii) Elaborating his theme of the “danger of eventual Russo-German collaboration” Von Kessel named Martin Bormann as leader of the “pro-Russian” group among the Nazis, and General Stahel, former Governor of Rome as a prominent exponent of this view among the generals. Himmler was anti-Russian, but pro-Russian sympathies were to be found among the colonels commanding the SS regiments. Seydlitz and his group in Moscow were “unimaginative patriots” who put geographical proximity and admiration for the Russian army as the main reason for the Russo-German collaboration. “They knew nothing of Shakespeare and Goethe and cared less”.

Russian policy in the Middle and Far East

(xiv) Turning to Russian policy in the Middle and Far East, Von Kessel said that some three months ago his group had intercepted most secret information from a Japanese source suggesting the existence of a Russo-Japanese understanding. By this, Asia would be divided into Russian and Japanese spheres of influence. Japan would include China, and India as far as the Indus. Russia would predominate in Sinkiang, Mesopotamia and Persia.

(xv) The tone in which Von Kessel mentioned this, was at least designed to suggest that he believes this information to be true. He supported his views by claiming that Japanese troops had been withdrawn from Manchuria to attack the Chungking forces on the Peking-Hankow railway, and he reminded me of the strength of the Japanese forces we had just cleared out of India. He went on that Germany still had a great admiration for the China of Chiang Kai Shek.60 He thought that after the war was over in Europe many Germans would volunteer for service in the Far East against the Japanese.

Third Interview

Von Papen’s future and attitude to the present régime

(xvi) Von Kessel said we must not be surprised if Von Papen were to play a considerable role in Germany in the near future. It would either be that, or he would be shot by the Party. We might with good reason distrust Von Papen, but he was a man with great personality, forthright, and who had a knack of wielding personal influence over those with whom he came into contact.

(xvii) In October 1939 he had had no qualms about telling the Turkish President61 that if it were necessary to make peace, peace would be made. If Hitler opposed “Hitler could be done away with”. This conversation had come into the hands of the French Military Attaché at Ankara,62 who had transmitted it to his Government. The document had been captured along with other archives in 1940, and Von Kessel had had the task of telling Von Papen of its existence. Von Papen had acknowledged the truth of the report and asked for the document as a souvenir. Von Kessel let him have it.

Personalities implicated in the “putsch”

(xviii) Count Helldorf, Chief of Police in Berlin, had been implicated in the Putsch. Many others, such as General Von Pohl63 and Oberst Veltheim64 of the Fasano65 Embassy were sympathetic. We should do well to watch Field Marshal Von Richthofen66 as the possible leader of further action against Hitler. Of the Generals in the field in Italy, Von Kessel had much to say about the “pro-British” sentiments of Generals Baade67 and Ludwig.68 Kesselring,69 Von Kessel described as a “very second rate Bavarian officer”. The brains behind the campaign was General Westphal.70

Group in contact with Abwehr Agents

(xix) His movement had been able to get into touch with the “underground in Occupied Europe”, through agents in the Abwehr, in particular through an Evangelical Pastor in Switzerland. This had opened the way towards co-operation with groups in the present Dutch Administration in Holland, and Evangelical representatives there and in Norway. The Dutch Government in London was “in the picture”.

Future of Austria

(xx) We should not over-estimate the swing of opinions against the Reich among the older people there. He considered that they were irritated and harassed rather than deeply disaffected. They had had trouble with the bombed out or with Prussian officials.

(xxi) The real test would be the attitude of the young Austrian soldier when he returned from the Front. Would he say “I have been fighting along with the Germans in the same company for Austrian reparation” rather than “I was fighting as a member of the German people”. Austria could not live in independent isolation. Austrian Nazis had been even more fanatical than Prussian. Von Kessel considered that a loose union with Germany should be maintained for five years after the War. Then the people should have a chance of deciding whether to remain with Germany or link with Hungary or Czechoslovakia.

51  This document is dated October 12, 1944, and was presumably transmitted by a British source to the Office of Strategic Services. The document is located in the Army and Air Corps Branch of the National Archives, but a photostat is now in Department of State files.

Documentation on only the July 22 interview with Herr von Kessel was found in the files of the Department of State; firstly, telegram 15, July 28, 1944, 9 a.m., and secondly, a report by W. H. C. Frend, a British official of the Psychological Warfare Branch, Allied Force Headquarters, enclosed with despatch 641, July 28, 1944. Both telegram and despatch are from the U.S. Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Murphy) (not printed). In the conclusion of his report on the initial interview with von Kessel, the British official wrote that he saw “no reason to regard this move by the German Embassy in the Vatican as a hoax.” (862.01/7–2844).

52 W. H. C. Frend.

53 Psychological Warfare Branch of Allied Force Headquarters.

54 Telegram 15, July 28, 1944, 9 a.m., not printed, from the United States Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Murphy) stated that the first conversation with von Kessel took place on July 22, 1944 (862.01/7–2844).

55 Ernst von Weizsäcker, German Ambassador in the Vatican.

56 Gen. Walther von Seydlitz-Kurzbach, Commander of the LI Corps which surrendered with the German Sixth Army at Stalingrad in 1943. Later he headed a “Union of German Officers” in the Soviet Union which sought to induce Germany to make peace with the Soviet Union.

57 German states.

58 A Gau was one of the 43 regional divisions of the German Nazi party.

59 Former Under Secretary of State. For details of his proposals for partition of Germany, see Sumner Welles, The Time for Decision (New York, Harper and Brothers, 1944), pp. 336–361.

60 President of the National Government of the Republic of China.

61 Ismet Inönü.

62 Presumably Col. de Courson de la Villeneuve.

63 Chief of the Liaison Office of the German Air Force in Italy.

64 Col. Herbert von Veltheim, Assistant Military Attaché.

65 Reference is to the German Embassy to the Italian Social Republic, Benito Mussolini’s puppet government in Northern Italy.

66 Field Marshal Wolfgang von Richthofen, Commander of the German 2nd Air Force in Italy.

67 Lt. Gen. Ernst-Günther Baade, Commander of the 90th Panzer Grenadier Division.

68 Presumably Lt. Gen. Hartwig von Ludwiger, Commander of the 104th Jäger Division.

69 Field Marshal Albrecht Kesselring, Commander-in-Chief of German Forces in Italy and Military Commander of Italy.

70 Maj. Gen. Siegfried Westphal, Chief of Staff to Field Marshal Kesselring.

Miss K. Isabel Poate, Attaché in the British Embassy, to Mr. Fletcher Warren, Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) 740.0011 European War 1939/7–2644

[Document 304]

Miss K. Isabel Poate, Attaché in the British Embassy, to Mr. Fletcher Warren, Executive Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

Washington, 26 July, 1944.

Dear Mr. Warren: I enclose herein paraphrases of telegrams71 exchanged between His Majesty’s Ambassador at Madrid72 and the Foreign Office in London. His Majesty’s Ambassador at Madrid has, as you will notice, been instructed to consult his United States colleague, so no doubt you will have heard of this further approach, but you may nevertheless be interested to have these telegrams for your files.

Yours sincerely,

K. Isabel Poate

[Enclosure]

Text of Telegram From the Foreign Office to Madrid, Dated July 20th, 1944

These proposals have just been made public both here and in the United States and have been exposed as blackmail.73 Further, we have secret evidence which we are conveying to the United States Government that the Nazi authorities are using Jews in order to make contact with British and American authorities as a cover for peace proposals with the obvious motive of dividing His Majesty’s Government and United States Government from the Soviet Government whose suspicions the Nazi authorities desire to arouse. In these circumstances His Majesty’s Government, who at once informed the Soviet Government of German and Hungarian approach are proposing to the United States Government to refuse to have anything to do with these “proposals” and there would in our opinion be every objection to Dr. Schwartz74 or to anybody else making contact with the German Authorities. But Dr. Schwartz is an American citizen and you should discuss the matter at once with your United States colleague informing him of all the foregoing and asking him whether he agrees or will submit the point to his Government. If the Germans or Hungarians, who are credited with having made offers to the International Red Cross in regard to exit permits for refugees, who possess visas for other countries, are serious, they can easily pursue their schemes without involving Allied citizens. We are in consultation with the United States Government and Jewish Agency about the reported Hungarian intentions. In the meantime, it is essential especially in the interests of our relations with Moscow that no suspicions should be aroused that Allied persons are negotiating with the enemy.

71 Only one telegram was found enclosed with this document in Department files.

72 Sir Samuel Hoare.

73 For correspondence on the general subject of offers to free Jewish civilians by the Axis nations in return for concessions from the Allies, see pp. 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 549] ff.

74 Joseph J. Schwartz, European Director of the American-Jewish Distribution Committee.

The Second Secretary of the British Embassy (King) to the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger) 740.00119 European War 1939/8–744

[Document 305]

The Second Secretary of the British Embassy (King) to the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger)

Washington, 7 August, 1944.

Dear Riddleberger: With reference to our recent conversation, I have pleasure in sending you the attached paraphrase of a telegram from the Foreign Office to Moscow about alleged German peace feelers.

Yours very sincerely,

C. E. King

[Enclosure]

Paraphrase of a Telegram From the Foreign Office to Moscow, Dated July 23rd, 1944

The Soviet Ambassador75 wrote to me76 on the 8th July stating that the Soviet Government would be grateful for information in regard to reports that had appeared in the British press suggesting a renewal of a “peace offensive” on the part of the Germans. He referred in particular to two reports, (1) a message from the Berne correspondent of the Daily Telegraph stating that the Pope,77 following an appeal addressed to him by German bishops to help Germany, had expressed to Mr. Myron Taylor78 his profound desire for peace, and (2) a Reuter’s report concerning the alleged arrival in Seville of a German diplomatic mission and connecting this rumour with stories of a journey by Doctor Salazar79 to Seville, with the Portuguese Ambassador’s80 recent return to London and with Mr. Hopkinson’s81 journey to this country.

2. I have informed M. Gusev in reply that I have no information in regard to (1) and that (2), like the other reports which have subsequently appeared in the News Chronicle purporting to summarise German military peace feelers in the Iberian peninsula in recent months, is entirely without foundation. I asked him to inform the Soviet Government that no peace approaches have been received recently by His Majesty’s Government from German sources and reminded him that His Majesty’s Government have always promptly informed the Soviet Government of any such approaches which have reached them in the past and will of course continue to do so.

75 Fedor Tarasovich Gusev.

76 Presumably British Foreign Secretary Eden.

77 Pius XII.

78 Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII.

79 Antonio Salazar, Prime Minister of Portugal.

80 Domingo de Sousa Holstein.

81 Henry L. Hopkinson, British Minister in Portugal until July 7, 1944.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 862.01/8–744

[Document 306]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

Some weeks ago a German journalist in a neutral country with connections with the German Legation established contact with a British Agent there. This German claimed to be in touch with high German military and civilian personages who were planning the overthrow of Hitler and the Nazi régime. His story bore every resemblance to similar stories which have been produced at intervals since 1938 and it was accordingly discounted as probably of little importance.

2. Shortly before the attempt on Hitler’s life this German reported that the conspirators in Germany, who included General Beck, intended to act immediately without waiting for any encouragement from the United Nations, and that Hitler would probably be murdered before the end of July. It would therefore appear that this German and the information provided through him are in fact serious although it cannot, of course, be said whether or how far his activities are known to and tolerated by the German Government or any particular group or clique holding high office in Germany. His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom hope to receive shortly through the same channel a fuller account of recent events in Germany which they will of course pass on to the United States Government.

3. In communicating this information to the United States Government, His Majesty’s Government wish to emphasize that there is, of course, no question of His Majesty’s Government giving any promises or indeed any encouragement to dissident Germans through this or any other channel nor of departing in any way from the formula of unconditional surrender. His Majesty’s Government felt however that they should not miss any reasonably promising opportunity of acquiring information bearing on the stability or otherwise of the régime inside Germany.

4. The above information is being conveyed to the Soviet Government.

Washington , August 7, 1944.

Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/8–1744

[Document 307]

Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, to the Secretary of State

Washington, 17 August, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: The Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force, has proposed the issuance of synchronized orders of the day by Marshal Stalin, General Eisenhower and General Wilson.82 This proposal is detailed in the telegram attached.

The Combined Chiefs of Staff83 consider that the political implications in this proposal are such that, if implemented, it should be handled by the heads of state.

General Eisenhower has been informed that his proposal has been forwarded to the Department of State and the Foreign Office.

Sincerely yours,

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
William D. Leahy

[Enclosure]

Telegram From the Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force, to the Combined Chiefs of Staff

SCAF 55 London, 10 July, 1944.

It is considered that we are approaching the psychological climax of the war and a decisive demonstration of military unity between the western, southern and eastern fronts may well turn flagging German morale into rapid demoralization. This is likely to be true not only of the German home front but of the German troops, whose relatively high fighting morale recently shows significant slackening.

It is proposed therefore that on a date to be synchronized by the 3 headquarters, orders of the day be issued by General Eisenhower, Marshal Stalin and General Maitland Wilson to their Armies. These orders would not be identical but would contain the following points: a. Allied successes on the eastern, western and southern fronts.

b. In face of this combined attack Germany is finished as a military power and the German High Command knows it.

c. Let the Allied fighting men make a great combined effort to finish the job.

d. Into that combined effort will go the victorious enthusiasm [of?] the industrial workers.

e. The final battle has begun.

These orders should, ideally, be issued at the same hour but, short of that, on the same day so that the unity of intention will be manifest. This would be immediately followed by a concerted psychological warfare campaign on the basis that “the war is lost, all is up.”

Orders would, on release, be broadcast in German on all available transmissions from Russia, the Mediterranean and the United Kingdom to impress on the German mind the idea of concerted and concentric action.

With the fall of Cherbourg and continuing successes in Italy ideal timing would be shortly after a notable success of the Russian offensive and when an important objective has been gained in the west such as a break out from the bridgehead area. Also if the release of these orders should occur several days before the surrender of Finland or Roumania, it would give the impression that they had obtained concrete results and the occupation of Germany from all sides is soon to follow.

If the Combined Chiefs of Staff approve this proposal it is requested they secure concurrence of the Russians and advise SACMED84 of the approved proposal.

Upon approval, the exact timing of the publication of the 3 orders of the day would be recommended by SHAEF directly to the Russians through the Military Missions and to SACMED through British Chiefs of Staff.

82 British General Sir Henry Maitland Wilson, Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater.

83 The Anglo-American Combined Chiefs of Staff, established in January 1942.

84 Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater.

Memorandum by the Combined Chiefs of Staff 740.00119 European War 1939/8–1844

[Document 308]

Memorandum by the Combined Chiefs of Staff 85

Washington, 18 August, 1944.

The Combined Chiefs of Staff consider it important that Allied commanders in the field should be aware of the limitations which it is necessary to impose on the scope of any terms of surrender which may be arranged locally. Without such limitations, terms of surrender locally arranged might later make it difficult to impose the full instrument of surrender upon Germany. Accordingly, the Combined Chiefs of Staff have forwarded the enclosed message to the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force, and the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean.

The Combined Chiefs of Staff request that the instructions in the enclosure be communicated to the European Advisory Commission and the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics for their information.86

For the Combined Chiefs of Staff: A. T. Cornwall-Jones,
Brigadier A. J. McFarland
Brigadier General, U.S.A.

Combined Secretariat

[Annex]

The Combined Chiefs of Staff to the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force (Eisenhower), and the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson)

1. To cover possibility of large scale local capitulations by German forces surrendering as units through their commanders you are sent the following instructions.

2. Essential requirement is that local capitulations should in no way prejudice final terms of total surrender of Germany.

3. Any instrument of local capitulation to be signed by a German commander should be strictly confined to the following stipulations: a. All forces under his control surrender unconditionally;

b. All forces under his control will lay down their arms and obey all orders issued by the United Nations commander as to their disposal;

c. All aircraft under his control will remain on the ground and personnel will remain in their existing positions pending further instructions;

d. He undertakes to allow no destruction, removal, or concealment of war material or other property;

e. Any United Nations prisoners (or internees) in the hands of his forces, or under his control, will be handed over forthwith;

f. Immediate information shall be given as to the location of all dangers or obstacles to movement on land, at sea and in the air;

g. Any further orders and instructions issued by the United Nations commander will be carried out;

h. The instrument is without prejudice to, and shall be superseded by, any general instrument of surrender imposed by the U.S.A., U.K. and the U.S.S.R., and applicable to Germany and the German armed forces as a whole.

4. Local circumstances at the time may impose some variation on the above stipulations. In particular it may be necessary to instruct the German commander to apprehend and hand over persons in his area who are not strictly speaking under his command, such as SS or Gestapo personnel. For this purpose you have adequate powers under Clause G of paragraph 3 above. The over-riding principles by which you should be guided are as follows: a. Terms of capitulation must be clearly and expressly limited to immediate military objects of local surrender.

b. You must make no commitment of any kind.

c. Capitulation must be expressly subject to any instrument of total surrender which may later be imposed by United Nations on German High Command and/or Government.

5. Matters relating to the surrender which do not fall within the purview of these instructions will be referred to the Combined Chiefs of Staff for decision.

6. In every case instrument of capitulation should be given some title which emphasizes its purely local character.

85 Addressed to the Department of State and the British Embassy.

86 This was done by telegrams No. 6626 and 6627, August 19, midnight, to London, for the European Advisory Commission, and by a note of August 19 to the Soviet Chargé (Kapustin).

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.0011 European War 1939/8–1744

[Document 309]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] August 21, 1944.

I enclose a copy of a letter dated August 17, 1944 from Admiral Leahy,87 transmitting a telegram of July 10, 1944 from S.H.A.E.F. recommending the issuance at the proper moment of simultaneous orders of the day to the troops under the command of Marshal Stalin and Generals Eisenhower and Wilson to the effect that the final battle has begun and that “all is up” for Germany.

I see no objection to this proposal from the political point of view and consider it primarily a military matter. If you approve the proposal, you will no doubt wish to take it up with Churchill and Stalin.

C[ordell] H[ull]

87  Ante, p. 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307].

Memorandum by Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/8–2444

[Document 310]

Memorandum by Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 24, 1944.

Referring to your Secret BC of August 21, 1944,88 in regard to General Eisenhower’s proposal for the issue of synchronized order of the day to the troops under his, Stalin’s and Wilson’s commands, to the effect that the final battle has begun and that “all is up” for Germany, I am directed by the President to inform you that he does not consider the present time appropriate for the issue of such a statement.

William D. Leahy

88  Supra. BC presumably refers to Division of British Commonwealth Affairs in which the memorandum of August 21 was drafted.

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of War [Document 311]

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of War 89

[Washington,] August 26, 1944.

This so-called “Handbook”90 is pretty bad. I should like to know how it came to be written and who approved it down the line. If it has not been sent out as approved, all copies should be withdrawn and held until you get a chance to go over it.

It gives me the impression that Germany is to be restored just as much as The Netherlands or Belgium, and the people of Germany brought back as quickly as possible to their pre-war estate.

It is of the utmost importance that every person in Germany should realize that this time Germany is a defeated nation. I do not want them to starve to death but, as an example, if they need food to keep body and soul together beyond what they have, they should be fed three times a day with soup from Army soup kitchens. That will keep them perfectly healthy and they will remember that experience all their lives. The fact that they are a defeated nation, collectively and individually, must be so impressed upon them that they will hesitate to start any new war.

The following are a few extracts of things which have caught my eye in a very hurried reading of this “Handbook”. There are doubtless many others.

“Your main and immediate task, to accomplish your mission, is to get things running, to pick up the pieces, to restore as quickly as possible the official functioning of the German civil government in the area for which are [you?] are responsible.…91 The first concern of military government will be to see that the machine works and works efficiently”.

“The principles with which Officers in Military Government Staffs and Detachments will be concerned include: the reorganization of the German police and the maintenance of Law and Order; the supervision of the German Judiciary and the establishment of Allied Military Courts; the control of the German Finances; the protection of property; the establishment and maintenance of an adequate standard of public health; the promotion of agriculture; the control, supply and distribution of food and essential supplies of every kind; the restoration and maintenance of public utilities; the provision for the gradual rehabilitation of peace-time industry and a regulated economy; the employment of Labour and the prevention of industrial unrest …”92

“Military Government Officers will, in conjunction with other interested and affected agencies and authorities, ensure that steps are taken to: (1) Import needed commodities and stores.

(2) Convert industrial plants from war to consumer goods production.

(3) Subsidize essential economic activities where necessary.

(4) Reconstruct German foreign trade with priority for the needs of the United Nations.

(5) Modify existing German regulations controlling industrial and raw material production”.

“The highly centralized German administrative system is to be retained unless otherwise directed by higher authority”.

“All existing German regulations and ordinances relating to …92 production, supply or distribution will remain in force until specifically amended or abrogated. Except as otherwise indicated by circumstances or directed by higher authority, present German production and primary processing of fuels, ores and other raw materials will be maintained at present levels”.

“The food supply will be administered so as to provide, if possible, a diet on the basis of an overall average of 2000 calories per day. Members of the German forces will be rated as normal consumers. The control of retail prices will be continued. The existing rationing system and classification of consumer groups will be maintained subject to modifications required by circumstances …92 Should the indigenous products of Germany be insufficient to provide such a basic ration, the balance will be made up by imports”.

“All possible steps will be taken to ensure the utilization of German economic, material and industrial facilities to an extent necessary to provide such raw materials, goods, supplies or services as are required for military and essential civilian needs, and to any additional extent—as approved by higher authority—necessary to provide surpluses for international transfer, supplies for reparational requisition, and legitimate industrial stock-piling”.

“The fishing industry has long been important in German economy, but owing to the requisitioning of trawlers for naval operations, the most important North Sea fish catch has been seriously curtailed. Before extensive commercial fishing can be resumed, a considerable amount of fishing gear will be required as well as stores and material for the repair and reconditioning of fishing vessels. There will possibly also be an immediate shortage of fuel and lubricants”.

“The Agricultural economy will be freed of Nazi discrimination; it will not otherwise be changed except where direct advantages are to be gained. Agricultural production control, and grain and other agricultural products collection agencies existing prior to occupation will be maintained or re-established. Equitable prices co-ordinated at Reich level will be fixed for farm products. Violations of farm price control, wages or rationing regulations will be severely punished”.

“The main objective of Allied Military Government in the financial field is to take such temporary measures as will attempt to minimize the potential financial disorder and chaos that is likely to occur and thus assist the military forces in their operations and ease the burdens that will face the more permanent Allied control organization that will later deal with the problems of Germany”.

“Wherever possible, removals and appointments (of civil servants) will be made by Military Government officers acting through German officials who are vested with this authority under German law; nothing will be done which would unnecessarily disturb the regular German civil service procedure or deprive the official or employee to be removed of any ultimate rights to which he may be justifiably entitled under German law, after cessation of military government”.

“International boundaries will be deemed to be as they were on 31 December 1937”.

There exists a school of thought both in London and here which would, in effect, do for Germany what this Government did for its own citizens in 1933 when they were flat on their backs. I see no reason for starting a WPA, PWA or a CCC for Germany when we go in with our Army of Occupation.

Too many people here and in England hold to the view that the German people as a whole are not responsible for what has taken place—that only a few Nazi leaders are responsible. That unfortunately is not based on fact. The German people as a whole must have it driven home to them that the whole nation has been engaged in a lawless conspiracy against the decencies of modern civilization.

Please let me see the revision of this and also let me have this original copy back.

F[ranklin] D. R[oosevelt]

89 Copy obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.

90  Handbook of Military Government in Germany, 1 September 1944, issued “By Command of General Eisenhower” by W. B. Smith, Lieutenant General, Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force, mimeographed (Hickerson files, Lot 55D374, Box 5339). For details see Forrest C. Pogue, The Supreme Command, in the official Army history, United States Army in World War II: The European Theater of Operations (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1954), p. 354.

91 Omission indicated in the original memorandum.

92 Omission indicated in the original memorandum.

92 Omission indicated in the original memorandum.

92 Omission indicated in the original memorandum.

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State 862.01/8–2744: Telegram

[Document 312]

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

San Sebastian, August 27, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received August 28—8:30 a.m.]

SS–2. Father Cojrado, German Capuchin who had contacts with our Embassy through Beaulac last year94 (reported by Madrid despatch),95 has now called on me with information that a separatist movement in south Germany is gathering rapid headway, that its secret head, Field Marshal von Leeb,96 has not been executed as recently reported in the press but continues to reside in Bavaria near Swiss frontier, that his agents are committing many acts of sabotage preliminary to general uprising against Hitler and Third Reich. The separatist movement aims at creation of south German state, including Austria, Bavaria, Wurttemberg and Baden, entirely independent of Prussia and north Germany. Would such territorial arrangement be incompatible with Allied plans for military occupation of Germany or for any subsequent partition?

Repeated to Madrid.

Hayes

94 Willard Beaulac, then Counselor of Embassy in Spain.

95 Despatch 1337, September 17, 1943, from Madrid; not printed.

96 Field Marshal Wilhelm von Leeb, formerly Commander in Chief, German Army Group North, Eastern front.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) 862.01/8–21744: Telegram

[Document 313]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, September 1, 1944—10 p.m.

2430. The question of whether or not Germany is to be partitioned is currently under consideration and has not yet been decided.97 It appears, however, that the territorial arrangement outlined in your SS–2, August 27, 5 p.m., would not fit in with Allied plans in so far as they have been formulated up to the present time.

Hull

97 For correspondence on the problem of the partition of Germany, see pp. 161–166 [Pgs. 161–166 include portions of Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, and Doc. 89], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 148], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 154], 311–312 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 154], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 167], and 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178].

Mr. Carmel Offie, of the Office of the United States Political Adviser (Kirk) on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW/9–444: Telegram

[Document 314]

Mr. Carmel Offie, of the Office of the United States Political Adviser (Kirk) on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State

Caserta, September 4, 1944—midnight.
[Received September 5—8:24 p.m.]

295. SAC received word this morning that since early part of August Lieutenant Colonel Barnes, British liaison officer in Epirus, has been approached on several occasions through Greek agents by General von Lanz, Commander of German Twenty-second Mountain Corps. Von Lanz, who reportedly was in touch with dissident German generals, has made various proposals including an effort to meet Barnes personally. Most recently, on September 2, Barnes, on instructions, informed Greek emissary that British were only interested in surrender, but so as not to slam door he added that he would be receiving further instructions from his superiors in two or three days time.

No definite information has been received at AFHQ98 to indicate how genuine this approach might be, but it is known that on August 1st a Greek secret agent in Athens in employ of British reported that he had been approached by a Greek quisling with follow [apparent omission] a document circulated in Athens by a group of Greek quislings suggesting German evacuation of Greece under control of an international police force and thought that this document had been inspired by Allies. If that was the case they were willing to send an emissary to Cairo to discuss proposal and emissary would have full powers to negotiate advantageous conditions. Under this arrangement 50,000 German troops would remain in Greece to maintain order and hand over to Allies.

Immediately on receipt of this information SAC called a special meeting of his Political Committee and after some discussion it was agreed that Barnes should be instructed to inform von Lanz that British terms were unconditional surrender and if this should interest Germans they should dispatch immediately a high-ranking German officer to southern Italy for further discussion, adding that arrangements for evacuation of this official from Greece to Italy would be arranged by British.

Offie

98 Allied Force Headquarters.

Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War/9–744: Telegram

[Document 315]

Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State

Caserta, September 7, 1944—noon.
[Received 9:40 p.m.]

312. My 295, September 4, midnight. General Wilson has now sent instructions to Lieutenant Colonel Barnes that there is no objection to his meeting Von Lanz but he is not to discuss terms of surrender. Purpose of such a meeting would be to arrange evacuation of a senior German officer to AFHQ to receive surrender terms.

Kirk

Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean, Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State 740.0011 E.W./9–744: Telegram

[Document 316]

Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean, Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State

Caserta, September 7, 1944—1 p.m.
[Received 9:15 p.m.]

313. We are informed by OSS that one of their representatives in Mihailovitch99 territory reported that an emissary from German Minister for Balkans, [Ne]ubacher,1 has approached him with a suggestion that an arrangement be made with British and Americans whereby all German troops would withdraw in Balkans approximately up to Danube–Sava line without any interference on part of Allies in return for German promise to employ these troops against Russians. OSS representative replied that conversations on basis of trickery or Allied disunity were out of question but that he would be glad to confer with German representative on an early end of German resistance in Balkans and disposition of German troops and would transmit any serious proposals that Germans might wish to make. This emissary believes conversation will resume after a few days. He said German behaviour during days immediately ahead would be an important consideration.

Kirk

99 Draza Mihailovich, Minister of War and Commander in Chief of the Yugoslav Armed Forces, as well as leader of the Chetnik resistance forces.

1 Hermann Neubacher, German Minister in Rumania and Special Envoy of the Foreign Office in the Balkans.

Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State 740.0011 E.W./9–744: Telegram

[Document 317]

Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State

Caserta, September 7, 1944—midnight.
[Received September 8—12:35 p.m.]

324. OSS representative referred to in my 313, September 7, 1 p.m. has been advised that his reply to Neubacher’s emissary was quite in order. He has been informed of principles to be applied to local German forces seeking to surrender as set forth by the CCS2 on August 163 in FAN4 395 to SACMED and FACS4 511 to SHAEF and has been instructed that he is to be guided by these principles in any future negotiations.

SACMED has also directed Maclean’s6 mission to issue instructions to all BLOs7 in Yugoslavia in similar sense.

Kirk

[Documentation regarding the discussions on postwar treatment of Germany, which took place at the Second Quebec Conference, September 11–16, 1944, is scheduled for publication in a subsequent volume of Foreign Relations. A photographic copy of the so-called “Morgenthau Plan” on Germany is printed before the preface to Henry Morgenthau, Jr., Germany Is Our Problem (New York, 1945).]

2 Combined Chiefs of Staff.

3 Presumably the reference here is to the message mentioned in the memorandum by the Combined Chiefs of Staff, August 18, the text of which is given in the annex to that memorandum, p. 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 308].

4 Military communications indicator.

4 Military communications indicator.

6 Brig. Fitzroy H. R. Maclean, Commanding British Military Mission to the Partisans in Yugoslavia.

7 British Liaison Officers.

Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State . 740.00119 EW/9–1244: Telegram

[Document 318]

Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State .

Caserta, September 12, 1944—11 a.m.
[Received 8:54 p.m.]

364. My 312, September 7. Colonel Barnes has now reported that on September 9 Von Lanz stated that he would send senior officers immediately to AFHQ if terms are altered from unconditional surrender to surrender. SAC has replied to this message that terms of surrender must remain unconditional surrender and that Von Lanz should be informed that details to implement such surrender will be presented to his representative at AFHQ who must be empowered by Von Lanz to accept or refuse the terms offered.

Kirk

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 E.W./9–1244: Telegram

[Document 319]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, September 12, 1944—10 p.m.
[Received September 13—1:34 a.m.]

3631. In connection with reports published in German press of September 11 concerning execution of seven additional Germans for alleged complicity in July 20th plot, and allegation that Trott zu Solz was in contact with the Allies in Sweden, Legation has learned the following facts.

According to a member of British Legation staff, Trott, who was in Washington in ’408 and who was quarter American, was assigned to Far Eastern Division of German Foreign Office. He came to Stockholm about beginning of November ’43, allegedly for Xmas shopping, and stayed with Swedish woman who is pro-German and on good terms with non-Nazi members of German Legation, but is also friendly to several members of British Legation staff. Obviously on instructions from Trott, she talked to member of British Legation. She represented Trott as saying Germans would rather come to terms with British than Russians because former understood Germany and Europe better. However, he thought Russians had a plan for Europe and Germany and wanted to know if British and Americans had plans made. He desired to learn whether British and Americans on one hand and Russians on other really had solid working agreement or whether forthcoming Moscow Conference9 was pure superficial window dressing. Swedish woman who acted as intermediary represented Trott as speaking for opposition group and indicated there might be further developments if British had plan and appeared willing to discuss terms with opposition.

No reply was given except that views would be reported to London, which was done. Subsequently, in March this year Trott again reappeared in Stockholm,10 this time to visit liver specialist, and through same intermediary repeated much the same views to British Legation member with slightly more favorable accent on possibilities of coming to terms with Russians who were fighting hard at fronts whereas British and Americans were killing civilians at home. British Legation again made clear it was interested in listening but had nothing to say in reply.

Apparently British Secret Service made some attempt to find out who Trott’s principals were but without success. London Foreign Office inclined to view that he was probably Gestapo agent seeking to ferret out views in Allied circles. British Legation inclined to feel he represented bona fide opposition group. Nothing further was ever heard from him according to our British informant.

Other than foregoing story, Legation has nothing so far to substantiate headline allegations in Swedish press that contact was made with “Allied” representatives in Stockholm by executed opposition group in Germany.

Johnson

8 Trott had arrived in the United States in November 1939 as a result of an invitation to attend a conference of the Institute of Pacific Relations at Virginia Beach, Virginia.

9 Reference here is to the Tripartite Conference of Foreign Ministers, held in Moscow, October 18–November 1, 1943; for correspondence, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 513 ff.

10 See telegram 2309, June 26, 9 p.m., from Stockholm, p. 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294].

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 862.01/9–1444: Telegram

[Document 320]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, September 14, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received 9:40 p.m.]

3661. Department’s attention is particularly invited to story reported in Legation’s press telegram 3592 of September 14 [13]11 (re Legation’s 3631 of September 12, 10 p.m. reporting details of British contact in Stockholm with executed Adam von Trott). Legation learns this article12 was written by Willy Brandt, young anti-Nazi German who has been subject of Legation’s 3412 August 31, 8 p.m., and despatch 4027 September 2.13 He is obviously well informed concerning opposition organizations and views. Department will note his account of von Trott’s views and British reaction and reply does not differ from British Legation account. Furthermore, article’s assertion that contacts were made by other routes than Stockholm is borne out by British Legation which says Foreign Office received reports of similar contacts by von Trott in Berne, Ankara and either Madrid or Lisbon.

With these indications of reliability of Brandt’s information, article can be considered as giving one of clearest glimpses yet obtained of organization and views of German opposition groups.

Legation learns indirectly from Brandt that Trott sought contact with Soviet Legation in Stockholm during last visit in June but contact could not be made in time.

Brandt believes July 20th plot was launched prematurely as outcome of Trott’s contacts with Allies in attempt to prove sincerity and existence of opposition movement.

Foregoing completes information currently in Legation’s hands concerning Trott and German opposition movement. Reference should also be made to Legation’s 2309, June 26, 9 p.m. and to 3562 [3592] September 11, 8 p.m.14 Taken together with press telegram under reference and Legation’s 3631, September 12, 10 p.m. these messages, based on information from German, Swedish, British and American sources, clearly indicate views of von Trott and German opposition, together with act [fact] that Trott was in contact with British but not with Russians. Information further gives definite basis for conclusion that an organization existed which was working to overthrow Hitler before July 20th, an organization which had wide-spread contacts and ramifications among leaders from most diverse political, economic, military and religious groups but which probably lacked wide popular foundation.

Johnson

11 Not printed.

12 Reference here is to an article in the Swedish newspaper Dagens Nyheter of September 12, 1944.

13 Neither printed.

14 Latter not printed.

Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State 740.00119 E.W./9–1944: Telegram

[Document 321]

Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State

Caserta, September 19, 1944—midnight.
[Received September 20—9:37 p.m.]

459. My 324, September 7. Information has reached this office that Neubacher wishes to discuss total German surrender15 but points out difficulty of finding a competent group of liberals within Germany to discuss matter with Allies and to carry on administrative functions Allies would assign. He apparently wishes Allied troops to be ready for occupation immediately upon surrender. He claims Hungary is in danger of an internal explosion with anarchy threatening. Germans holding North Yugoslavia only to postpone this explosion which would start trouble within Germany. Consequently there is great interest in preventing anarchy in a region from where it might spread to Germany. A German effort will be made to hold Sava line from east to west and Hungarian lines formed by rivers running south to Danube. Germans are bringing troops from Greece by road at night through Nis and Smederevo. Gestapo evacuating all North Yugoslavia.

OSS informant reports Neubacher is apparently sincere in his desire for immediate unconditional surrender but no accurate information is available on size of group he represents. According to this source Germans would presumably allow Allied entry if non-Soviet troops held Trieste or Fiume to Belgrade line. Only impediment to total surrender is German fear Allies will allow a state of chaos to exist in Germany over a long period.

Kirk

15 In a memorandum (not printed), of September 21, 1944, from the Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to the Secretary of State, it was reported that the OSS representative, Lt. Col. McDowell, had been invited to Belgrade to discuss “total surrender” with Neubacher, who had just returned from Hitler’s headquarters. McDowell, however, had been instructed not to go to Belgrade nor to initiate any negotiations for peace. (740.00119 EW/9–2144)

Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State 740.0011 E.W./9–2144: Telegram

[Document 322]

Mr. Alexander C. Kirk, United States Political Adviser on the Staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson), to the Secretary of State

Caserta, September 21, 1944—midnight.
[Received September 22—8:26 a.m.]

484. My 324, September 7, midnight, second paragraph. On instructions from SACMED member of Maclean’s Mission recently interviewed Tito16 with view to obtaining latter’s agreement to application of principles governing surrender of Germans recently enunciated by CCS. Tito fully agreed and is issuing instructions to his corps commanders accordingly. It is reported that he proposes to place Germans surrendering in concentration camps for road work in Yugoslavia.

Kirk

16 Marshal Josip Broz-Tito, Commander of the Yugoslav National Army of Liberation, and President of the National Committee of Liberation of Yugoslavia.

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 E.W./9–2344: Telegram

[Document 323]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, September 23, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received 11:39 p.m.]

3841. Conversations between Lithuanian author Ignas Scheynius and member of German Legation were reported in Legation’s despatches 3554 June 17, 4010 August 31.17

Scheynius has furnished officer of Legation with memorandum of conversation on August 25 with same German Legation contact, Franz Zuechner. Memorandum is in our opinion trustworthy account of conversation in question although colored by extreme anti-Soviet views which Scheynius holds. He has not yet ascertained beyond doubt whether Zuechner was acting in good faith in making this approach. Paraphrase of pertinent parts of memorandum reads as follows.

Begin paraphrase:

I was visited on August 25 by my German acquaintance who asked me if I would approach American Minister in endeavor obtain information concerning armistice terms and conditions for agreement between Allies and Germany regarding separate peace.

I requested information concerning terms expected by Germans, in order to acquaint myself with German standpoint. I desired to ascertain whether Germans still cherished ideas of expansion eastward. (Legation’s note: see section 2 of memorandum attached to despatch 4010.)

In reply German official said issue at stake was safeguarding of Germany’s old borders and unity. If same conditions as those granted Italy18 were made basis of dealings between Allies and Germany, discussion grounds would thereby be provided.

I presented following two conditions as basis for my willingness approach American Minister: 1. I must know whether approach was made on behalf of German Government or some one else.

2. If, in case results of present approach were unsatisfactory, German Government intended approach Moscow subsequently in effort obtain more favorable conditions, I would not wish to assist in peace negotiations with American Government. I wished to assure myself of sincerity of Germany’s westward orientation.

With respect my first condition, German official promised reply in few days. He asked me to promise to keep his visit absolutely secret and to take no steps until his reply received. I have heard nothing further from him for over ten days and it is therefore my wish to bring this matter confidentially to knowledge of American authorities.

With respect my second condition, German acquaintance replied that in his belief Germany would not wish to have her freedom of action bound. German Government had to endeavor find best possible way out of present situation. End of paraphrase.

Remainder of memorandum is concerned with Scheynius’ anti-Russian views, with most of which he claims Zuechner was in agreement.

In second memorandum, dated September 14, just received from Scheynius, he states that on Scheynius’ initiative Zuechner again visited him on 13th and in reply to questions asserted that immediately after previous conversation he had informed Berlin authorities of Scheynius’ reply and conditions. He had as yet received no answer but he believed that if conditions had been rejected he would have been informed of that fact. He asserted his visit of August 25 took place with knowledge of German Foreign Ministry and German Legation here and that motive was to gain information by more or less private means about possibilities for separate peace between Germany and western Allies.

In this second conversation Zuechner stated his belief that Berlin has not pursued matter because recent executions have intimidated peace proponents even in circles closest and most loyal to Hitler. He asserted Berlin has lately become extremely pessimistic about chances for separate peace with western Allies and believes they intend to stick to Soviet Union through lack of understanding of European conditions and ignorance of what is in store for Europe.

Scheynius’ second memorandum is mostly concerned with recounting anti-Soviet remarks exchanged between him and Zuechner.

Zuechner holds relatively minor position in cultural section of Kultur Division of German Legation here. He is said to be one of Legation’s Scandinavian experts. He has Norwegian wife and lived in Norway for some years before and during early stages of war. In fall or winter 1941 he was arrested and taken to Berlin where he was tried on charges apparently originating with Reich’s Commissariat for Norway. Exact nature of charges unknown but he was eventually freed but not permitted to return to Norway. He finally turned up in present position, probably through influence of brother in Propaganda Ministry.

Legation has no facts other than foregoing to go on and can only speculate about Zuechner’s real principals. With his background, it seems difficult to believe that his contact was on behalf of German Government. On other hand there is no evidence that Zuechner is in any way connected with executed Von Trott. His approach may have been a very tentative fishing expedition on behalf of some government group.

Legation has made no reply to Scheynius and does not consider approach very serious in view of lack of follow up.

Johnson

[On September 28, 1944, a statement to the Germans by the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force (Eisenhower), was released to the press. See Forrest C. Pogue, The Supreme Command, in the official Army history, United States Army in World War II: The European Theater of Operations (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1954), page 357.]

17 Neither printed.

18 For correspondence relating to the Italian surrender, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. ii, pp. 314 ff; for the surrender documents, see Department of State, Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS) No. 1604.

The Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs, Department of State (Dunn) 740.0011 European War 1939/10–244

[Document 324]

The Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs, Department of State (Dunn)

Washington, October 2, 1944.

Dear Mr. Dunn: I should appreciate it if you would place the attached memorandum before the Secretary.

Ambassador Murphy19 is also interested in this matter, and I enclose an extra copy of the memorandum to be brought to his attention.

Sincerely,

Bill

[Enclosure]

Memorandum for the Secretary of State

Washington, October 2, 1944.

Under date of 9 September and 10 September we sent Ambassador Murphy two reports20 from our Bari office referring to statements of Starker of Neubacher’s staff. Copies of these statements were sent to Ambassador Harriman21 and General Deane,22 who in turn showed them to the Russians.

You may find of significance that in a message from General Deane to us today, he states that General Fitin23 is grateful for the information which was sent to him and requests that more information be forwarded as it becomes available.

Donovan

19 Robert D. Murphy, formerly United States Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy, had become, after September 15, 1944, United States Adviser on German Affairs.

20 Neither printed, but for the substance of these two reports, see telegrams 313, September 7, 1 p.m., and 324, September 7, midnight, from Caserta, p. 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317].

21 W. Averell Harriman, American Ambassador in the Soviet Union.

22 Maj. Gen. John R. Deane, Head of the United States Military Mission in the Soviet Union.

23 Lt. Gen. Pavel Mikhailovich Fitin, Head of Soviet External Intelligence Services.

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 E.W./10–1344: Telegram

[Document 325]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, October 13, 1944—10 p.m.
[Received October 14—4:11 a.m.]

4170. Scheynius has been visited again by Zuechner of German Legation on October 2, 5 and 6. During these visits, Zuechner communicated following statements concerning alleged interest of German Government on peace feelers, reported in Legation’s 3841, September 23, 7 p.m.

He referred to drastic conditions in Germany and observed that “Germany is now ripe for peace”. With regard to Scheynius’s previous stipulations, Zuechner said reply had been received from Berlin to effect that German Government desired Scheynius to approach American Legation Stockholm, and without expressly mentioning German Government’s interest in matter, endeavor to ascertain sentiments (“Staemningen”, in Swedish) in “Western Allied” circles concerning peace with Germany. Zuechner said on prestige grounds Germany could not openly admit defeat and German leaders could not address themselves directly to “Western Allies”. They wished to use private channels lest rejection of direct advances would undermine German Government’s authority.

Scheynius asked if it would not be better for Germany to make its inquiry in more concrete form, such as asking for “Italian conditions”, or terms based on Atlantic Charter.24 One could then better ascertain whether Allies would be disposed to initiate discussions on definite basis. Zuechner said he personally considered Atlantic Charter most acceptable basis but it would be necessary to refer this question to Berlin. He agreed to propose to Berlin that Scheynius’s alternatives be considered. Zuechner went on to express opinion that Germans had now learned that it was dangerous to follow extremists and to have illusions about ruling Europe. He believed German people would rise up in anger against Nazis. He feared, however, that if “Western Allies” followed too harsh policy, German peoples emotions would be exploited by extremist elements.

On last visit, Zuechner stated telegram to Berlin had been prepared as promised but German Legation felt it unwise to send it as it would only cause lengthy delay. He indicated in response to question, that Hitler would have to approve any decision. Zuechner therefore appealed to Scheynius again to approach American Legation at earliest possible time (to use approximately his own words) to learn conditions which “Western Allies” would propose for an armistice and for basis for peace negotiations between Germany and “Western Allies”. He added that in circles he represented there were no illusions about possible nature of conditions which might be forthcoming. American and British views on the subject were only too well known but subjection to “Western Allies” was considered lesser evil than alliance with Soviet Union. He expressed fear that if “Western Allies” demanded unconditional surrender, Hitler would accept such conditions as Soviets would give Germany.

Scheynius asked why German Government did not address itself to all Allies at same time and Zuechner replied that although German Government realized three great Allies were cooperating to such extent that it would be difficult to separate them, it thought it should, in interest of German people and as last attempt to prevent possible permanent occupation and annexation by Soviets of parts of Germany, make last attempt to explore possibilities for separate agreement with “Western Allies”.

At a fourth meeting on October 7, Zuechner, who had previously stressed fact that his proposals were made with knowledge of German Legation, stated that he was specially asked to stress that everything was being presented in spirit of complete honesty and sincerity with no reservations or evasions. He further expressed desire that no publicity be given to the matter and that it not be brought to knowledge of third parties.

This report from Scheynius was accepted by a Legation officer without comment.25

Simultaneously the Legation has been told the following story by Carl Buchberger, former Austrian Minister to Turkey, who received it from a Swedish source. Von Kleist,26 a Berlin lawyer who comes to Stockholm as Red Cross delegate from time to time, attempted to establish contact with Soviet Legation in June or July. (This is apparently same Von Kleist as has been involved in suggestion to get Baltic Jews out to Sweden, as reported in Legation’s 2362, dated June 28, 10 p.m., 2419, dated July 3, noon, and 2621, dated July 15, 10 a.m.27 ) Attempted contact was apparently to see whether Russians would be receptive to idea of separate peace with Germany. Whatever directions he had were reportedly set forth in meeting with Dankwort,28 German Legation Counselor, and a Swedish subject named Rasch. Rasch subsequently obtained interview with Semenov,29 Soviet Legation Counselor, who, when he learned object of Rasch’s call, reportedly said he would have nothing whatever to do with matter and would not have granted interview had he known what object was. Buchberger reports further that Von Kleist has just been in Stockholm and departed for Berlin four days ago. On this visit he is said to have stated unequivocally that he had full powers to propose peace to Soviets on whatever terms they might exact. He was, however, unable to make any contact with Soviet representatives, according to Buchberger’s informant.

Foregoing facts and reports may fit in with information available to Department from other sources. Viewed from here, these appear to be transparent and rather clumsy attempts to implant seeds of suspicion between Anglo-Americans and Soviets in another desperate effort to exploit any dissensions among Allies and possibly mitigate eventual fate of Germany. Legation would not be surprised to know that Zuechner’s advances have been brought to the attention of Soviet Legation as Kleist’s efforts were brought to the attention of this Legation.

Johnson

24 Joint statement by President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, August 14, 1941, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. i, p. 367.

25 On November 2, 1944, the Department of State transmitted aide-mémoire (not printed) to the British and Soviet Embassies, informing them of this indirect approach by Franz Zuechner. The Department stated that the Minister in Sweden declined to consider the approach further and doubted the truth of Zuechner’s claim to represent the German Government. It further indicated that it attached no importance to the approach. (740.00119 EW/11–244)

26 Reference here is to Peter Kleist.

27 None printed, but see telegrams 2322 and 2340, June 27, from Stockholm, pp. 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295] and 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297], respectively.

28 Werner von Dankwort.

29 Vladimir Semenovich Semenov.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 EW/10–1744: Telegram

[Document 326]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 17, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received 7:48 p.m.]

8842. From Murphy. The Chief,30 Psychological Warfare Division SHAEF, recommended in a recent staff meeting that a SHAEF directive be issued redefining the objects of Allied occupation of Germany with special reference to the pre-surrender period. A priority list was suggested as follows: (1) to induce in German civilians in occupied territories non-resistance and obedience to our orders thus reducing the number of garrison troops necessary; (2) to maintain the output of key industries and essential services; (3) to obtain from the purged German administration at least that degree of collaboration which will prevent administrative sabotage; (4) to obtain from the civilian population at least that degree of acceptance of our rule which will make them unwilling to harbor Nazi guerrillas and saboteurs and (5) by the example of life under military government to counter the effect of Nazi propaganda in the German army and to weaken its spirit of resistance.

The foregoing is in the discussion stage and no decisions were taken on any of the foregoing points in respect of Allied propaganda to the German public but a committee has been set up to study the matter and to formulate local directives.

SHAEF points out that military operations require that railroads continue to operate for the Allies where possible, certain public services—light, water, etc.—are necessary, coal from the mines is required, etc. The workers and other personnel needed for these services will be predominantly German, and of course, to work will need to be fed. Some of the German territory which will be occupied is not self-sustaining and it will be necessary to import food for this purpose. PWD pointed out that the present directive31 permits such imports of food and measures of economic rehabilitation as are demanded by military considerations and that this could be interpreted narrowly to the effect that unless and until starvation has been proved or industrial unrest already caused no food will be imported; broadly looking to an economic policy designed to maintain tolerable living conditions throughout the occupied area thus reducing the garrison troops necessary and maintaining essential production. PWD made the point that if the first is adopted the population will find life under military government infinitely worse than life under the Nazis. Considerable bodies of troops to maintain work in essential industries to guard our lines of communication and to track down the guerrillas harbored by a desperate population would be required. It concludes that after the use of force and threats and after the population has been driven into an attitude of resistance the Allies would probably be compelled to introduce wide-spread relief measures.

It had been proposed among other things to reassure the German population generally that the latter would not starve under Allied rule and it was suggested that military considerations will compel the Allies to maintain employment at as high a level as possible. I urged that no broadcasts or announcements should be made which could even remotely be construed as a general commitment or long term obligation but that use be made of examples in captured areas to demonstrate that German workmen are fed and that there is no starvation or brutality under Allied rule. It is my opinion that it might be most effective at the present stage if Germany were now faced by a wall of complete silence on the Allied propaganda front as distinct from straight news.

The Dept’s comment on the foregoing would be helpful.

In connection also with American information effort [in] Germany during the post defeat period it is now planned to place supervision of this activity in the political section of the Control Council. I have been asked whether the personnel for this work in the Control Council in Berlin as well as under the Commanding General in the American One [Zone] would include OWI civilians and what responsibility OWI would have for operations. PWD is faced with the responsibility of recruiting qualified [personnel?] for this purpose now. I should be grateful for the Dept’s advice in that connection. [Murphy.]

Winant

30 Brig. Gen. Robert A. McClure.

31 Reference is to the directive to the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force, in respect of military government in Germany for the pre-surrender period, April 28, 1944, text of which is printed on p. 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 112]. The Economic and Relief Guide for Germany, which constituted Appendix D to the Directive, is printed in Hajo Holborn, American Military Government (Washington, Infantry Journal Press, 1947), p. 143.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.0011 E.W./10–1744: Telegram

[Document 327]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 20, 1944—midnight.

8719. For Murphy. The Department has considered your 8842, October 17, 6 p.m., and believes that the high policy decisions implicit in certain of the points made will necessitate a reference of this matter to the White House. Pending such reference the Department agrees that no broadcasts or announcements should be made which could be construed as a general commitment or long-term obligation toward Germany or the German people. However, the Department feels that your suggestion regarding a blackout on propaganda is impracticable at this time. It does agree that the maximum possible amount of straight news presentation will be desirable.

The last paragraph of your telegram under reference will be discussed with the Office of War Information and the War Department and our joint decision will be telegraphed to you at a later date. In general the Department is inclined to favor the inclusion of OWI civilians and the maximum possible OWI responsibility for operations.

Hull

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.0011 EW/10–1744: Telegram

[Document 328]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 3, 1944—noon.

9183. For Murphy. State, War and Office of War Information after consideration of the points contained in your telegram sent as London’s 8842, October 17, 6 p.m. have agreed upon a joint propaganda directive for Germany which has been approved by the President. This directive will be transmitted to SHAEF by the War Department32 and a copy will be given to you. It will contain no reference to your telegram or to the PWD proposals.

For your information State, War and Office of War Information in submitting this matter to the President made objection to the total effect of the PWD proposals and to the implications inherent therein. It was stated that these proposals might result in appeals to the Germans which we would not want in any form; that the reassurances suggested might create subsequent difficulties since military considerations might make implementation impossible; and that in no event could the Allies be expected to provide for the Germans better food and employment conditions than they had under their own Government or are now being received by the people in liberated areas. The President was informed that in general the PWD proposals were much too conciliatory and ingratiating.

The Department commends you for your action in this matter.

Stettinius

32 For a brief commentary upon this phase of the propaganda program, see Pogue, The Supreme Command, p. 344.

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EW 1939/11–1444: Telegram

[Document 329]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, November 14, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received 9:58 p.m.]

4669. Another approach by Zuechner of German Legation has been reported to Legation by Scheynius, with reference to conversations reported in Legation’s 3841 September 23, 7:00 p.m. and 4170 October 13, 10:00 p.m.

Latest visit by Zuechner occurred on November 6 and Scheynius reports that Zuechner was in best of spirits in sharp contrast to earlier visits. German inquired if any reply had been received from American sources. Scheynius said no and expressed belief no response could be expected until Germany defeated. Zuechner was undisturbed by this remark and replied that “western Allies will still face greater troubles even if they win war. They will still confront tremendous problem of working amicably with Russia.” He added, “Actually, German Government’s earlier desire to learn western Allies peace conditions is no longer important as situation has taken decided turn for better for Germany.”

Scheynius reports Zuechner made foregoing statement in natural manner and without display of bravado and was quite willing to explain this alleged change of feeling. Explanation lies in new weapons with which Germany now sure it can win war including new antiaircraft and antitank guns which will have devastating effect on enemy. When Scheynius deliberately deprecated importance of new weapons, Zuechner seriously replied that German Army experts who had seen them expected good results. Scheynius was impressed by Zuechner’s apparent earnestness and confidence. Latter had formerly been mysterious in speaking of new weapons but was open and frank on this occasion. He asserted manufacture and distribution of new devices proceeding rapidly and numerous German army units already equipped but weapons would not be used until “sufficient number of units” were supplied. When Scheynius attempted to obtain details of new weapon’s nature, Zuechner became reserved and changed subject. Discussing war generally, Zuechner asserted Germany’s situation was “not so bad” and that though Red Armies might take Budapest and Vienna, Russia would be forced to give up all this territory. He stated “We shall defeat Soviets in due course but it is of far greater importance to us to first conquer Western Allies.”

Describing difficulties of Russian lines of communication through Balkans and Carpathians, Zuechner again asserted that “our first task is to overcome enemy attacking from west. Second objective is to defeat Russians and with assistance of our new weapons Russians will finally suffer greater catastrophe than they inflicted on us at Stalingrad”.

When conversation turned to conditions and morale in German Legation, Zuechner said sentiment had recently changed perceptibly and situation is now stabilized with no more desertions expected. He said several prominent Germans recently visited Stockholm but refused to identify them. Scheynius believed Zuechner’s changed outlook was probably connected with these visits which had aimed at bolstering spirits of Stockholm Germans.

This conversation seems to put an end for the present to whatever objective may have been aimed at in Zuechner’s previous approaches. Legation believes Scheynius’ report is reliable and accordingly deduces that German “shot in the arm” technique of building hopes around new weapons has been locally successful. Conversation does not seem to add any real information concerning new weapons.

One perhaps noteworthy feature of conversation was entire absence of any implication that Germans might be considering separate peace with Russians.

Johnson

President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill) [Document 330]

President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill)33

[Washington,] 22 November, 1944.

Number 655.

1. Apparently the Chiefs of SHAEF would like something done by top level to help break down German morale.

2. I can think of nothing except a joint statement from you and me and therefore suggest something along the line of the following: “We have viewed the overall iron discipline of the Wehrmacht and strangle-hold of the Nazi party over the individuals of the German nation and we have considered the problem of getting the truth to the people of Germany, for they have been flooded with Nazi propaganda that the Allies seek the destruction of the German people and the devastation of Germany.

Once more we wish to make it clear to the German people that this war does not seek to devastate Germany or eliminate the German people.

Once more we want to make it clear to the people of Germany that we seek the elimination of Nazi control and the return of the German people to the civilization of the rest of the world.

We are winning. There is no question of that.

But we want to save lives and to save humanity.

We hope that this slaughter of Germans can be brought to an end hut we are going to bring this war to a conclusion which will satisfy civilization and seek to prevent future wars. The answer lies in the hands of the German people. They are being pressed the whole length of their boundaries on the Rhine. They are being pressed by overwhelming numbers and inexhaustible resources in Poland and Czechoslovakia and Hungary. German towns are daily being destroyed and your enemies draw closer in the closing of an inexorable ring. The simple fact remains that the Allies are united in demanding a complete military victory.

The choice lies with the German people and the German army. Bo not prolong the days of death and suffering and destruction. Join all the other people in Europe and Africa and America and Asia in this great effort for decency and peace among human beings.”

Roosevelt

33 Copy of telegram obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.

The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt [Document 331]

The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt 34

London, 24 November, 1944.

Number 828. Your Number 655. I have consulted the Cabinet and separately the Chiefs of Staff and we all gravely doubt whether any such statement should be made. I do not think that the Germans are very much afraid of the treatment they will get from the British and American armies or governments. What they are afraid of is a Russian occupation, and a large proportion of their people being taken off to toil to death in Russia, or as they say, Siberia. Nothing that we can say will eradicate this deep seated fear.

2. Moreover, U. J.35 certainly contemplates demanding two or three million Nazi youth, Gestapo men, etc., doing prolonged reparation work, and it is hard to say that he is wrong. We could not therefore give the Germans any assurances on this subject without consultations with U. J.

3. It seems to me that if I were a German soldier or general, I should regard any such statement at this juncture, when the battle for Cologne is at its height, as a confession of weakness on our part and as proof positive of the advantages of further desperate resistance. The Chiefs of the Staff and Ministry of Information both independently agree with me that this might well be the consequence of any such announcement now. I do not see any alternative to the General Grant attitude “To fight it out on this line, if it takes all summer”. We, therefore, are opposed to any reassurance being volunteered by us at this juncture.

4. The brilliant French success in the south, your capture of Metz and the break-through of the Seventh American Army upon Strassbourg now taken are substantial facts which must be added to the intense pressure of the American First and Ninth Armies and our own British efforts towards Venlo. Even if we do not conquer at the strongest point towards Cologne, enough has been already gained to make the battle a notable step towards our goal. Words, I am sure, would play no part now and we can, it seems to me, speak no words of which the Russians, who are still holding on their front double the number of divisions opposite us, are not parties.

5. I, therefore, earnestly hope that we shall fight the battle out till winter comes about the middle of December and throw extra weight into the points of penetration. I am sure it would be hurtful to our prestige and even to our initiative if we seemed to try high-level appeals to the Germans now. All kinds of propaganda can be thrown across the battle-fronts locally as they do to us, and the staffs are working at a plan on which a separate telegram will be sent, which is designed to meet Eisenhower’s desire to get at German morale by underground methods. But to make the great governments responsible for anything which would look like appeasement now would worsen our chances, confess our errors and stiffen the enemy resistance. Please, however, do not hesitate to correct me if you think I am wrong. Meanwhile, I remain set where you put me on unconditional surrender.

Prime

34 Copy of telegram obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y. On November 27, 1944, a paraphrase of this telegram was transmitted to the Department of State by the British Embassy.

35 Uncle Joe (Stalin).

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to President Roosevelt 103.918/12–144

[Document 332]

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to President Roosevelt 37

Washington, 1 December, 1944.

Our office in Sweden has raised for immediate decision a question which will arise with increasing frequency in connection with those of German nationality who work for us behind German lines. We are asked specifically what we are prepared to do in their behalf in regard to offering firm guarantees of protection and post-armistice privileges to Germans whom we recruit and who work loyally for our organization. Among these privileges would be permission for entry into the United States after the war, the placing of their earnings on deposit in an American bank and the like. We shall, of course, institute appropriate controls.

On this we will need authority which only you can give.

At this moment we have certain German nationals working for us within Germany at great risks.

William J. Donovan

37 This document was transmitted to the Secretary of State along with a memorandum from President Roosevelt asking what he thought of it. On December 1, 1944, a copy had already been sent to Mr. Dunn, Director of the Office of European Affairs, with the suggestion that the Secretary of State would be interested in it.

The Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs, Department of State (Dunn) 740.00119 E.W./12–1144

[Document 333]

The Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs, Department of State (Dunn)

Washington, 11 December, 1944.

Dear Jimmie: I am inclosing a paper that I am sending to the Secretary but I would like you to look at it before it goes in.

Sincerely,

Bill

[Enclosure]

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to the Secretary of State

Washington, 11 December, 1944.

In order to weaken the resistance of the German civilian population, it is proposed to disseminate both by radio and by pamphlet the theme set forth in the inclosed paper entitled “Black Propaganda Treatment of Unconditional Surrender”.

I think you understand that this material will be purported to come from within Germany itself and will represent the dissatisfaction of the purported group with the needless sacrifice of continued resistance.

I am anxious to submit this to the Joint Chiefs of Staff but before doing so, I would appreciate your concurrence as to the advisability of the attack and the method proposed.

William J. Donovan

[Subenclosure]

Black Propaganda Treatment of Unconditional Surrender

I. Discussion

1. Analysis of German propaganda for home-front consumption discloses that while a literal translation of the phrase “unconditional surrender” has rarely been employed to convince the German people that there is no alternative but to continue the war, the concept of surrender has become associated in the German mind with the worst catastrophes which could befall the population. The horrible prospects of exile to Siberia, eternal slavery, de-industrialization, breakup of Germany, and even sterilization, have been carefully portrayed to the Germans by their Nazi leaders. It is considered that the German spirit of resistance has been bolstered greatly by fear of the consequence of unconditional surrender.

2. Black propaganda disseminated by wholly secret means and purporting to originate from within enemy countries could:

a. Diminish the propaganda value of this theme by attempting to dissociate “unconditional surrender” from the afflictions Nazi leaders have been predicting to their people.

Typical Black Theme:

“Unconditional surrender” is demanded of “our” Government by the Allies, but it applies only to the Nazi Government and the Wehrmacht, and not to us as individuals. Behaviour of Allied Forces in Italy, Rumania, Bulgaria and occupied areas of Germany disprove the Nazi predictions of horrible conditions resulting from “unconditional surrender.”

b. Convert the theme to a black propaganda weapon of our own by associating “unconditional surrender” with desirable rather than fearsome prospects.

Typical Black Theme:

Unconditional surrender means “our” delivery from the Nazi yoke and would represent a new beginning for the German people wherein “our” biological strength, shrewdness, and scientific prowess would soon lead “us” to a healthy economic and social position. Homes, industries, national wealth, and the framework of the German Army would be conserved for the future. The destruction of Germany is too high a price to pay for saving the Nazis for another four or five months, by which time military defeat is inevitable.

c. Suggest that continuation of the war would expose the German people to a fate worse than that threatened by Nazi propagandists.

Typical Black Theme:

The traditional humanitarian tendencies of the democracies may change to vindictiveness if the war is allowed to continue. The chaos, disease, and privation predicted for us in the event of unconditional surrender will develop by prolonging the war. “Our” continued resistance protects only the Nazi leaders.

d. Give the German people a vague and wholly spurious idea of the “terms” of unconditional surrender which the Allies will impose.

Black Treatment:

“Terms” would not be specifically set forth, but “interpreted” in general terms based upon the principles enumerated at Tab ‘A’.38

3. Methods: At the present time a spurious and purportedly clandestine newspaper, “Das Neue Deutschland,” is being printed in Europe by this organization and distributed by means of agents to the German troops on the Western Front and the Italian Front, in Hungary and in Austria. Future editions of this publication, whose cover is still considered to be secure, can develop the themes enumerated in Paragraph 2 above. Rumors currently being carried through neutral countries to Germany and initiated among German troops by means of agents can portray the inevitability of defeat and the reasons for unconditional surrender now. A false document setting forth actual terms of unconditional surrender may be “planted” in such a manner that its content would be appropriately publicized, or the secret Allied intentions after surrender could be “disclosed” by rumor alone.

4. It is recognized that in conducting black propaganda operations, the real source of the propaganda may be suspected, but its dissemination is handled in such a manner that neither the Allied Military Commanders nor their Governments can be implicated, and all such propaganda may, if necessary, be officially disavowed.

II. Recommendations

1. That the Morale Operations Branch of this organization be authorized to undertake a black propaganda campaign, directed at the German people’s fear of the consequences of “unconditional surrender.”

2. That themes, similar to those outlined in the foregoing discussion, be employed.

III. Concurrences

Office of War Information

Department of State

William J. Donovan

[Sub-subenclosure]

Suggested Black Statement of Allied Intentions After Unconditional Surrender of Germany

I. Territorial

1. Germany will be entirely occupied by Allied troops.

2. Although Russian, British and American troops will occupy three separate sections of Germany, it is not intended to partition the German Reich.

II. Military

1. Internal order will be maintained by Allied forces until a German Government is formed.

III. Judicial

1. War criminals will be tried by special international tribunals. Impartial justice will be meted out.

2. War criminals are defined as leaders of the National Socialist Party, certain general officers in the Wehrmacht, police officers of high rank, and any other persons who have committed criminal acts.

3. Persons accused of being war criminals will be committed to trial only after the establishment of their probable participation in criminal acts by an impartial international body.

IV. Political

1. Germany will eventually be allowed to choose its own form of government and the Allies will establish the machinery for registering the expression of popular will.

2. The National Socialist Party will be stamped out. No member of that party will be allowed to hold any office or position of trust.

3. Germany will be admitted to participation in whatever association of nations is formed after proving its good intentions.

V. Economic

1. The establishment of a prosperous Germany as a self-sustaining member of the family of nations is desired by the Allies. To this end the Allies will restore the basis of sound German currency, assistance in the restoration of German industry will be provided with a view to absorbing the unemployed, and Germany will be allowed access to raw materials and markets in order to support its industry.

2. Germany will be forbidden to manufacture airplanes, guns over 20 mm. calibre and warships. Allied control will be exercised to insure that German industry will be directed only toward the production of non-military goods.

VI. Reparations

1. Property acquired by Germans in any other country will be returned to its owner or compensation made.

2. Property destroyed or damaged by Germans in any other country will be rebuilt and restored by Germany.

VII. Cultural

1. Freedom of religion is guaranteed.

2. Education, speech and the press will be controlled only to the extent necessary to insure that National Socialism and similar doctrines are not advocated.

3. Organizations of a non-military and non-political character will be permitted.

38 Printed as sub-subenclosure, p. 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 333].

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 103.918/12–1544

[Document 334]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, December 15, 1944.

In accordance with your request, there is transmitted herewith a suggested memorandum for reply to General Donovan.

E. R. Stettinius, Jr.

[Annex]

Memorandum for General Donovan 39

I do not believe that we should offer any guarantees of protection in the post-hostilities period to Germans who are working for your organization. I think that the carrying out of any such guarantees would be difficult and probably widely misunderstood both in this country and abroad. We may expect that the number of Germans who are anxious to save their skins and property by coming over to the side of the United Nations at the last moment will rapidly increase. Among them may be some who should properly be tried for war crimes or at least arrested for active participation in Nazi activities. Even with the necessary controls you mention I am not prepared to authorize the giving of guarantees.

39 No evidence has been found to indicate that this reply was transmitted to General Donovan by President Roosevelt.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00119 EW/12–1644

[Document 335]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

Early in November information reached His Majesty’s Government that von Kessel, Counsellor at the German Embassy to the Vatican, was anxious to desert to the British authorities in Rome. The German Ambassador von Weizsäcker was said to be aware of and in sympathy with von Kessel’s intentions. Von Kessel wanted to meet a British officer to give oral explanations which he claimed might be connected with a fresh “putsch”. Though suspicious of this approach His Majesty’s Government authorized an interview to see if von Kessel had any useful information to impart.

2. The interview produced no information of value. It appeared that neither von Kessel nor von Weizsäcker was prepared to renounce publicly his German allegiance and both seemed to be primarily moved by the desire for personal reinsurance [reassurance?]. In the message received from Weizsäcker the latter claimed he had means to bring about the downfall of Hitler but that for his own safety he would only communicate his proposal to a responsible British official personally known to him. Von Kessel offered to go to Switzerland ostensibly on sick leave there to establish contact with Guderian41 or von Rundstedt who he thought would be willing to negotiate peace.

3. His Majesty’s Government considers that this approach is purely a manoeuvre and that there is nothing to be gained by maintaining contact with von Kessel, which has accordingly been dropped.

4. The Soviet Government is being informed.

Washington , 16 December, 1944.

41 General Heinz Guderian, Acting Chief of the Army General Staff.

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 EW/12–2144: Telegram

[Document 336]

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, December 21, 1944—9 a.m.
[Received 3:14 p.m.]

8243. Early December days brought reports Reich leaders intended start new peace probing. It is said that all Reichswehr Ministry42 and OKH43 leaders profess that destruction German cities and publicized plans to annihilate Reich so raised German civilian and soldier morale that there is now reasonable prospect for Reich to prolong war into 1946. However, leaders condition prospect on premise that Reich does not in interim lose major part of its material resources particularly coal. Leaders also say that resistance to a Russian attempt to enter Austria and Bavaria would be as stubborn as in East Prussia and would be aided by better strategic possibilities; that OKH strategic goal was substantially attained in Aachen-Cologne area where they expect to prolong war of position materially; that battles in Saar are serious but Reich has sufficient reserves ready to prevent break through there; and that battles in Alsace are purely delaying operations.

Despite far from hopeless military picture which leaders paint, only those completely dominated by party thought are said to desire actually to prolong war another year or two. The others know that very heavy losses are sapping German national energy to point where Reich eventually would become feather in storm of mightier forces. Therefore they wish to make peace either with Russia or its western Allies whichever offers best possibility. To attain peace, Generals are prepared even to undertake struggle to liquidate Nazis and regime; but before doing so, they desire assurance only that they would not have to fight simultaneously against external enemies and that their personal security and future prospects are guaranteed.

Actually feelers seem to have been made. Reports to our Consul General at Zurich44 and from another credible source say Himmler delegate in Konstanz (on Swiss border) pretends Himmler believes he might be able to reach compromise peace with western democracies. Delegate also said there is now so little fighting on Russian front that German soldiers and officers no longer fear transfer there; Reich will soon expose new secret weapon to bring Allies to early peace; German plane output exceeds losses and there is enough food in Reich to prolong fighting at least another year. He concluded by arresting statement that greatest peril at moment for Reich is approaching breakdown of transport system.

On other hand, as at moments of similar past peace-probing, Nazi chiefs are pictured as determined to fight on even at cost of bleeding populace white in hope that losses of western adversaries would push them to consider peace. But as they are not altogether certain of attaining their end, they do utmost to assure resurrection of party by establishing future clandestine Nazi movement. Among other things, latter selects SS men for training in “communist phraseology” intended to aid them to infiltrate later into anticipated communist groups which they would then lead against democratic occupying powers. Movement also expects use many communist renegades now active leaders in Nazi party and in its ranks for infiltration.

Hitler is definitely said not to be dead; long seriously ill and incapacitated, he can be expected to return to active life. However, he will find Himmler–Bormann–Goebbels triumvirate disinclined relinquish either real or agency power which they arrogated to selves during his incapacitation. South German Volkssturm45 continues train in use of light MG carbines,46 pistols, Panzerfaust 47 and hand-grenades but must surrender all weapons after practice. Although those liable to service chafe under added heavy burden, they are said to persevere because they feel they have no alternative but to defend selves against Allied advance. South German civilians continue work hard on “formidable” West wall fortifications on right bank of Rhine. It is probably no mere coincidence that reports of actual and pending peace probing by Himmler agents and Generals (after recent purge in officer corps, each element probably acts with full knowledge if not connivance of other) reached here slightly in advance of launching of large scale German counteroffensive against Belgium and Luxembourg. Nor is it strange that probing is accompanied by usual intimidating propaganda themes—determination defend every meter German soil prolonging war into 1946, unfeasibility Russian attempt enter Reich through Austria and Bavaria, inclination of party chiefs do one thing and important general clique do another, “semi-peacefulness” of Russian front, third secret weapon, menacing difficulties from new clandestine Nazi movement, future communist Germany, determination of despairing Volkssturm fight to defend homes, “formidable” fortifications on right bank of Rhine, et cetera.

Party and military chiefs could hope that desperate display of German military vigor might be good spade work for peace probing disconcerting Anglo-American peoples and Governments if not their military leaders to point that they might waver in their steadfastness and desire to establish contact with Himmler agents here or elsewhere.

They could hope that impressive counterthrust in Belgium and Luxembourg on scale of those made several times during last two years in Russia, might also cause Russian leaders to view peace overtures as advisable. It must not be forgotten that there is no conclusive evidence that Nazi chief[s], if not also their Generals, have abandoned their fundamental Germanic illusion that, as between their adversaries and selves, they have stronger nerves and staying power. Legation recently reported intelligence indicating quite widely-shared German belief, even in high military circles, that battle spirit of all three major Allies in coalition of their enemies had materially sunk this autumn. It is, therefore, not at all impossible that supreme leadership of Nazi Germany (in which seemingly Generals must now be included) has decided as measure of despair to attempt now a sortie from “Festung Deutschland” in hope that it will shock adversaries’ nerves and consequently disorganize their military potential to extent that peace negotiations might follow. Disappointed in this hope, leaders would be expected to try bolster up German civilian and soldier morale by claiming success in unsettling winter offensive plans of western Allies.

Huddle

42 German Armed Forces Ministry.

43 Oberkommando des Heeres.

44 Sam E. Woods.

45 The Volkssturm was that part of the German Army which was conscripted late in World War II and was composed of men heretofore not used; in the armed forces, mostly those under 16 and over 60 years of age.

46 Lightweight automatic rifle.

47 German anti-tank weapon.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.0011 E.W./12–2844

[Document 337]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

His Majesty’s Ambassador is instructed to inform the United States Government of an approach made to a member of His Majesty’s Legation at Stockholm by Dahlerus48 regarding Germany, details of which are set out in the enclosed paraphrases of two telegrams from His Majesty’s Minister at Stockholm to the Foreign Office dated December 15th and December 20th. The first of these telegrams was sent by bag to London and not by telegram.

2. In reply, the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs has expressed his regret that any conversation was held with Dahlerus with reference to his journey to Germany. It was to be expected that German military support of the attack in the West would be accompanied by a deliberate attempt to sow suspicion and dissension amongst the Allies with the object of bringing about a compromise peace with one or other of them. Mr. Eden went on to say that he strongly suspected that the information given by Stegmann,49 as also the information in paragraph 4 of the longer of the two telegrams enclosed,50 may have been planted by the Germans with this purpose. Mr. Eden gave instructions that no member of the staff of His Majesty’s Legation at Stockholm was in future to enter into any discussion of this nature with Dahlerus or with anyone else. It was to be expected that a number of peace feelers would be launched and the utmost vigilance was necessary to ensure that no encouragement was being made to any.

3. His Majesty’s Ambassador at Moscow51 has been instructed to convey the above information to the Soviet Government.

Washington , December 28, 1944.

[Enclosure 1]

Paraphrase of telegram from His Majesty’s Minister at Stockholm to the Foreign Office dated December 15th, 1944

Dahlerus visited Counsellor52 on December 13 to say he had just met a German friend of his by the name of Stegmann who was on a visit to Sweden. Stegmann was married to the daughter of the former Swiss Minister at Berlin and his family was now living in Switzerland. He was solicitor of a certain Kloth who was part owner of [2 groups undecipherable] Werke manufacturers of stoves and restaurant equipment at Hildesheim. Dahlerus had known both Kloth and Stegmann previously and the former had been aware of his attempts at mediation just before the outbreak of the war. Dahlerus was convinced neither Kloth nor Stegmann had any sympathies for National Socialism and that they were both men whose word could be relied on.

According to Stegmann, Hitler had had a bad shock at the time of the attempt on his life and had had to have an operation on one of his ears. Since then he had no capacity for work and he lost interest in any subject after discussing it for ten minutes or so. Otherwise he appeared perfectly normal and was able to go about and attend superficially to business and he was in fact in Berlin on December 11. There was no question of his life being in danger as a result of the effects of the accident but he was definitely out of the running for the purposes of practical leadership.

Himmler who was now virtual dictator of Germany had achieved this position by reaching an agreement with the military with whom he was now on very close and friendly terms. All the leading military were anti-Nazi in the sense that they were opposed to party dictatorship and Himmler had gained their support by gradually abolishing all Nazi plans and ideals. In opposition to Himmler stood Ribbentrop, Ley53 and the other extremists of the Left but it was probable Goebbels had joined the Hitler [Himmler?] Camp. Goering was opposed to Himmler but he was now of no importance whatever except insofar as he was still popular with the people.

Himmler hoped to produce a German fighting force of five million military. With these he was confident he could hold the Russian front and he hoped to hold the western front long enough to cause enough losses of British and American troops to persuade the Western Powers to agree to a more reasonable settlement with Germany. Himmler had initiated no contacts with the Allies but Ribbentrop had done so and these contacts had been backed by Hitler and the old Nazi regime.

An indication of Himmler’s new policy was that during the last four weeks wives and families of all those who took part in the attempt on Hitler’s life including the family of Stauffenberg himself had been released and pensioned. It was not generally known that the clean up which followed July 20 also included the arrest and shooting of all those Germans who were attempting to reach a settlement with Russia. Himmler was a great opponent of Russia and was determined to exterminate all those with a contrary view on this question.

Dahlerus then said that he was turning over in his mind the idea of visiting Germany where he thought he could arrange possibly through his friends Stegmann and Kloth to be received by Himmler and he would take this opportunity to try to find out whether Himmler seriously thought there was any use in continuing the struggle and if not what steps he proposed to take with a view to suing for peace. Before deciding however whether to go to Germany Dahlerus asked for an assurance that if he reported result of his visit to us British Foreign Office would believe what he said. He added that he knew he had been in our black book and that there had been a move to blacklist him and he thought that as a result of this the Foreign Office might not believe a word he said; if this were the case there would be no point whatever in his carrying out his plan.

Counsellor suggested in reply that it was in the circumstances hardly reasonable to expect the Foreign Office to commit themselves to a definite answer to this question. The Foreign Office he said had no intention of encouraging Dahlerus or anyone else to sound Himmler as to his intentions and if Dahlerus really intended to pursue his plan he must do so entirely on his own initiative and without any prompting from us or any assurances from us of any kind. All that Counsellor could say was that reports of his early conversations with Goering had been reported in detail to London where they had been read with interest.

Counsellor then said that he thought it was only fair to make it clear before Dahlerus decided to go to Berlin that whatever proposal Himmler might make there was no chance whatever of His Majesty’s Government agreeing to negotiate with him in any circumstances whatever and that therefore any interest which His Majesty’s Government might have in the result of Dahlerus’s initiative would be purely of an intelligence nature. Dahlerus said that while he fully appreciated this he thought it possible that Himmler might agree to retire altogether with the whole of the rest of the Nazi gang and leave it to other elements to sue for peace.

Dahlerus accordingly agreed to withdraw his request and he is now considering whether to proceed with his plan. He will let Counsellor know in a few days’ time.

[Enclosure 2]

Paraphrase of telegram from His Majesty’s Minister at Stockholm to the Foreign Office dated December 20th, 1944

Dahlerus told Counsellor today that he now believes that Stegmann came to Stockholm to contact him on behalf of Himmler. Dahlerus added that he told Stegmann that whereas he would personally be glad to intervene between the Germans and British he could not visualise any circumstances in which the British would be prepared to talk with Himmler. Stegmann is returning to Berlin presumably to report and Dahlerus has promised to inform Counsellor if he receives an invitation to visit Himmler.

Dahlerus says he was incorrect in reporting Stegmann as having said that Stauffenberg’s wife has been released. She is only conspirators’ wife still detained but she is expected to be released shortly.

48 Birger Dahlerus, Swedish civil engineer and manufacturer.

49 For information on Stegmann, see enclosure 1.

50 Enclosure 1.

51 Sir Archibald Clark Kerr.

52 William H. Montagu-Pollock.

53 Robert Ley, leader of the German Labor Front.

The Counselor of the British Embassy (Wright) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Matthews) 740.00119 EW/1–645

[Document 338]

The Counselor of the British Embassy (Wright) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Matthews)

Washington, January 6, 1945.

Dear Doc: With reference to our Aide-Mémoire of December 28th which I left with you, about the approach made by Dahlerus to our Legation at Stockholm regarding Germany, I send you herewith a paraphrase of a telegram which the Foreign Office sent on January 2nd to our representatives at Madrid, Lisbon, Ankara, Berne, Tangier and the Holy See.

You will see that the purpose of this telegram is to ensure that no encouragement whatsoever is given to any peace overture from the Germans.

Yours ever,

Michael Wright

[Enclosure]

Paraphrase of a telegram from the Foreign Office to Madrid, Lisbon, Ankara, Berne, Tangier and the Holt See dated January 2nd, 1945

Present German counter offensive in Belgium may be accompanied or followed by renewed peace overtures from the Germans designed to divide the Allies. It is of utmost importance that the Germans should be given no encouragment to believe that we may be inclined to play. It will be equally important that we should keep our principal Allies promptly and fully informed of any such overtures. I accordingly rely upon you to ensure that instructions in my telegram under reference against any contact with any German nationals are strictly observed and that any German feelers that may come to the notice of yourself or your staff or Consular Officers (where any) under your superintendence are promptly reported to me.

Particular care should be exercised in regard to approaches from unofficial neutrals who may be suspected of being used either innocently or otherwise for the purpose of establishing contact between us and enemy quarters. No encouragement whatever should be given any such approach.

The Assistant Secretary of State (Dunn) to the Assistant Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Buxton) 740.00119 E.W./12–1144

[Document 339]

The Assistant Secretary of State (Dunn)55 to the Assistant Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Buxton)56

Washington, January 11, 1945.

Dear Ned: I have given considerable thought to General Donovan’s letter of December 11 and the paper enclosed therewith on black propaganda treatment of unconditional surrender. We feel that it is important that no promises or commitments be made to the German people in official statements of this Government and that this is the only position which can properly be taken in the light of this Government’s policy. However, if for military purposes connected with the prosecution of the war and our operations against Germany, our Joint Chiefs of Staff desire to have the Office of Strategic Services undertake certain black propaganda programs, this would appear to be a matter for their decision and responsibility. The question is, therefore, presumably one which you would wish to take up with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Sincerely yours,

James Clement Dunn

[No effort to modify the principle of unconditional surrender as applied to Germany came to fruition. In the communiqué issued at the end of the Yalta Conference, February 12, 1945, President Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill, and Marshal Stalin expressed their views thus: “Nazi Germany is doomed. The German people will only make the cost of their defeat heavier to themselves by attempting to continue a hopeless resistance.” ( Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, 1945, page 970.)

For the activities of the Psychological Warfare Division, Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force, directed at allaying the fears of German soldiers and civilians concerning surrender, see Pogue, The Supreme Command, pages 343–346.]

55 Mr. Dunn became Assistant Secretary of State on December 20, 1944.

56 Mr. Buxton was First Assistant Director of the Office of Strategic Services. On January 2, 1945, the Second Assistant Director, Mr. Cheston, had sent Mr. Dunn a letter (not printed), enclosing duplicates of the papers previously sent him by General Donovan on December 11, 1944.

Application of the principle of unconditional surrender to Bulgaria, Hungary, and RumaniaApplication of the principle of unconditional surrender to Bulgaria, Hungary, and Rumania

[340] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, January 6, 1944—4 p.m. [Received January 7—7:50 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/32572: Telegram

[341] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, January 25, 1944—2 p.m.

740.0011 European War/32572: Telegram

[342] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, March 12, 1944—6 p.m. [Received 8:33 p.m.]

740.00119 EAC/117: Telegram

[343] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] March 25, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/2434

[344] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 28, 1944—midnight.

740.00119 European War 1939/2394a: Telegram

[345] The Soviet Embassy to the Department of State

[ Washington ,] March 31, 1944.

740.00119 European War/2412

[346] Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

Washington, April 1, 1944.

740.00119 European War/2434

[347] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] April 1, 1944.

740.00119 European War/2434

[348] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Eastern European Affairs (Bohlen) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 3, 1944.

740.00119 European War/2434

[349] The Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, April 4, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/2430a

[350] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Washington, April 4, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/2428

[351] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, April 4, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 7:10 p.m.]

740.00119 European War 1939/2420: Telegram

[352] Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

Washington, April 5, 1944.

740.00119 European War/2662

[353] The Department of State to the Soviet Embassy

Washington , April 11, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/2434

[354] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, April 11, 1944—noon. [Received 6:48 p.m.]

740.00119 European War 1939/2461: Telegram

[355] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, April 12, 1944—3 p.m.

740.00119 European War 1939/2465a: Telegram

[356] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, April 17, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 9:50 p.m.]

740.00119 European War 1939/2481: Telegram

[357] Memorandum Prepared in the British Foreign Office

[ London ,] 17 April, 1944.

740.00119 E.A.C./4–1744

[358] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, April 22, 1944—midnight.

740.0011 European War 1939/34078a: Telegram

[359] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, April 25, 1944—8 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/34173b: Telegram

[360] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, April 29, 1944—11 p.m. [Received April 30—5 p.m.]

740.00119 European War 1939/2551: Telegram

[361] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton)

Washington, May 1, 1944—5 p.m.

740.00119 European War 1939/2551: Telegram

[362] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, May 1, 1944—10 p.m. [Received May 2—1:12 p.m.]

740.00119 European War 1939/2559: Telegram

[363] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, May 2, 1944—noon. [Received May 2—7:15 a.m.]

740.00119 European War 1939/2558: Telegram

[364] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, May 2, 1944—8 p.m. [Received May 3—8:45 a.m.]

740.00119 European War 1939/2561: Telegram

[365] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, May 3, 1944—9 p.m. [Received May 3—6:39 p.m.]

740.00119 European War 1939/2563: Telegram

[366] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, May 3, 1944. [Received May 3—7:56 p.m.]

740.00119 European War 1939/2564: Telegram

[367] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, May 5, 1944—7 p.m.

740.00119 European War 1939/2564: Telegram

[368] The Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, May 10, 1944.

740.00119 European War 1939/2669

[369] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Murphy), at Algiers

Washington, June 2, 1944—11 p.m.

740.00119 European War 1939/2615: Telegram

[370] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 3, 1944—5 p.m. [Received June 3—1:40 p.m.]

740.0011 LCC/25: Telegram

[371] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, June 9, 1944—10 a.m.

740.00119 European War 1939/2561: Telegram

[372] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, June 20, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 10:02 p.m.]

740.00119 European War 1939/2688: Telegram

[373] The Secretary of State to Certain American Diplomatic Officers

Washington, June 22, 1944—noon.

800.00 Summaries/39n: Circular telegram

[374] Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Southern European Affairs (Cannon)

[Washington,] August 28, 1944.

740.0011 EW/8–2844

[375] The Secretary of State to Certain American Diplomatic and Consular Officers

Washington, September 2, 1944—11 p.m.

740.00119 E.W./9–244: Circular telegram

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/32572: Telegram

[Document 340]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, January 6, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received January 7—7:50 a.m.]

43. Personal for the President and the Secretary: Bill Donovan1 arrived in Moscow December 23 and left today January 6. His departure was held up over a week by weather.

On arrival I took him to see Molotov2 to whom he described the general purposes and activities of his organization and in more detail his program in the Balkans. He offered to furnish the appropriate Soviet officials with full information on these matters and to cooperate with them to any degree desired. Molotov showed considerable interest in Bill and everything he said, especially about Bulgaria.

After consultation with his associates, Molotov arranged for Bill to meet certain of his opposite numbers in the NKVD.3 At these discussions, in which General Deane4 participated, it was definitely agreed to collaborate closely, to establish reciprocal liaison representation in Washington and Moscow, exchange intelligence material, special devices and equipment, and to carry on joint operations in such theatres as might be agreed. The above program was approved and authorized by the highest Soviet authorities. The Soviets have selected a representative to go to Washington, whom we met, and Bill is sending Colonel John Haskell, son of General William Haskell,5 to be attached to our military mission in Moscow for this purpose.

His delay here made it possible for Bill to work out these arrangements in detail, and he has also had an opportunity to see certain other people in Moscow and obtain at first hand significant information as to the Soviet attitude on subversive activities against enemy morale and an appreciation of the psychology of the Germans on this front.

Probably as a result of a disagreement with Molotov over his arbitrary refusal to allow my plane to take Bill to Cairo, to which I took strenuous objection and which I finally got reversed, the Soviets went to great lengths to placate both of us. As a consequence the NKVD officials came to the Embassy for a midnight discussion and last night three of them dined at the Embassy, as far as I know, unprecedented occurrences in any foreign Embassy.

In my talk with Molotov alone on December 31 he brought up on his own initiative the question of the meaning of “unconditional surrender” as applied to the various satellite countries, and asked whether I had any information on our attitude. I explained that I had none except as had been discussed with him by General Donovan in relation to Bulgaria. I said that we had both read with interest the Pravda article on December 27 concerning Bulgaria published since our talk (summarized in our no. 2333, December 276 ) and that we had been struck by the similarity of views expressed in that article with those expressed by General Donovan. In reply to my inquiry, Molotov indicated that he was in general agreement with the article.

I told him General Donovan was planning to discuss the matter with the President on his return and that in the meantime we had hoped that Molotov might be able to give advice on the subject because of the Soviet diplomatic contact with Bulgaria.7 He said that they did not have sufficient information to reach a conclusion that they were working on it. His only specific suggestion was that they placed great importance on the continuation of the bombing of Bulgaria which they believed would assist the Bulgarians in becoming more sensible.

Molotov continued that Marshal Stalin8 at Tehran9 had outlined the terms which the Soviet Government were prepared to accord Finland10 and, as he recalled it, the President and Mr. Churchill11 had expressed no objection to these terms. I said I understood the Swedish Government was pressing the Finns to make a move in this direction, to which Molotov replied that it always took the Finns a long time to make up their minds. Molotov added that they were also studying the question of Roumania and Hungary.

The impression that Bill and I have got from the two conversations with Molotov is that the Soviets want us to take the initiative in connection with Bulgaria but that we can count on their cooperation and assistance if a definite proposal is presented to them.

As a result, Bill has prepared specific recommendations to the Joint Chiefs-of-Staff which he is forwarding to them with copy to you for your information. I concur in these recommendations.

Harriman

1 Maj. Gen. William J. Donovan, Director, Office of Strategic Services (OSS).

2 Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov, People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union.

3 Commissariat of Internal Affairs of the Soviet Union.

4 Maj. Gen. John R. Deane, Chief, United States Military Mission in the Soviet Union.

5 Lt. Gen. William N. Haskell, U.S.A. (retired), was a member of the staff in charge of field operations, Office of Foreign Relief and Rehabilitation Operations, Department of State.

6 Not printed.

7 Alexander Andreyevich Lavrishchev was the regular Minister of the Soviet Union in Bulgaria until September 1944. At the beginning of 1944 he was temporarily away on other duties and the mission was in the hands of Vladimir Georgiyevich Dekanozov, an Assistant People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union, who remained until March 1944.

8 Marshal Iosif Vissarionovich Stalin, Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars of the Soviet Union.

9 For documentation relating to the conference at Tehran, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehran, 1943, pp. 457 ff.

10 See vol. iii, pp. 556 ff.

11 British Prime Minister Winston S. Churchill.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 740.0011 European War/32572: Telegram

[Document 341]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, January 25, 1944—2 p.m.

144. Personal for the Ambassador. Your 43, January 6, 4 p.m. I took up with the President the question of the desirability of defining the term “unconditional surrender”13 which Molotov raised with you on December 31. In his memorandum in reply14 the President stated that he does not favor the idea of any discussions for the purpose of defining the term “unconditional surrender” since he feels that any definition which might be agreed upon now would probably have to be modified or changed the first time one of our enemies indicated a desire to surrender. He believes that since the Soviet Union, Great Britain, and the United States have agreed not to make any peace except after mutual consultation, the case of each individual enemy country should be considered on its merits on that basis. The President further suggests that for the propaganda effect on the German people utilization should be made of that portion of his Christmas Eve speech15 which referred to future treatment of the German people (I am informed you have the text of the President’s Christmas Eve speech). In the President’s opinion the best definition of the meaning of the term “unconditional surrender” is to be found in the account of Lee’s surrender to Grant with which you are familiar.

When a suitable occasion presents itself you might inform Molotov that this Government does not consider it wise to attempt at this time to make any general public definition of the term “unconditional surrender” but rather to deal with the case of each individual enemy country as it arises.16

Repeated to London.17

Hull

13 See memorandum by the Secretary of State, January 14, p. 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265].

14 January 17, ibid.

15 Address by President Roosevelt in a radio broadcast from Hyde Park, N.Y.; for text, see Department of State Bulletin, January 1, 1944, p. 3.

16 In his telegram 273, January 27, noon, Ambassador Harriman stated he would carry out the instructions (740.0011 European War/32897).

17 As telegram 606.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/117: Telegram

[Document 342]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, March 12, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received 8:33 p.m.]

2018. Personal to the Secretary. Since I got news of your return I have been working on a draft summary of the general situation here which I hope will be helpful to you.

I would like you to consider this cable as a first installment, limited to the situation in the Advisory Commission.18

[Here follows a summary of the status of negotiations in the European Advisory Commission.]

With respect to the satellite countries, we have now received for our guidance materials for surrender terms with respect to Hungary, Rumania and Bulgaria.19 These materials, which are practically identical for all three countries and are substantially the same as those first sent us in connection with Germany, envisage straight terms of unconditional surrender, designed to give the military authorities of the three major Allies all necessary powers over the peoples and authorities in those countries following the termination of hostilities. They make no reference to the two outstanding practical problems which are uppermost in the minds of people in those countries at this stage in connection with termination of hostilities; namely: What they are to do with the German troops by whom their territories are now occupied and to what extent they may hope to escape the hardships of similar occupation by the Russians in case they do surrender. Our unwillingness to treat these questions in drawing up surrender terms is in line with our policy of unconditional surrender, which calls on the enemy countries to place themselves in our hands, and leaves for future settlement all decisions and commitments affecting their subsequent treatment.

I shall of course proceed to seek agreement in the Commission along these lines, as soon as the Russian delegate is willing to undertake such discussion. But I think you may want to give attention to the possibility that while we are proceeding—or waiting to proceed—on this basis in the Commission, many major questions of Government, territory or international position affecting the future status of the satellite countries may actually be in process of predetermination to one degree or another by means of preliminary feelers and exchanges of various kinds in Eastern Europe. People in all those countries have noted with the greatest interest that the exchanges between the Finns and the Russians20 have revolved around the realities created by the presence of German troops in Finland and by the proximity of Russian troops to the Finnish border. If they get the idea that the Russians would be prepared to enter into similarly concrete discussions with them, their interest in entertaining our terms of unconditional surrender—except possibly by prearrangement with the Russians—would be slight. You may wish to note in this connection my 2017, March 12, Comea 40.21

I realize that this situation may have been clearly taken into account in Washington, and that my instructions may form only part of a general picture. But there did seem to us here to be a danger that unless the implementation of our unconditional surrender policy in the Commission were very carefully coordinated with diplomatic action taken elsewhere, the net practical effect might be to deprive us of the chance to make our voice heard in many of the vital political settlements affecting the future of these countries; and I thought it might be helpful to you to have this picture as we see it.

Winant

18 Ambassador Winant was United States Representative to the European Advisory Commission. For correspondence regarding United States participation in the work of the European Advisory Commission, see pp. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1] ff.

19 For correspondence regarding the negotiations by the Allies of an armistice with the Hungarian Government, signed at Moscow, January 20, 1945, see vol. iii, pp. 847 ff. For correspondence regarding the negotiations leading to the signing of an armistice with Rumania at Moscow, September 13 (as of September 12), 1944, see vol. iv, pp. 133 ff. For correspondence regarding the negotiations leading to the signing of the armistice with Bulgaria at Moscow, October 28, 1944, see vol. iii, pp. 300 ff.

20 For correspondence regarding the interest of the United States in the Allied Armistice with Finland of September 19, 1944, see vol. iii, pp. 556 ff.

21 Not printed; it transmitted press reviews. Comea was the series designation lor telegrams from London dealing with matters before the European Advisory Commission.

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.00119 European War 1939/2434

[Document 343]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] March 25, 1944.

The British Ambassador22 has given me the attached telegram23 from Mr. Eden24 recommending that the principle of unconditional surrender as laid down at Casablanca25 and confirmed at Moscow26 be abandoned in the case of the Axis satellite states in order that, for purposes of both propaganda and peace feelers, all three Governments should be free to decide in consultation, according to the circumstances, whether they should insist on unconditional surrender. In the case of Germany and Japan, the principle of unconditional surrender will continue to apply.

While the British telegram correctly points out that the Soviet terms to Finland definitely do not impose unconditional surrender, such terms are not required under the Joint Four Nation Declaration for the reason that Finland is not a member of the Axis, whereas the other satellites are. Although the premise of the British reasoning may not be strictly correct, I recommend, however, that we concur in the proposal in order to obtain more flexibility vis-à-vis the Axis satellite states.

The events of the past few days27 make it unlikely that the question of surrender terms for Hungary and Rumania will have any immediate importance. Furthermore, Mr. Molotov has indicated that he is not yet prepared to discuss Bulgarian surrender terms in the European Advisory Commission currently meeting in London.28 Nevertheless, for the purpose of handling either propaganda or peace feelers, I think it would be advantageous now to free ourselves from the Moscow decision on the unconditional surrender of Axis satellite states.29

22 Viscount Halifax.

23 Telegram dated March 17, not printed; it was received in the Department March 20.

24 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

25 Communiqué issued on January 26, 1943, after conference between President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill at Casablanca, January 14–24, 1943; for text, see Department of State Bulletin, January 30, 1943, p. 93. The records of the Casablanca Conference are scheduled for publication in a subsequent volume of Foreign Relations.

26 Declaration of Four Nations on General Security, signed at Moscow, October 30, 1943; for text, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 755.

27 Military occupation of Hungary by Germany and setting up of new regime under German pressure.

28 See telegram 924, March 19, 11 p.m., from Moscow, vol. iii, p. 316.

29 A handwritten notation on the file copy reads: “No—The British Foreign Office has always been back of this & it is N.G. FDR.”

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 European War 1939/2394a: Telegram

[Document 344]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 28, 1944—midnight.

2405–[2407]. Department’s 2406 and 2407 constitute Sections Two and Three of this message. The Department believes that it would be useful at the present moment for the three principal Allies to agree upon the terms of a statement to be directed to Hungary, Rumania and Bulgaria for the purpose of turning present events in those countries to Allied advantage. Such a statement would be designed to encourage the small Axis satellites to withdraw from the war against the Allies and, so far as possible, turn their forces against the Germans.

In conformity with the agreed policy whereby the three principal Allies consult and keep each other informed in such matters, the Department, after consultation with the American military authorities, thinks that a text somewhat as follows might serve as a suitable draft: 2406. “Through the fateful policy of their recent leaders, the people of Hungary are suffering the humiliation of German occupation. Rumania is trembling under the Nazi threat while continuing to fight the Nazi war. Bulgaria is under the Nazi sway.

“In order to point out the road to freedom for these unhappy victims of Hitler’s evil devices and again to give them warning at this late hour, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and the United States have agreed that: “1. The small Axis nations, Hungary, Rumania and Bulgaria, despite their realization of the inevitability of a crushing Nazi defeat and their desire to get out of the war, are by their present policies and attitudes contributing materially to the strength of the German war machine.

“2. These nations still have it within their power, by withdrawing from the war and ceasing their collaboration with Germany and by resisting the hated invader by every possible means, to shorten the European struggle, diminish their own ultimate sacrifices and contribute to the Allied victory.

“3. The prospects of these countries for future existence as independent states, the right freely to choose their own governments, the preservation of their rightful territories, and the avoidance of military devastation cannot be enhanced, but only diminished, by their continued collaboration with Nazi Germany.

“4. There is no question but that the longer these nations continue their participation in the war and their collaboration with Germany the more disastrous will be the consequences to them and the more rigorous will be the terms which will be imposed upon them.

“5. The responsibility of Hungary, Rumania and Bulgaria for their participation in the war at the side of Nazi Germany places upon them the necessity of deciding now, while yet there is time for them to contribute to the inevitable Allied victory, whether they wish to persist in their present misguided and inglorious course.”

2407. Please communicate the foregoing to the Foreign Office and inform the Department of its reaction and of any substantial modifications suggested.

We think the matter could be more expeditiously handled if the British would undertake to communicate the statement to the countries concerned.

The Department is telegraphing to Moscow30 on this matter, suggesting that Harriman acquaint you with the Soviet views.

Hull

30 Telegrams 731 and 732, March 29, 2 p.m., and 3 p.m., respectively; not printed.

The Soviet Embassy to the Department of State 740.00119 European War/2412

[Document 345]

The Soviet Embassy to the Department of State

Memorandum

On March 19, the British Ambassador, Mr. Kerr, sent a letter to Mr. V. M. Molotov, People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs and, on behalf of the British Government, informed him that the British Government gave consideration to the question of application of the principle of unconditional surrender in regard to European countries—satellites of Germany, in the light, as it was said in the letter, of the new situation developed as a result of the terms which were proposed by the Soviet Government to Finland and which, as it is known, do not contain a demand of unconditional surrender and provide negotiations on certain questions.

The letter contains a summary as to how the British Government interprets the formula “unconditional surrender” and points out in detail the disadvantages which may arise for the Allies in the case of strict application of this principle in regard to the European satellite countries and expresses the thought that, on the contrary, non-application of this principle may in certain cases be advantageous for the Allies, the policy of whom should be that of withdrawing small countries from the war, as it is said in the letter, as soon as possible.

The letter further says that while it is desirable to insist on unconditional surrender in the case of Germany, it is not necessary that the same formula is to be applied as obligatory to small European countries.

Having in view that the principle of the unconditional surrender in regard to all Axis countries with whom correspondingly are in a state of war the Soviet, British and American governments was confirmed at the Moscow Conference, the British Government in the above-mentioned letter asks “whether the Soviet Government, on its part, agrees that all the three governments be freed from the Moscow decision as far as the small European Axis countries are concerned, in regard to their propaganda in these countries, as well as in connection with any peace moves, which these countries may undertake, in order that in the future the three governments, as far as these countries are concerned, were free to decide, in the light of existing circumstances and, after consultation with each other, whether to insist or not to insist on the unconditional surrender.”

At the end of the letter the Soviet Government was asked to give a speedy reply in view of the fact that serious appeals for peace from the Rumanian, Hungarian and Bulgarian governments may be received. It was also stated in the letter that a similar request was being made to the United States Government.

On March 29, the Soviet Government gave the following reply to Ambassador Kerr’s letter: “In connection with your letter of March 19, in regard to the application of unconditional surrender to European countries—satellites of Hitlerite Germany, the Soviet Government informs, that, as it was already clear from the Soviet peace terms to Finland, the Soviet Government considers it possible, under certain circumstances, not to apply the principles of unconditional surrender to the satellites of Germany to what [sic] and the British Government agreed.

The Soviet Government considers that the demand of unconditional surrender from European satellite countries under certain circumstances may yield not a positive but a negative effect, helping not to weaken but to strengthen the bonds of satellite countries with Germany and thereby delaying the process of disintegration of these bonds. Besides, the principal task of the Allied governments in regard to the countries—satellites of Germany, especially under the present conditions, must be that of assisting the rupture between these countries and the Hitlerite Government and their going over to the side of the Allies for the purpose of hastening the defeat of Germany. Proceeding from the above-mentioned considerations, the Soviet Government regards favorably the proposal of the British Government that, in modification of the decisions of the Moscow Conference, the three Allied governments, in each separate case, could make decisions after having consulted each other, whether they should insist on the unconditional surrender in regard to a particular satellite country, or, instead of that, to put forward moderate concrete terms of agreement between this country and the Allied countries.

As to the question of applying the principle of unconditional surrender to Germany, the Soviet Government considers that this principle should not be subjected to any doubt and that it should be preserved in regard to Germany to the full extent.”

The Soviet Government, until making final decision regarding the proposal of the British Government, would like also to know opinion of the American Government on this question. The Soviet Government would appreciate a speedy reply from the Government of the United States.

[ Washington ,] March 31, 1944.

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War/2434

[Document 346]

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

Washington, April 1, 1944.

I think this31 should be handled differently. It would be a mistake, in my judgment, to abandon or make an exception in the case of the words “unconditional surrender”. As a matter of fact, whom do we mean those words to apply to? Evidently our enemies.

In August, 1941, at the time of the Atlantic Charter,32 and in January, 1943, at the time of Casablanca, Hungary, Bulgaria, Rumania and Finland were the Axis satellites. But they were not our enemies in the same sense that Germany and Italy were. These four little satellite states were enemies under the duress of Germany and Italy.

I think it is a mistake to make exceptions. Italy surrendered unconditionally but was at the same time given many privileges. This should be so in the event of the surrender of Bulgaria or Rumania or Hungary or Finland. Lee surrendered unconditionally to Grant but immediately Grant told him that his officers should take their horses home for the Spring plowing. That is the spirit I want to see abroad—but it does not apply to Germany. Germany understands only one kind of language.

F[ranklin] D. R[oosevelt]

31 See memorandum of March 25 to President Roosevelt, p. 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343].

32 Joint statement by President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill, August 14, 1941, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. i, p. 367.

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.00119 European War/2434

[Document 347]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 33

[Washington,] April 1, 1944.

The Soviet Ambassador last night handed me the attached memorandum34 concerning the British suggestion to the Soviet Government that the principle of unconditional surrender as adopted at the Moscow Conference be abandoned in the case of Axis satellite states.

You will note that the Soviet Government appears to favor the British suggestion, but would like to have the opinion of this Government before making its final decision. In view of your decision on the British proposal as set forth in the memorandum to me of April 1, I shall inform the Soviet Ambassador that this Government does not favor at this time any modification of the principle of unconditional surrender as applied to the satellite states.

Cordell Hull

33 Not transmitted until April 3. Notation by President Roosevelt: “CH OK FDR”.

34 Dated March 31, p. 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345].

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Eastern European Affairs (Bohlen) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War/2434

[Document 348]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Eastern European Affairs (Bohlen) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 3, 1944.

Mr. Secretary: Although in our memorandum of April 1 we have told the President that on the basis of his memorandum of that date regarding a similar suggestion from the British we would tell the Soviet Ambassador here that this Government does not favor any modification of the principle of unconditional surrender for the Axis satellite states, I believe you might wish to ask the President to reconsider his position on this question. Military operations in areas involving the satellite states are developing so rapidly that I feel if the United States should be the one to impose any objection to flexibility in regard to their surrender favored both by the British and Soviet Governments, we might be put in the position of responsibility for stiffened satellite resistance.

I feel quite certain that the Soviet Government would not understand and would indeed resent our refusal to accede to a request put forward by both the British and Soviet Governments. The Soviets would be very apt to regard it as evidence that we wish to have their armies encounter maximum resistance from the satellite countries. I venture to suggest, therefore, that this question be reopened with the President perhaps in the form of a personal note from you to him a suggested draft of which is attached.35

Charles E. Bohlen

35 The note was sent on April 4; printed infra.

The Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.00119 European War 1939/2430a

[Document 349]

The Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, April 4, 1944.

My Dear Mr. President: I have received your memorandum of April 1, 1944 in which you express your disapproval of the British suggestion that there be an exception made to the unconditional surrender principle as applied to the satellite Axis states in Europe. Since that time you will have received the Soviet memorandum which I forwarded to you on the same date in which the Soviet Government expresses its support of the British suggestion.

Although I told you that because of your decision on the British request I would inform the Soviet Ambassador of the views of this Government on this question, upon further reflection I am very much afraid that the Soviet Government will not understand our refusal to accede to the desire of both the British and Soviet Governments on this point. Since the Soviet Government itself has to some extent laid down without objection from us definite conditions in the case of Finland, I am sure they will not understand why there should be any objection to doing the same in the case of Rumania and Hungary as in their opinion there is a definite military advantage to be gained. We might find ourselves in the position of being accused of having rendered more difficult the Soviet military task.

I hope you will let me have your views in the light of the above considerations and in the meantime I will withhold reply to the British and Soviet Ambassadors.

Faithfully yours,

Cordell Hull

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2428

[Document 350]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Washington, April 4, 1944.

Dear Mr. Hull: You will recall that on March 20th I left with you an Aide-Mémoire 35a about the application of the principle of unconditional surrender to minor Axis European States, explaining that a similar approach was being made to the Soviet Government. I now enclose a copy of a telegram from our Ambassador at Moscow36 giving the reply of the Soviet Government.

Can you now tell me anything more about the United States position?

Yours very sincerely,

Halifax

35a Not printed.

36 Dated March 30, not printed; it gave substance of the communication quoted in memorandum from the Soviet Embassy, March 31, p. 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2420: Telegram

[Document 351]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, April 4, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 7:10 p.m.]

2718. The text of the prepared statement to be communicated to Bulgaria, Hungary and Rumania contained in the Department’s 2405, March 28, 12 p.m. was communicated promptly to the Foreign Office and we have now received a reply dated April 4 stating that the British Government are quite prepared to associate themselves with the declaration provided the Soviet Government are ready to do likewise. The note continues: “We would suggest, however, the following minor amendments to the text: (A) In the first line we suggest the omission of the word ‘recent’. Admiral Horthy37 was and still is the leader of Hungary. On the other hand, the recent Prime Minister, Kallay,38 drew down on Hungary a German occupation precisely because he was trying to get away from the Axis. There is, therefore, no particular reason to single him out for odium while leaving Admiral Horthy and the present pro-German Government out of account. We also think that the words ‘the Government in Bulgaria has sold the country to Germany’ should be substituted for the words ‘Bulgaria is under the Nazi sway’ (which seems to suggest a German occupation à la Hongroise).

(B) The word ‘small’ should be omitted from line 1 of paragraph 1.

(C) The word ‘and’ should be inserted between the words ‘sacrifices’ and ‘to’ in the last line of paragraph 2.39

You will have seen the declaration which the Soviet Government issued yesterday about their attitude towards Rumania.40 In the last paragraph it is stated that ‘the Soviet Government declares that it has no intention of taking possession of any portion of Rumanian territory or of changing the existing social order in Rumania and that the entry of Soviet troops into Rumanian territory is dictated exclusively by military necessity and the continued resistance of enemy forces.’

It occurs to me that this Soviet declaration may necessitate some amendment to paragraph 3 of your proposed declaration, which implies that unless Rumania ceases collaboration with Germany, she may forfeit her right as an independent state. I do not think we need alter the text ourselves but the Soviet Government may draw attention to this point in their reply. I should be grateful if you would let me know in due course the nature of the Soviet Government’s reply to your approach.”

Winant

37 Adm. Nicholas (Miklos) Horthy, Hungarian Regent.

38 Nicholas Kallay, Hungarian Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs until German military occupation, March 19–22.

39 In telegram 2702, April 6, midnight, the Department replied that paragraphs A and B were acceptable, while C apparently was due to a garble in the American draft (740.00119 European War 1939/2420). In telegram 825, April 6, 11 p.m., the Department informed the Ambassador in the Soviet Union of its approval of the amendments in A and B provided they were acceptable to the Soviet Government (740.00119 European War 1939/2396b Suppl.).

40  Vol. iv, p. 165.

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War/2662

[Document 352]

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

Washington, April 5, 1944.

I have your memorandum of April fourth in regard to exceptions to be made to the unconditional surrender principle as applied to the satellite Axis states in Europe. I understand the problem thoroughly but I want at all costs to prevent it from being said that the unconditional surrender principle has been abandoned. There is real danger if we start making exceptions to the general principle before a specific case arises.

We all know that this would happen if we were to make any exceptions to the principle which would thereafter apply in all cases.

I understand perfectly well that from time to time there will have to be exceptions not to the surrender principle but to the application of it in specific cases. That is a very different thing from changing the principle.

If the Soviet and British Governments will advise us of any case of this kind, I am quite sure that we will agree with them. This should be made clear to both of these Governments. Then they cannot accuse us of having rendered more difficult the Soviet military task.

F[ranklin] D. R[oosevelt]

The Department of State to the Soviet Embassy 740.00119 European War 1939/2434

[Document 353]

The Department of State to the Soviet Embassy

Memorandum

The United States Government has given careful study to the memorandum of March 31 from the Soviet Ambassador setting forth the views of the Soviet Government concerning the proposal of the British Government that the principle of unconditional surrender be modified in the case of the European satellite countries.

It is noted that the Soviet Government believes that under certain conditions the retention of the principle of unconditional surrender as applied to the satellite countries might delay rather than hasten their rupture with Germany and, therefore, the Soviet Government regards favorably the proposal of the British Government that the three Governments represented at the Moscow Conference should be free in each individual case to decide after consultation with each other whether the principle of unconditional surrender should be retained in regard to a particular satellite country or modified by the presentation of moderate, concrete terms. It is further noted that the Soviet Government considers that the principle of unconditional surrender should however be retained to the full in regard to Germany.

After careful consideration of the proposal of the British Government and the views of the Soviet Government thereon, the United States Government has come to the conclusion that it is undesirable to make any general departure in principle from the doctrine of unconditional surrender. Any such departure in principle would inevitably serve as a precedent for all future cases. This Government would prefer that the general principle of unconditional surrender be retained intact and consideration be given to any modification on the basis of specific cases. This Government, rather than abandon the principle of unconditional surrender in regard to the Axis satellite countries as a group, is prepared to give favorable consideration to a modification of this principle in the specific case of any one of such satellite countries when either the British or Soviet Government believes such modification to be advantageous to the common cause.

The British Government is being informed of the above views of the United States Government.41

Washington , April 11, 1944.

41 By a memorandum of the same date to the British Embassy, not printed.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2461: Telegram

[Document 354]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, April 11, 1944—noon.
[Received 6:48 p.m.]

1250. Department’s 731, March 29, 2 p.m.42 In a note from Molotov dated April 10 Molotov states that the Soviet Government is prepared in principle to agree with the proposal of the United States Government regarding a statement of the three Allied Powers to the satellite countries of Germany, but that the Soviet Government considers it necessary that the declaration in question should be addressed not only to Rumania, Hungary and Bulgaria, but also to Finland, which country is participating in the war on the side of Germany and is a satellite of that country. The note continues that, if the United States Government agrees in principle to the Soviet proposal,43 corrections in the text of the statement will be presented by the Soviet Government.

Sent to Department. Repeated to London.

Harriman

42 Not printed.

43 The Department indicated its agreement in telegram 902, April 13, midnight, and at the same time informed the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in telegram 2946.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 740.00119 European War 1939/2465a: Telegram

[Document 355]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, April 12, 1944—3 p.m.

881. On Saturday, April 1, the Soviet Ambassador left with me a memorandum44 containing the exchange of communications between the British Ambassador in Moscow and Mr. Molotov concerning the British proposal that the principle of unconditional surrender be modified in so far as satellite countries are concerned although retained in regard to Germany. The Soviet reply expresses concurrence with the British view and agrees with the suggestion that British, American, and Soviet Governments should be released from the Moscow decision concerning the application of the unconditional surrender principle to the satellite powers. In this memorandum the Soviet Government states that before making final decision regarding the British proposal it would like to know the opinion of the American Government on this question. (As you can obtain from your British colleague the full text of these communications, the text of the Soviet memorandum is not being telegraphed to you.)

Having received from the British Embassy here a similar proposal45 concerning the abandonment of the principle of unconditional surrender in the case of the Axis satellite states, it was submitted to the President prior to the receipt of the Soviet memorandum. The President has replied expressing strong disapproval of the British suggestion and insisting that the principle of unconditional surrender should be preserved intact not only for Germany but for the Axis satellite countries as well.

After receiving the Soviet memorandum supporting the British position the question was submitted to the President for possible reconsideration. He has replied that he is still opposed to any general departure from the principle of unconditional surrender before a specific case arises. He feels to do so would be to start a general abandonment of the principle as a whole and that any exception would serve as a precedent which would apply in all future cases. The President, however, understanding that from time to time the application of this principle to specific cases will have to be modified, is prepared to consult with the British and Soviet Governments in the case of any particular satellite country.

In the light of the President’s decision we are replying to the British and Soviet Governments through their Ambassadors here along the following lines:

[Here follows summary of memorandum to the Soviet Embassy, April 11, printed on page 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 353].]

Sent to Moscow, repeated to London.46

Hull

44 Dated March 31, p. 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345].

45 See memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt, March 25, p. 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343].

46 As telegram 2878.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2481: Telegram

[Document 356]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, April 17, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 9:50 p.m.]

1321. In reply to my note pursuant to the Department’s 902, April 13, midnight,47 a note from Molotov dated April 16 states that the Soviet Government agrees to the original text of the Declaration of the Three Allied Powers with the changes set forth in my note but with one amendment. The Soviet Government proposes that the first paragraph be worded as follows: “Through the fateful policy of their leaders, the people of Hungary are suffering the humiliation of German occupation. Rumania is still bound to the Nazis in a war now bringing devastation to its own people. The Governments of Bulgaria and Finland have sold their countries to Germany and persist in remaining in the war at Germany’s side.”

The note concludes by stating that should the United States Government agree to this change the Soviet Government would not object if this declaration were transmitted to the respective countries and it would be prepared to publish the declaration in the Soviet press.

Sent to Department, repeated to London.

Harriman

47 See footnote 43, p. 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355].

Memorandum Prepared in the British Foreign Office 740.00119 E.A.C./4–1744

[Document 357]

Memorandum Prepared in the British Foreign Office 48

(U 2769/491/G)

British Interests in South-Eastern Europe

I. Introduction.

In the Moscow Four-Power Declaration His Majesty’s Government agreed to take a share in united action for the organisation and maintenance of peace and security and for the enforcement of surrender terms on enemy states. The fulfilment of this pledge will involve British action in South Eastern Europe. This area contains four enemy states, Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria and Roumania. The many political and economic problems of this area, if left unresolved, may present [prevent?] the establishment of peace and security and threaten their maintenance in the future.

2. Great Britain’s interest in South Eastern Europe is first her general interest in world peace and prosperity. As a world power dependent for her own prosperity on international trade and with possessions in every continent she cannot disinterest herself from disorders in any part of the world. Many recent wars have started in the Balkans and, if pre-war antagonisms are not removed, South-Eastern Europe will remain a potential storm centre. By abdicating our responsibilities for the general settlement of this region we may moreover encourage the growth of zones of influence leading to the division of Europe into rival camps under the leadership respectively of the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics which in the long run is bound to be detrimental to Anglo-Soviet relations. Alternatively prolonged chaos in South-East Europe or the establishment of regimes imposed against the wishes of the populations may soon give Germany the opportunity of reasserting her political and economic influence in these regions either in the guise of “Champion against Bolshevism” or as the guardian of law and order.

3. South-Eastern Europe has moreover particular historical and geographical significance for this country. It is the road to the Middle East. Unrest in the Balkans may spread to adjacent areas which are of vital importance to the British Empire because of our lines of communication through the Mediterranean and Red Sea and the oil supplies in Iraq and Persia, while the effective domination of South-Eastern Europe by a rival Great Power would constitute a direct threat to these vital interests.

4. Against this background the following table of probable or possible commitments has been drafted in an order of priority, with the supporting reasons. It assumes: (i) That the Russians will claim sole occupation of Roumania, with or without the part of Transylvania transferred to Hungary by the 1940 Vienna Award,49

(ii) That Germany (apart from Austria) is outside the scope of the desired appreciation.

II. Inescapable Commitments.

(1). Austria. The establishment of a free and independent Austria was agreed upon at the Moscow Conference. In view of the present complete integration of Austrian administration with that of Germany it will be necessary to set up an interim Allied administration to carry on the business of government until local organs of self-government can be restored. Otherwise there will be chaos. Tasks such as demobilisation and military and economic disarmament will have to be carried out under the orders of the Allied High Commission at Berlin as part of the military control of Germany.

The Russians have put before the European Advisory Commission a suggestion for the joint occupation of Austria, and it is recommended that we should bear an equal share in such occupation. The combatant forces required should not be very great since the tasks of occupation would be mainly political and administrative. There would no doubt have to be a joint Allied central authority at Vienna and the remainder of the country would be divided geographically into zones of occupation.

As a corollary it would be necessary to station Allied forces in the Trieste area in order to provide a secure base and lines of communication for Allied troops and agencies in Austria and Central Europe (see also under (4) below).

(2). The Dodecanese. Occupation of these islands seems essential to prevent a Greek-Turkish-Italian conflict. His Majesty’s Government have already informed both the Greek and Turkish Governments that they propose to occupy the Dodecanese until a final decision is taken as to their ownership. The Russians have so far not expressed any interest in this area and we should be ready to accept this occupation, like the stationing of troops in Greece, as a purely British commitment.

(3). Greece. It is suggested that the commitment on the mainland and the islands should be limited to the despatch of a military mission, to supervise relief and to restore lines of communications in the initial phase. Plans are being prepared and will be submitted through S.A.C. Mediterranean.50 A small combatant force to guard supply dumps etc. may be required.

If troops are available, it may be desirable to consider in addition the despatch of a small combatant force, not more than two brigades, temporarily to Athens to support the interim Greek administration which it is hoped may be set up there as a prelude to the restoration of constitutional Government in Greece.

In the event of our assuming any military commitments in Greece it is suggested that these might best be met from some force stationed in Salonika, which would be able to provide, in addition, for any commitment in Bulgaria (q.v. in paragraph 5 below) and would also be capable of safeguarding rail communications with Yugoslavia.

III. Desirable Commitments.

Items (1) and (2) and (3) above represent therefore inescapable British commitments. Items (4) to (7) below are arranged in order of suggested importance:

(4) North East Italian Frontier. Over and above the commitment for the maintenance of communications with Austria (see (1) above), additional forces may be required in Venezia Giulia and Istria in order to prevent an Italo-Yugoslav conflict, to supervise the frontier settlement between Italy and the new Yugoslav and Austrian states, and to maintain any interim administration set up by the Allies.

(5) Bulgaria. If Bulgaria comes to terms with the Allies before the end of the war there may be no question of military occupation during the post-war period. If she does not, however, it seems inevitable that the Russians will claim at least a large share in the occupation though they are not at present at war with Bulgaria. Our interest lies in preventing the extension of Soviet influence towards the Straits and the Mediterranean. It is therefore suggested that, in addition to British membership of any Allied control machinery in Bulgaria, a British force should be sent to Bulgaria in order (a) to “show the flag” by participating in any military occupation there may be; (b) to demonstrate British interest in that part of Europe; and (c) to ensure if necessary that Bulgarian forces evacuate and do not re-occupy Greek and Yugoslav territory of which they are now in possession. There can be no question of any British occupation except in agreement with the Russians.

(6) Albania. His Majesty’s Government’s desire for the restoration of an independent Albanian State was expressed by Mr. Eden in the House of Commons on the 17th December, 1942, as follows: “His Majesty’s Government wish to see Albania freed from the Italian yoke and restored to her independence . . . . What I have said does not in any way prejudge the question of Albania’s position in relation to such future arrangements as may be reached between the various Balkan States. His Majesty’s Government regard the question of the frontiers of the Albanian State after the war as a question which will have to be considered at the peace settlement.”

To give effect to this policy it may be necessary to station troops in the country, particularly on the frontiers with Greece and Yugoslavia. This task could perhaps be linked with that of maintaining forces in Italy, which does not come within the scope of the present survey. At the same time the troops required for Albania might well be based on Bari.

(7) Hungary. Similar considerations as under (5) above apply. There are political reasons for at least “showing the flag” in Hungary though this might in practice be accomplished by the despatch of a “token” force.

[ London ,] 17 April, 1944.

48 Handed by Sir Orme Sargent, British Deputy Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, to the Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs (Matthews) at a meeting in London, April 18, in connection with the mission of Under Secretary of State Stettinius.

49 August 30, 1940; Documents on German Foreign Policy, 1918–1945, series D, vol. x, p. 582.

50 Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean (SACMED), Gen. Sir Henry Maitland Wilson.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.0011 European War 1939/34078a: Telegram

[Document 358]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, April 22, 1944—midnight.

3255. The revised text of the proposed statement as already approved by the Soviet and American Governments is as follows: “Through the fateful policy of their leaders, the people of Hungary are suffering the humiliation of German occupation. Rumania is still bound to the Nazis in a war now bringing devastation to its own people. The Governments of Bulgaria and Finland have placed their countries in the service of Germany, and remain in the war at Germany’s side.

“In order to point out the road to freedom for these unhappy victims of Hitler’s evil devices and again to give them warning at this late hour, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and the United States have agreed that: “1. The Axis satellites, Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria and Finland, despite their realization of the inevitability of a crushing Nazi defeat and their desire to get out of the war, are by their present policies and attitudes contributing materially to the strength of the German war machine.

“2. These nations still have it within their power, by withdrawing from the war and ceasing their collaboration with Germany and by resisting the forces of Nazism by every possible means, to shorten the European struggle, diminish their own ultimate sacrifices and contribute to the Allied victory.

“3. The prospects of these countries for future existence as independent states, the right freely to choose their own governments, the preservation of their rightful territories, and the avoidance of military devastation cannot be enhanced, but only diminished, by their continued collaboration with Nazi Germany.

“4. There is no question but that the longer these nations continue their participation in the war and their collaboration with Germany the more disastrous will be the consequences to them and the more rigorous will be the terms which will be imposed upon them.

“5. The responsibility of Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria and Finland for their participation in the war at the side of Nazi Germany places upon them the necessity of deciding now, while yet there is time for them to contribute to the inevitable Allied victory, whether they wish to persist in their present misguided and calamitous course.”

Repeated to Moscow.51

Hull

51 As telegram 1002.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 740.0011 European War 1939/34173b: Telegram

[Document 359]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, April 25, 1944—8 p.m.

1025. In indicating its approval of the text of the proposed Allied statement as contained in the Department’s 1002 of April 22 to you,52 the British Foreign Office has suggested that it not be formally communicated to the satellite governments but that it be released to the press simultaneously by the Soviet, British and American Governments. While the Department had believed that direct communication of the declaration to the four satellites would have increased its effectiveness, we have, in the interests of expedition and subject to Soviet approval, agreed to the British suggestion.

Since the Department’s 1001 of April 22 to you53 dealt with what seems to have been merely a matter of translation, it is believed that the final wording of the declaration may now be considered as having been agreed upon by the three Governments. The Department accordingly proposes, unless it receives contrary suggestions from the British or Soviet Government, to give it to the press for release in the United States at 11 a.m. E. W. T. on Thursday April 27. This would be 5 p.m. of April 27 in London and 6 p.m. of April 27 in Moscow.

Please acknowledge this telegram immediately upon receipt.

Sent to Moscow, repeated to London.54

Hull

52 See supra.

53 Not printed.

54 As telegram 3308.

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2551: Telegram

[Document 360]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, April 29, 1944—11 p.m.
[Received April 30—5 p.m.]

1514. The Chief of the American Section of the Foreign Office55 asked me to call this evening. He asked me whether I could give him any information as to the reasons for the postponement of the tripartite declaration to the four satellite countries and how long the postponement would last. I told him that while the British Ambassador had informed me yesterday afternoon of his instructions to request postponement, I had received nothing from my Government. The Chief of the American Section said that the reasons for the postponement did not seem clear since apparently all three governments had reached complete agreement. He then repeated his query and added that he would appreciate any enlightenment I could give him. I remarked that the British, having requested the postponement, were of course in the best position to give reasons for this request; that the Embassy had received nothing new from the Department on the matter; but that I was confident my Government desired to go ahead with the declaration. In reply to my query he said that the Soviet Government was prepared also to go ahead. When I offered to telegraph and ask whether the Department could throw any light on the two questions he had asked, he side-stepped my offer and said that he had requested me to call just to ascertain whether I had any information on the matter.

Sent to Department, repeated to London.

Hamilton

55 Semen Konstantinovich Tsarapkin.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton) 740.00119 European War 1939/2551: Telegram

[Document 361]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton)

Washington, May 1, 1944—5 p.m.

1080. Your 1514, April 29. The release of the tripartite statement was held up at the last minute at the request of the British Foreign Office. Since last Thursday56 nothing whatever has been heard from London on the matter and the British Embassy here states that it has received no reply to its telegram asking for the reasons for the postponement and for a proposal for a new release date.

The Department has requested the Embassy at London57 urgently to take up the matter with the Foreign Office and to inform you of its reply. We think that the statement should be used now if it is to be effective, particularly in view of Stalin’s treatment of the same matter in his order of the day.58

Hull

56 April 27.

57 In telegram 3487, May 1, 5 p.m., not printed.

58 See telegram 1538, May 1, from Moscow, vol. iv, p. 864.

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2559: Telegram

[Document 362]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, May 1, 1944—10 p.m.
[Received May 2—1:12 p.m.]

1535. See my 1514, April 29, 11 p.m. It seems likely that the inquiry made of me at the Foreign Office on April 29 may have been related to the question of the inclusion in Stalin’s May 1 order of the day of the warning to Rumania, Hungary, Finland and Bulgaria to get out of the war.

Hamilton

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2558: Telegram

[Document 363]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, May 2, 1944—noon.
[Received May 2—7:15 a.m.]

3574. This refers to Department’s 3487, May 1, 5 p.m.59 Foreign Office instructed British Embassy to inform you that the release of the tripartite statement on satellite countries had been held up at the request of the Cabinet in order that it might be given further consideration. I understand that in spite of previous acceptance by the Foreign Office there are certain passages in the statement which the Cabinet feels should be changed. The Cabinet is considering the text of the statement this afternoon and Foreign Office promises to give me the suggested changes as soon as possible whereupon they will be urgently telegraphed to the Department.

Winant

59 Not printed.

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2561: Telegram

[Document 364]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Hamilton) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, May 2, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received May 3—8:45 a.m.]

1551. The British Ambassador has furnished me in strict confidence with a copy of his note to Molotov of April 27 of which the following is a paraphrase: “In my letter of March 19 concerning the modification of the principle of unconditional surrender in its application to the smaller Axis states, you will recall that I informed you that a similar inquiry was being made of the United States Government.

“2. The gist of the American reply was that they would prefer that the general principle of unconditional surrender should be retained intact although they would be prepared to consider a modification of the principle in specific cases when either the Soviet or British Governments believed this to be advantageous. I understand that the American Government has already informed the Soviet Government of the full terms of its reply.

“3. After considering this message my Government have instructed Lord Halifax to inform Mr. Hull that they see some inconsistency between the American Government’s disinclination to depart from the principle of unconditional surrender and their proposal to issue a joint Anglo-American-Soviet declaration to the Axis satellites, of the terms of which you are of course aware. While my Government would certainly not propose to ask the President to make any statement repudiating the terms of unconditional surrender for the smaller Axis states they are anxious to obtain now the necessary degree of latitude for their propaganda to these countries. The British Ambassador in Washington has therefore been instructed to point out that, with my Government’s agreement, the Soviet Government had not applied to Finland the principle of unconditional surrender and that it is also not intended to apply this principle to Rumania. My Government considers in both of these cases that propaganda should conform to practice. It is important with regard to Hungary and Bulgaria that Allied propaganda should be directed toward encouraging active resistance to the Germans and driving home the effect of the proposed tripartite declaration. My Government hope, therefore, that the American Government will agree that Allied propaganda to, or about, these countries should make no further reference to the principle of unconditional surrender although avoiding any public recantation to it.”

Department’s 1080, May 1, 5 p.m. The British note set forth above may be connected with the British request for the postponement of the tripartite statement although the British Embassy here states that it does not know why the request for postponement was made.

Hamilton

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2563: Telegram

[Document 365]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, May 3, 1944—9 p.m.
[Received May 3—6:39 p.m.]

3627. This refers to Embassy’s [Department’s] 3487, May 1, 5 p.m.61 Sir Orme Sargent today handed us the text of the proposed tripartite statement on the satellite countries as finally revised by the British Cabinet. Sir Orme stated that the text originally agreed to by the Foreign Office had been approved by Mr. Eden just prior to his absence from London for about 10 days and that it was only at the last moment that he decided to refer it to the Cabinet which had desired to suggest certain changes. Foreign Office very much regretted the delay and trusted that the changes suggested would be acceptable to the Department and to the Soviet Government.

The text suggested by the British Government is being transmitted in our immediately following telegram.

The Department will note that paragraph 3 as set forth in the Department’s 3255, April 22, midnight, has been omitted in the British draft. Sir Orme stated that this had been done since it had been felt that this paragraph might be interpreted as a weakening of the principles of the Atlantic Charter and might accordingly be of use to enemy propaganda. He stated that he did not think that the omission of this paragraph lessened the strength of the statement. Paragraphs 3 and 4 he described as mainly a redraft of paragraphs 4 and 5 of the Department’s text. Sir Orme said that he supposed that the Department would, if it agreed with the British text, clear it with the Soviet Government, whereupon arrangements could be made for its joint issuance. The British will, of course, be pleased to consider any changes in the text which may be desired by the Department or the Soviet Government.

Winant

61 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2564: Telegram

[Document 366]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 62

London, May 3, 1944.
[Received May 3—7:56 p.m.]

3628. Through the fatal policy of their leaders, the people of Hungary are suffering the humiliation of German occupation. Rumania is still bound to the Nazis in a war now bringing devastation to its own people. The Governments of Bulgaria and Finland have placed their countries in the service of Germany and remain in the war at Germany’s side.

The Governments of Great Britain, the Soviet Union and the United States think it right that these peoples should realize the following facts: (1) The Axis satellites, Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria and Finland, despite their realization of the inevitability of a crushing Nazi defeat and their desire to get out of the war are by their present policies and attitudes contributing materially to the strength of the German war machine.

(2) These nations still have it within their power, by withdrawing from the war and ceasing their collaboration with Germany and by resisting the forces of Nazism by every possible means, to shorten the European struggle, diminish their own ultimate sacrifices and contribute to the Allied victory.

(3) These nations will be held responsible for having participated in the war at the side of Nazi Germany, and the longer they continue at war in collaboration with Germany the more disastrous will be the consequences to them and the more rigorous will be the terms which will be imposed upon them.

(4) These nations must therefore decide now whether they intend to persist in their present hopeless and calamitous policy of opposing the inevitable Allied victory, while there is yet time for them to contribute to that victory.

Winant

62 See second paragraph of telegram printed supra.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00119 European War 1939/2564: Telegram

[Document 367]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, May 5, 1944—7 p.m.

3611. The Department is willing to accept the text of the proposed tripartite statement on the satellite countries as revised by the British Cabinet and transmitted in your 3628 May 3 with only one modification. In order to preserve the thought of satellite responsibility and at the same time avoid undue discouragement we would prefer the following language for numbered paragraph 3: “3. While these nations cannot escape their responsibility for having participated in the war at the side of Nazi Germany, the longer they continue at war in collaboration with Germany the more disastrous will be the consequences to them and the more rigorous will be the terms which will be imposed upon them.”

Please ask the British Foreign Office if it is agreeable to the foregoing modification of the text as revised by the British Cabinet and state that it is being submitted in this form to Moscow for Soviet approval. As soon as British and Soviet approval has been received the Department will again fix a date for release using the same hours as previously arranged.63

Repeated to Moscow.64

Hull

63 Following agreement to this revision of paragraph 3 among the three Governments, the statement was made public on May 12; for text, see Department of State Bulletin, May 13, 1944, p. 425.

64 As telegram 1120.

The Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.00119 European War 1939/2669

[Document 368]

The Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, May 10, 1944.

My Dear Mr. President: The Department has been informed by the British Embassy that the British Government considers it important that Allied propaganda to the satellite states should now be reinforced, and, with special reference to Hungary and Bulgaria, in order to attain the maximum military advantage in strengthening resistance to Germany, should henceforth omit reference to the term unconditional surrender, while of course avoiding abandonment of the general principle.

You will recall in this connection my letter of April 4, and your memorandum65 in reply thereto, in which you directed that the general principle of unconditional surrender be retained, though exception might be made in its application in specific cases.

In making this proposal, the British Embassy has pointed out that the Soviet Government had not applied the principle to Finland, and the same could be said for Rumania, if the Rumanians should come to terms along the lines proposed for their surrender. It is supposed that the propaganda agencies will take these considerations into account in preparing their directives. As for Hungary and Bulgaria, the Department thinks that advantages can in fact be gained from energetic action at this time in propaganda operations, and I should therefore be grateful if you would indicate whether you would approve our taking parallel action with the British and the Russians in authorizing a degree of latitude for propaganda purposes, having it clearly understood that the exception is authorized to enable the propaganda services to omit reference to the term, though of course there would be no public recantation of the principle as applicable to these countries.66

Faithfully yours,

Cordell Hull

65 Memorandum dated April 5, p. 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352].

66 Notation on the file copy by President Roosevelt: “CH OK FDR”.

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Murphy), at Algiers 740.00119 European War 1939/2615: Telegram

[Document 369]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Murphy), at Algiers

Washington, June 2, 1944—11 p.m.

1743. 1. Your 1641, May 19, noon.67 In view of the fact that United States now has no commitment for military operations in Rumania, Bulgaria, and Hungary, no directives with respect to civil affairs or occupation of those countries would seem necessary for consideration of Combined Chiefs of Staff.

2. Referring your paragraph numbered 2, no decision has been made as to nationality of civil affairs personnel for Austria, and planning for Austria should proceed on the assumption that no United States personnel will be employed in Austrian civil affairs administration.

3. Referring your paragraph numbered 3, no directive would appear necessary as no combined operation is contemplated in that area.

4. Referring your paragraph numbered 4, as no Anglo-American expedition is now contemplated to enter Bulgaria before surrender, and as there is no commitment to take part in civil administration in Bulgaria after surrender, planning for that country should be for period after withdrawal of German occupying troops and not to include American military personnel. As far as concerns Hungary and Rumania, the United States does not expect to ask for liaison or military representation with occupational administration which will presumably be by Soviet troops.

5. UNRRA68 would not be in a position to undertake relief in ex-enemy countries unless affirmative action thereon is taken by the UNRRA council.

6. This Government has had no exchange of views with the Soviet Union up to the present with respect to the Balkans or with respect to Austria. These subjects are expected to be covered in the discussion of terms of surrender for the satellite countries in the European Advisory Commission.

7. In response to your request, we will send you special memorandum by telegraph on dealing with Rumania and Bulgaria in the event of collapse.

Hull

67 Not printed. The Political Adviser reported that the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean, had called upon the American and British Political Advisers for advice with respect to civil affairs policies to he pursued in Austria, Bulgaria, Hungary, and Rumania. The Political Adviser requested instructions. (740.00119 EW 1939/2615)

68 United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration; for correspondence, see vol. ii, pp. 331 ff.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 LCC/25: Telegram

[Document 370]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 3, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received June 3—1:40 p.m.]

4454. Sir Orme Sargent, as chairman of the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee,69 has submitted a memorandum to Bucknell70 for comment concerning the enforcement of unconditional surrender on Axis satellites which he proposes to submit to the Committee.

Text of this proposed memorandum is quoted below: “At their second meeting on the third March the Committee invited me to seek from my Government a clarification of policy regarding the enforcement of unconditional surrender upon the satellite countries and Finland.

“His Majesty’s Government are of the opinion that a rigid application of this principle to the Axis satellites is likely to hinder rather than further our common aim of getting these states out of the war as soon as possible.

“The Soviet Government are understood to be in sympathy with this view and have in fact departed from the principle in framing terms for Finland and Rumania.

“The United States Government have stated that they would prefer not to abandon the principle of unconditional surrender with regard to the Axis satellites as a group, but are prepared to give favorable consideration to its modification in the specific case of any particular country should it be advantageous to the common cause.

“For the purposes of propaganda to or about these countries, His Majesty’s Government consider there is advantage in each case in refraining from any further reference to unconditional surrender. In the cases of Finland and Rumania, propaganda should conform to practice; and in each case we want to encourage active resistance to the Germans and drive home the recent Three-Power Declaration.

“It is understood that the United States Government do not object to British propaganda following this course and that United States propaganda will take the same line.”

Bucknell would be grateful for the Department’s views regarding this proposal as soon as possible.

Winant

69 For correspondence on this Committee, see pp. 1455 [Pg. 1455 is part of Doc. 974] ff.

70 Howard Bucknell, Jr., Counselor of Embassy.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 740.00119 European War 1939/2561: Telegram

[Document 371]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, June 9, 1944—10 a.m.

1461. Your 1551 of May 2. The question of reference to the term unconditional surrender in propaganda to the satellite states was the subject for a recent communication from the Department to the President.

The Department referred to the President’s earlier decision, which was conveyed to you in its 881 of April 12, whereby the President had directed that the general principle be retained though exception might be made in its application in specific cases. It was pointed out that the Soviet Government had not applied the principle to Finland, and the same could be said for Rumania, if the Rumanians should come to terms along the lines proposed for their surrender. It was therefore supposed that the propaganda agencies would take these considerations into account in preparing their directives. As for Hungary and Bulgaria, the Department observed that advantages could in fact be gained from energetic action in propaganda operations, and inquired whether the President would approve our taking parallel action with the British and Russians in authorizing a degree of latitude for propaganda purposes, having it clearly understood that the exception is authorized to enable the propaganda services to omit reference to the term, though of course, in its application to these countries there would be no public recantation of the principle.

The President has approved this proposal.

Sent to Moscow, repeated to London.71

Stettinius

71 As telegram 4568.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 European War 1939/2688: Telegram

[Document 372]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, June 20, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 10:02 p.m.]

2197. Department’s 1461, June 9, 10 a.m. In my talk with Vyshinski72 yesterday I informed him that although the President’s views on the subject of unconditional surrender remained unchanged the President had approved omitting the use of the term in connection with the satellite countries by the propaganda services and giving the services a degree of latitude in this connection. Vyshinski remarked that this step was in accord with the British attitude. I said that I had mentioned this question in view of the coming participation of the Soviet representative on the London Propaganda Committee.73

Repeated London as 120.

Harriman

72 Andrey Yanuaryevich Vyshinsky, Assistant People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union.

73 Known as the London Coordinating Committee for Political Warfare; see pp. 1455 [Pg. 1455 is part of Doc. 974] ff.

The Secretary of State to Certain American Diplomatic Officers 800.00 Summaries/39n: Circular telegram

[Document 373]

The Secretary of State to Certain American Diplomatic Officers 74

Washington, June 22, 1944—noon.

Discussions have recently taken place between the President and Churchill and between the Department and the British Embassy in Washington in regard to a British approach apparently designed to bring about the establishment in the Balkans of spheres of influence.75 On May 31 Prime Minister Churchill sent a message to the President76 pointing out that conflicts in policy had arisen between the British and the Russians in certain Balkan countries. The Prime Minister stated that as a result of this development the suggestion had been made to the Russian Ambassador in London77 that as a practical matter it should be agreed that the Russian Government would take the lead in Rumanian affairs while the British would take the lead in Greek affairs. Churchill stated that the Soviet Government agreed to this proposal but requested the views of the United States before giving final assurances. Churchill went on to argue at length that this arrangement was merely an extension of the interests of the two countries as reflected by the military situation and maintained that it would be useful in preventing divergences in policy between Great Britain and Russia in the Balkan States. In a subsequent message Churchill re-emphasized that he had no idea of establishing spheres of influence and argued that the British followed the American lead as far as possible in South America. A similar approach was made to the Secretary by Lord Halifax on May 30.78 The Department’s views on this matter were contained in a memorandum submitted to the British Embassy.79 After noting the British thesis regarding the necessity for such an agreement and the intention that the agreement would apply only to war conditions without affecting the rights and responsibilities of the principal Allied governments, the Department stated its reasons for not agreeing to the proposal. It was acknowledged that a government whose military forces are operating in a given territory will ordinarily take the principal initiative in making decisions affecting the territory and made necessary by military operations therein. The Department stated its belief that the natural tendency for the extension of such initiatives to other than the military field would be strengthened by the conclusion of an agreement of this nature. Consequently the Department believes that the proposed arrangements would result in the persistence rather than the elimination of differences in the views of the British and Soviet Governments regarding the Balkan Area and despite the declared intention to limit the arrangement to war conditions, would lead to the division of the Balkan region into spheres of influence. The memorandum stated the Department’s firm conviction that the practical and military advantages sought in plans of this nature would not counterbalance the evils inherent in such a system. The memorandum stated the Department’s opinion that the preferable course of action would be to devote attention to proposals designed to establish adequate machinery for frank consultation regarding the Balkan region. In this manner the policies of the Allied Governments would be directed along the lines of collaboration rather than independent action. The United States Government attaches special importance to this latter policy because of the efforts now being made for concerted action in laying the foundations of a broad system of general security in which all countries, great or small, will have their part. The establishment and effective functioning of such a broad system of general security would inevitably be adversely affected by any arrangement suggestive of spheres of influence. The President’s reply to the Prime Minister80 was couched in similar terms. It is the Department’s belief that the British proposal contained serious political implications pertinent to the whole question of joint participation and joint responsibility of all the Allied Governments in the conduct of the war. Despite the military basis upon which this proposal was presented it apparently amounts to an attempt to secure American approval of the establishment of spheres of influence.

Hull

74 At Algiers, Cairo, Lisbon, London, Madrid, Moscow, and Stockholm.

75 See vol. v, pp. 84 ff., passim.

76 Telegram 687, May 31, ibid., p. 114.

77 Fedor Tarasovich Gusev.

78  Vol. v, p. 113.

79 Dated June 12, vol. v, p. 119.

80 Telegram 557, June 11, ibid., p. 117.

Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Southern European Affairs (Cannon) 740.0011 EW/8–2844

[Document 374]

Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Southern European Affairs (Cannon)

[Washington,] August 28, 1944.

Memorandum for the President

Subject: The American Position as Regards an Eventual Allied Occupation of Rumania, Hungary and Bulgaria.

The Department understands that the decision has already been taken that American ground forces are not to participate in operations in the three satellite countries of Southeastern Europe. There have been, of course, considerable air force operations, under the Mediterranean command, probably the greater part of them conducted by American planes. In the case of Rumania, General Wilson has now ordered more intensive air operations, in the light of the events of the last few days, and these may now or at a later stage involve airborne troops, but we are not informed that any American personnel are being used. It seems to be, however, our basic military policy not to use U. S. forces in Balkan operations.

The O.S.S.82 does, however, have teams ready, or in process of organization, for use in these countries, chiefly for intelligence but also for special operations.

As regards occupation, the documents to be used as the basis for terms of surrender, and approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, provide for Allied occupation, but it is understood that our military policy is not to use American forces as a part of the army of occupation.

It is supposed that American missions will go into each of the countries after surrender. These missions will have political, military and technical functions. The Department has not been informed of the Army’s plans for assigning military personnel for this work.

As regards civil affairs in the Balkans, it has been decided that the United States will participate in relief and rehabilitation work in the military period, but this, so far, has been planned only for “liberated” territory; namely, Greece, Yugoslavia and Albania, and not for the satellite states.

The terms of surrender contemplate, however, the utilization of the resources or supplies which may be available in the satellite countries and useful to the Allies in the prosecution of the war. Technical personnel in the form of Allied, missions will be necessary for the administration of this program. This has been in discussion with the F.E.A.83 The present disposition is not to send American personnel into the countries for this purpose. This would be in line with the general policy to hold to a minimum actual American participation both in the operations stage and the occupation state [stage?].

82 Office of Strategic Services.

83 Foreign Economic Administration.

The Secretary of State to Certain American Diplomatic and Consular Officers 740.00119 E.W./9–244: Circular telegram

[Document 375]

The Secretary of State to Certain American Diplomatic and Consular Officers 84

Washington, September 2, 1944—11 p.m.

The Department considers that until the situation is clarified by Rumanian and Bulgarian acceptance of Allied armistice terms and until the status of the governments of these two countries is ascertained your attitude toward their diplomatic officials should remain unchanged.

Hull

[There are a few additional papers printed in Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, 1945, pages 237–248, which present summary descriptions on what the general Balkan policy of the United States had come to be at the close of the year 1944; on consideration of the American position on the Allied Control Commissions in Rumania, Bulgaria, and Hungary; and on the attitude taken toward the principal problems that had arisen in each of these three countries.]

84 At Ankara (for repetition to Istanbul), Lisbon, Rome, Stockholm; and paraphrase as 3042, September 4, to Bern.

Preliminaries to the establishment of an international organization for the maintenance of international peace and security:Preliminaries to the establishment of an international organization for the maintenance of international peace and security:1

1 For previous information on preliminaries to the establishment of an international organization for the maintenance of international peace and security, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, bracketed note, p. 1050.

Contents

A. Anglo-American-Soviet phase: August 21–September 28, 1944 (Documents 419-488)

B. Anglo-American-Chinese phase: September 29–October 7, 1944 (Documents 489-506)

I. Arrangements for exploratory discussions on world security organizationI. Arrangements for exploratory discussions on world security organization

[376] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] December 29, 1943.

500.CC/12–2943

[377] Notes on Meeting of Secretary Hull With President Roosevelt at the White House on February 3, 1944

Washington, “Date—Feb ’44(?)”

500.CC/2–344

[378] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, February 10, 1944—9 p.m.

500.CC/34a: Telegram

[379] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] February 16, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 43: PIO 198

[380] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special; Assistant to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] February 19, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 4a: PIO 229

[381] Memorandum by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 15, 1944.

500.CC/3–1544

[382] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 15, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 43: PIO 224

[383] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 29, 1944.

740.0011 European War/33802

[384] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 8, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 51: ISO 20

[385] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, April 14, 1944—midnight. [Received April 15—2 a.m.]

740.0011 Stettinius Mission/24: Telegram

[386] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Bucknell) to the Secretary of State

London, May 18, 1944—5 p.m. [Received May 19—1:53 p.m.]

500.CC/46: Telegram

[387] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] May 30, 1944.

500.CC/54

[388] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] May 31, 1944.

500.CC/82

[389] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 1, 1944. [Received June 1—9:15 a.m.]

500.CC/52: Telegram

[390] The Chinese Ambassador (Wei) to the Secretary of State

Washington, June 3, 1944.

500.CC/64

[391] The British Foreign Office to the British Embassy in the United States

[London,] June 4, 1944.

500.CC/6–544: Telegram

[392] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] June 12, 1944.

500.CC/6–1244

[393] Statement to the Press by President Roosevelt

June 15, 1944

[394] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, June 29, 1944—noon. [Received 8:50 p.m.]

500.CC/6–2944: Telegram

[395] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, July 7, 1944—9 p.m.

500.CC/7–744: Telegram

[396] The Soviet Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , July 9, 1944.

500.CC/7–944

[397] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] July 10, 1944.

500.CC/7–1044

[398] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] July 11, 1944.

[399] The Department of State to the Soviet Embassy

Washington , July 12, 1944.

500.CC/7–1244

[400] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, July 14, 1944—1 p.m.

500.CC/7–1344: Telegram

[401] President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

[Aboard the Presidential Special,] July 15, 1944.

500.CC/7–1544

[402] United States Tentative Proposals for a General International Organization, July 18, 1944

July 18, 1944

Lot 60–D 224, Box 51: ISO 23g (Special)

[403] The Soviet Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , July 20, 1944.

500.CC/7–2044

[404] Tentative Proposals by the United Kingdom for a General International Organization

[ July 22, 1944.]

Lot 60–D 224, Box 57: D.O./Conv.A/Doc. 2

[405] The Department of State to the Soviet Embassy

Washington , July 22, 1944.

500.CC/7–1544

[406] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, July 24, 1944—5 p.m. [Received July 25—12:30 a.m.]

500.CC/7–2444: Telegram

[407] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Far Eastern Affairs (Grew)

[Washington,] July 24, 1944.

500.CC/7–2444

[408] The British Chargé (Campbell) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 1, 1944.

500.CC/8–144

[409] Announcement to the Press by the Acting Secretary of State, August 1, 1944

August 1, 1944

500.CC/8–144

[410] General George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff of the United States Army, to the Secretary of State

Washington, 3 August, 1944.

500.CC/8–344

[411] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 4, 1944—midnight. [Received August 5—6:35 a.m.]

500.CC/8–444: Telegram

[412] The Acting Secretary of State to General George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff of the United States Army

Washington, August 5, 1944.

500.CC/8–344

[413] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, August 7, 1944—noon.

500.CC/8–444: Telegram

[414] The Soviet Chargé (Kapustin) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 11, 1944.

500.CC/8–1144

[415] Memorandum on an International Security Organization, by the Soviet Union

[ August 12, 1944.]

Lot 60–D 224, Box 57: D.O./Conv.A/Doc. 2

[416] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 14, 1944.

500.CC/8–1444

[417] The Chinese Ambassador (Wei) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 21, 1944.

500.CC/8–2144

[418] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 21, 1944—6 p.m. [Received 11 p.m.]

500.CC/8–2144: Telegram

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 500.CC/12–2943

[Document 376]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 2

[Washington,] December 29, 1943.

I transmit herewith for your consideration a statement of the basic ideas which might be embodied in a constitution of an international organization for the maintenance of peace and security, to be established in accordance with the provisions of the Atlantic Charter,3 of Point 4 of the Moscow Declaration,4 and of the Congressional Resolutions.5 The statement was prepared by our group working on the problems of international organization.6 Attached to the statement is a memorandum on the principal obligations which would have to be assumed by the members of the projected international organization.

The drafters of the statement recommend (1) That there should be a small Executive Council with adequate powers and adequate means to investigate conditions, situations and disputes likely to impair security or to lead to a breach of the peace; to recommend measures for the adjustment of such conditions, situations and disputes; to employ the processes of mediation, conciliation, arbitration, etc., for the settlement of disputes; to prescribe the terms of settlement where other procedures have failed; to enforce its decisions; and to repress acts or threats of aggression;

(2) That there should be a General Assembly, composed of all member states, whose principal functions and powers should relate to the setting up of a general framework of policy, the development of international law, and the promotion of international cooperation in general;

(3) That there should be an International Court of Justice; and

(4) That, as needed, there should be created or brought within the framework of the international organization agencies for cooperation in economic and social activities, for trusteeship responsibilities, and for other appropriate purposes.

The drafters have not been able to reach definitive conclusions on a number of crucial questions which are presented in the statement in the form of alternatives. These are indicated on pages 3, 4 and 5.

The entire plan is based on two central assumptions: First, that the four major powers will pledge themselves and will consider themselves morally bound not to go to war against each other or against any other nation, and to cooperate with each other and with other peace-loving states in maintaining the peace; and

Second, that each of them will maintain adequate forces and will be willing to use such forces as circumstances require to prevent or suppress all cases of aggression.

I hope that at our meeting tomorrow you will find it possible to discuss these matters with us.

C[ordell] H[ull]

[Annex 1]

Plan for the Establishment of an International Organization for the Maintenance of International Peace and Security

[Washington,] December 23, 1943.

i. functions and purposes

The primary functions of the international organization to be established in accordance with the provisions of the Atlantic Charter, of Point 4 of the Moscow Declaration, and of the Congressional Resolutions, should be, first, to establish and maintain peace and security, by force if necessary; and, second, to foster cooperative effort among the nations for the progressive improvement of the general welfare. The organization should provide means of cooperative action for the creation, operation, and coordination of agencies and procedures for the following purposes;

1. to prevent the use of force or of threats to use force in international relations except by authority of the international organization itself;

2. to settle disputes between nations likely to lead to a breach of the peace;

3. to strengthen and develop the rule of law in international relations;

4. to facilitate the adjustment of conditions likely to impair the security or undermine the general welfare of the peace-loving nations;

5. to promote through international cooperative effort the political, economic, and social advancement of nations and peoples.

ii. structure and powers

For purposes of maintaining peace and security, the international organization should have the following organs: 1. An Executive Council

2. A General Assembly

3. An International Court of Justice

All members of the organization should be represented on the General Assembly. The representation on the Executive Council should be limited, as indicated below.

For purposes of fostering good international relations and promoting general welfare, the organization should have, in addition to the organs above indicated, an agency for cooperation in economic and social activities, an agency for trusteeship responsibilities, and such other agencies as may be found necessary.

The various component organs and agencies of the organization should have appropriate administrative staffs.

The organization should have powers as follows: 1. to examine and investigate any condition or situation the continuation of which is likely to impair the security or undermine the general welfare of the peace-loving nations;

2. to recommend measures for the adjustment of such conditions and situations;

3. to prescribe the terms of settlement of disputes referred to it when the parties to the disputes have failed to find other means of pacific settlement;

4. to take jurisdiction over disputes upon its own initiative;

5. to enforce its decisions with regard to the settlement of disputes;

6. to determine the existence of threats or acts of aggression and to take measures necessary to repress such threats or acts;

7. to establish a system of armaments regulation upon the basis of international agreement.

These powers should be exercised by the respective organs of the international organization in the manner indicated below.

iii. the executive council

The composition of the Executive Council should be determined upon the principle that certain nations have exceptional responsibilities for the maintenance of international security and therefore should have indeterminate tenure; the responsibility of other states for the maintenance of security should be reflected by membership of a number of such states elected for limited periods.

The Executive Council should accordingly consist initially of: The United States of America, the United Kingdom, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and China (members with indeterminate tenure), together with 1. three other members, with the understanding that the Executive Council should always consist of members with indeterminate tenure and an equal number less one of elected members, or

2. not less than three nor more than eleven other members.

The elected members should be chosen annually by a two-thirds vote of the General Assembly, but should not be immediately eligible for re-election. The General Assembly may alter the total membership of the Executive Council, the membership with indeterminate tenure, the method of selecting other members and the length of their tenure. Such alterations should be effected by a two-thirds vote of the General Assembly, provided all the members having indeterminate tenure on the Executive Council vote in the affirmative.

Alternatively

[The Executive Council might initially be composed of the United States of America, the United Kingdom, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and China solely.]7

The Executive Council should be in continuous session and should have primary responsibility with respect to the security functions and security powers of the international organization. Except for procedural decisions, which should be taken by a majority vote, all other decisions should be by a two-thirds vote, with the qualifications indicated below. In no decision of the Executive Council should the vote of a party directly involved in a dispute and represented on the Executive Council be counted. A party deemed by the Executive Council to be directly involved in a dispute and not represented on the Council should be invited to participate in the consideration of the dispute in the Council, without right of vote.

The Executive Council should operate as follows: 1. Any member of the International organization may bring to the attention of the Executive Council any condition, situation, or dispute the continuation of which is likely to impair the security of itself or of any other member of the organization, or to lead to a breach of the peace. The Executive Council should have the right to institute an investigation of any such condition, situation, or dispute, and to make recommendations to the states concerned.

2. Any member of the international organization may refer to the Executive Council for settlement any dispute in which it may be involved. The Executive Council should have the right, upon its own initiative to take jurisdiction over any dispute the continuation of which, in its judgment, may lead to a breach of the peace.

3. The Executive Council should have the right (a) to prescribe the terms of settlement of a dispute within its jurisdiction, (b) to institute measures for the enforcement of its decisions, (c) to determine the existence of a threat or act of aggression, and (d) to institute measures to repress such threat or act. The decision of the Executive Council in these matters should require:

unanimity of all members with indeterminate tenure

Alternatively

[three-fourths vote of the members with indeterminate tenure [a. any abstaining or dissenting member being obligated by the decision; or

[b. any abstaining member being obligated, but a dissenting member not being obligated by the decision though bound not to obstruct action; or

[c. any abstaining or dissenting member not being obligated by the decision but obligated not to obstruct action.]

4. The Executive Council should have the right to ask the assistance of the General Assembly in the settlement of any dispute pending before it, and it should inform the General Assembly of any decisions or recommendations made by it. Whenever feasible, the Executive Council should ask the General Assembly for its assistance in the enforcement of its decisions.

5. The Executive Council should have the right to request from the International Court of Justice an advisory opinion on the legal aspects of any question pending before it.

6. The Executive Council should have the right to set up any technical agencies it may deem necessary for the performance of its functions.

iv. the general assembly

The initial membership of the General Assembly should comprise all of the United Nations and nations associated with them. The General Assembly should meet annually, but it may be convened in special session on its own initiative or on the initiative of the Executive Council. Its decisions should be by a majority vote, except as indicated below.

Alternatively

[The International Organization should be instituted by the United and Associated Nations. But when the basic document secures the requisite ratifications to become effective, all duly recognized independent states should be considered member states. In case of doubt, the Executive Council should determine whether a state is a duly recognized independent state.

[A state which in the judgment of the Executive Council has violated the peace of nations may be debarred by the Executive Council from exercising any or all of the rights given to member states under this Constitution for a stated period of time.]

The General Assembly should operate as follows: 1. Any member may bring to the attention of the General Assembly any condition, situation, or dispute the continuation of which is likely to impair the security or the general welfare of itself or of any other member of the organization, or to lead to a breach of the peace. The General Assembly should refer to the Executive Council, for the institution of measures, any condition, situation, or dispute related to security which it deems of sufficient gravity to require immediate consideration. It should refer to the Executive Council or to the appropriate agencies of the international organization any condition or situation not directly related to security which it deems to merit their consideration.

2. The General Assembly should receive from the Executive Council, from the agency for cooperation in economic and social activities, from the agency for trusteeship responsibilities, and from other agencies, reports of their decisions and recommendations.

3. The General Assembly should initiate studies and make recommendations concerning (a) the interpretation and revision of rules of international law and (b) the promotion of international cooperation.

4. The General Assembly should, by a two-thirds vote, admit other nations to membership in the international organization.

Alternatively

[All duly recognized independent states shall be considered member states. In case of doubt the Executive Council shall determine whether a state is a duly recognized independent state.]

5. The General Assembly may alter the total membership of the Executive Council, the membership with indeterminate tenure, the method of selecting other members and the length of their tenure. Such alterations should be effected by a two-thirds vote of the General Assembly, provided all members having indeterminate tenure on the Executive Council vote in the affirmative.

6. The General Assembly should, by a two-thirds vote, select judges of the International Court of Justice.

7. Except for such agencies as may be created by the Executive Council, the approval of the General Assembly should be required for the creation or modification of permanent technical agencies included within the framework of the international organization.

8. All administrative and budgetary arrangements should require approval of the General Assembly, except such arrangements as the General Assembly may empower agencies of the organization to make on their own initiative.

[Annex 2]

Principal Obligations of a Member State

[Washington,] December 29, 1943.

1. To refrain from use of force or threat to use force in its relations with other states and from any intervention in the internal affairs of other states, except in performance of its obligation to contribute to the enforcement procedures instituted by the Executive Council.

2. To settle all disputes with other states by pacific means and, failing such settlement, to submit any such dispute likely to endanger the peace to the Executive Council or to such agencies or procedures as the Council may designate.

3. To recognize the right of the Executive Council, on its own initiative or on the initiative of any member state, to examine, investigate, and act upon any dispute, condition, or situation deemed by it as likely to endanger the peace.

4. To accept as binding the decisions of the Executive Council in the settlement of a dispute of which the Council takes jurisdiction and to carry out in good faith the recommendations of the Council with respect to conditions or situations deemed by it as likely to endanger the peace.

5. To submit all justiciable disputes in which it may be engaged to the International Court of Justice and to accept as binding the decisions of the Court.

6. To make such contribution to the facilities and means which the Council may require for the enforcement of its decisions or for the prevention or repression of aggression as may be agreed upon in advance or, in the absence of such agreement, as the Executive Council may deem appropriate.

7. To enter into an eventual general agreement with other member states for the regulation of national armaments.

2 Copy obtained from the Library of Congress, Manuscripts Division, papers of Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State. President Roosevelt gave the draft his general approval and initialled the memorandum “OK FDR” at a meeting at the White House on February 3, 1944, attended by Secretary Hull and some of his “consulting group” (a group which began in the summer of 1943 to accompany the Secretary to the White House for Presidential discussions). See notes by Mr. Pasvolsky on that meeting, infra.

3 Joint statement by President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, August 14, 1941; for text, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. i, p. 367.

4 Joint Four Nation Declaration on General Security, signed at Moscow, October 30, 1943, ibid., 1943, vol. i, p. 755.

5 For the Fulbright Resolution, September 21, 1943, and the Connally Resolution, November 5, 1943, see Senate Document No. 123, 81st Cong., 1st sess.: A Decade of American Foreign Policy, Basic Documents, 1941–49 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1950), pp. 9 and 14, respectively.

6 The statement was prepared by the Informal Political Agenda Group which decided at its first meeting on December 9, 1943, after the negotiation of the Moscow Declaration to prepare a draft of basic proposals on this subject for recommendation to the Secretary. The draft was completed on December 23 (the Group’s tenth meeting) and submitted to President Roosevelt in response to his request of Secretary Hull for the Department’s latest ideas on international organization, made at luncheon on December 21, directly after the President’s return from the Conferences at Cairo and Tehran where the question was discussed with the British Prime Minister (Churchill) and the Chairman of the Council of Commissars of the Soviet Union (Stalin): see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehran, 1943. For additional information on preparation of the statement, see Department of State, Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, pp. 246 ff.

7 Brackets throughout this document appear in the original.

Notes on Meeting of Secretary Hull With President Roosevelt at the White House on February 3, 1944 500.CC/2–344

[Document 377]

Notes on Meeting of Secretary Hull With President Roosevelt at the White House on February 3, 1944 9

Washington, “Date—Feb ’44(?)”

The President read again the three documents on international organization sent to him by the Secretary on December 29, 1943. He had already read them at Hyde Park.

He said that he approved the general approach but wanted to discuss a number of specific questions.10 In the ensuing discussion, the following points emerged: 1. He agreed that the Executive Council should consist of the four major powers and a number of smaller ones. Last summer he was rather impressed by the 11–7.11

2. Unanimous with abstention.

3. Action in Emergency.

4. Council and Secretariat located on an island—Assembly and conferences might move about.

5. Technical organizations might be located in different places—the Court at The Hague, for example.

6. Right of Assembly to investigate and make reports on conditions in dependent areas.

7. Make sure that our contribution outside Western Hemisphere, except, perhaps in the Pacific, shall be naval and air forces rather than troops.

8. Wanted to make sure that we would not be called upon to furnish armed forces without our consent. Was satisfied that point 6 in statement of obligations would take care of this.

9. Would like us to find some new terminology, although “Executive Council” and “General Assembly” might do.

10. Is willing for us to start discussions with British and Russians and would like some one to go to Chungking to discuss the matter with Chiang.12

11. Agrees that documents should be exchanged before discussions.13

12. Believes that the Secretary should discuss question with the Senators, although fears publicity.14

9 Handwritten, unsigned notes, presumably drafted by or for Mr. Pasvolsky, obtained from the Library of Congress, Manuscripts Division, papers of Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State.

10  An entry of February 8, 1944, in a series of “Memory notes” on conversations with President Roosevelt (authorship not indicated but assumed to be Mr. Pasvolsky) indicated that the meeting of that date of the Informal Political Agenda Group considered the President’s views on the plan of December 23, and the notes continued as follows: “It was brought out that the President’s approval on matters of major concern carried approval of the right to abstain from voting but to be bound to the decision. The President thinks of having the international organization have a central seat for records and a kind of home base, but that it should meet in various places. The President prefers the Azores as the permanent seat but thinks it should have some meetings in Hawaii. The President wants to begin with a council of seven but he is a little afraid we will not be able to select three countries from the smaller ones and so might be driven to a larger council; the Assembly should elect the smaller states to membership—the regional principle goes out. The President does not want any plan under which the U.S. would be bound to send troops in Europe; we can send troops in the Western Hemisphere and perhaps in the Pacific. The kind of forces that we should plan for international use would be naval and air (i.e. enlisted forces).”

At a meeting of the Informal Political Agenda Group on February 24, 1944, Mr. Pasvolsky “explained that the President had been quite clear on the point that the interests of the major powers required their unanimity on the most crucial matters, but that he had not been sure whether the council, so constituted, would be flexible enough in an emergency, and he had been particularly aware of the danger that the small states would obstruct action” (Minutes of 25th meeting, p. 10). At a meeting of the Group on February 25, Mr. Isaiah Bowman pointed out, and Mr. Pasvolsky agreed, that the President was particularly interested in making clear that the member of the council which abstained in a vote under a provision which determined the issue by a majority of those “present and voting” should be bound by the decision (Minutes of 26th meeting, p. 8).

11 See the Plan of December 23, Section III, Executive Council, second paragraph, alternative No. 2, p. 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 376]. For an outline of President Roosevelt’s earlier concept of an organization of United Nations, see minutes of his, conversation with Marshal Stalin at the Tehran Conference on November 29, 1943, 2:45 p.m., Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehran, 1943, p. 529.

12 Chiang Kai-shek, President of the National Government of the Republic of China.

13 Following Presidential approval of the “Possible Plan” on February 3, 1944, the Informal Political Agenda Group gave renewed consideration to the broader aspects of world organization and the preparation of papers intended for use in the projected exchange with the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and China.

14 For data on his consultations with Congressional leaders, see Cordell Hull, The Memoirs of Cordell Hull, vol. ii (New York, the Macmillan Co., 1948), pp. 1656 ff.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 500.CC/34a: Telegram

[Document 378]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)15

Washington, February 10, 1944—9 p.m.

276. At the request of the Secretary the British and Soviet Embassies here on February 8 were informed16 that in accordance with point two (B) of the Secret Protocol of the Moscow Conference17 we are ready to start the study of the general framework and functions of an international organization for security and peace.18 The British and Soviet Governments were requested each to prepare a paper as a basis for discussion of the possible organization and were told that we will also prepare such a paper. We suggested that as each Government has its paper ready it be communicated to the other two Governments and arrangements will be made for the exchange of papers and preliminary discussions thereon to take place in Washington. We also stated that within a week or so we would have prepared in written form a sketch outline of the topics on which the views of the respective Governments would be necessary, accompanied by a brief statement of the general lines of organization which we tentatively have in mind.

We stated that we would keep the Chinese Government informed as the development of discussions went on, but would not ask at this time that the Chinese Government be brought into the discussions.19 We might, at a later time, raise this question for consideration by the other two Governments.

For your own information, we have, of course, given considerable study and consideration to the possible form of international organization, and will be ready as we go forward to discuss this question with the other two Governments, without, of course, committing our Government at this stage. We think it desirable, however, that each Government present in written form a general outline of its thinking on the subject before we begin preliminary discussions.

Stettinius

15 Repeated on the same date as telegram 1043 to London.

16 The Secretary’s message to the Embassies was conveyed orally by the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn) and the Special Assistant to the Secretary (Pasvolsky). (Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, p. 256.)

17 Point 2 (b) of the Secret Protocol signed at Moscow on November 1, 1943, at the Tripartite Conference of Foreign Ministers, recognized the desirability that representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union should conduct, in a preliminary fashion, an exchange of views on questions connected with the establishment of an international organization for the maintenance of international peace and security; for text of this document, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 749.

18 Inquiries were made by the British Embassy on January 29 and February 1 concerning the time of beginning an exchange of views, the level at which discussions might be conducted, and their coverage. (Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, pp. 255–256.)

19 According to memorandum of February 9 (not printed) by the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Dunn) to the Director of the Office of Far Eastern Affairs (Hornbeck), this position was taken at the request of President Roosevelt, who directed that after discussions had proceeded a little further, the Chinese President, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, should be apprised, thus obviating the possibility of the matter being discussed by too many persons and becoming publicly known.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 43: PIO 198

[Document 379]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] February 16, 1944.

Mr. Wright20 called at his request and left with me the attached document entitled, “Summary of Topics”, received yesterday from the Foreign Office. This paper was sent to the Embassy for transmission to us following the Embassy’s report on Mr. Wright’s conversation on February 8 with Mr. Dunn and myself. A copy will be communicated today to the Soviet Government.

Mr. Wright explained that the list is intended to serve two purposes: (1) As a list of topics on which detailed papers are being prepared in London; these papers will in due course be sent to us;

(2) As suggestions for an agenda for the discussions

Mr. Wright inquired as to when they could expect to receive our list of topics. I said that it was our hope to make it available to them in the next few days.

Mr. Wright also inquired whether it was our intention that discussions would be arranged after the preliminary papers had been exchanged by the respective governments, or whether there would be further exchanges by cable prior to the inauguration of the discussions. I replied that the matter would have to be left in a flexible state, but that our present thought is that the discussions would take place as soon as the documents had been exchanged and an opportunity had been afforded for a sufficient study by the governments. Mr. Wright said that the latter procedure would be preferable from their point of view.

Mr. Wright inquired whether or not any comments have been received from the Soviet Government. I replied in the negative.

Leo Pasvolsky

[Annex]

Memorandum Prepared in the British Foreign Office

Summary of Topics

A. Nature and membership of any World Organization.

1. Membership, functions and powers of a general assembly.

2. Membership of a smaller body (Council).

3. Functions and powers of such a Council. (a) Maintenance of international peace and security.

(b) Settlement of international disputes.

(c) Nature of relation of the Council to world economic bodies—see C below.

(d) Question of unanimity.

4. Role of an international court for settlement of juridical disputes.

5. Nature of instrument establishing world organization and method of amendment.

6. Secretariat.

B. System of general security.

1. Methods of cooperation and coordination between members, e.g. question of concerted military advice to the Council.

2. Relation of mutual defence arrangements and any regional systems, which may be established, to general security system.

3. Provision of bases for common use.

C. International economic and functional organizations.

1. Their relation to the Council and Assembly; their relation to one another; should there be attached to the Council some body for the purpose of coordinating them.

2. Should such a body dispose of an economic general staff.

3. Management and secretariat.

4. Future role of international labour organization and any functional bodies of the League of Nations which may be continued.

D. Future procedure.

1. Method of discussion with other United Nations.

2. Method of registering agreement reached.

3. Time table.

Washington, February 15, 1944.

20 Michael Wright, First Secretary of the British Embassy.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special; Assistant to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 4a: PIO 229

[Document 380]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special; Assistant to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] February 19, 1944.

Mr. Wright called at my request. I handed him the attached Topical Outline and said that we were handing a copy today to the Soviet Embassy.

He inquired how soon they might expect actual memoranda and whether or not we intend to transmit them one at a time as they are ready. I replied that I could not tell him anything as to when we might be ready. I also said that it is not our present intention to give them single documents.

He inquired as to whether or not, in the event that no exchange of documents will have taken place before the Under Secretary’s projected visit to London, Mr. Stettinius will discuss the matter there.21 I replied that this question can be answered only at that time.

Leo Pasvolsky

[Annex]

Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State

February 17, 1944.

Topical Outline

A. General Character of an International Organization

What should be the general structure, functions and powers of an international organization for the maintenance of peace and security established in accordance with the provisions of the Moscow Four-Nation Declaration.

B. A General Assembly

1. What should be the functions and powers of a representative general assembly with respect to: a. general policy of the organization?

b. promotion of international cooperation?

c. settlement of disputes and security action in relation to a council?

C. An Executive Council

1. What should be the composition of an executive council?

2. What should be its functions and powers with respect to: a. settlement of disputes?

b. restraint or suppression of threats to or breaches of the peace?

c. a system of regulation of armaments?

d. economic and social cooperation?

3. By what vote should decisions be reached?

D. A Court of Justice

1. How should an international court of justice be constituted and what should be its position and its functional relation to the other organs of the international organization?

2. What should be the jurisdiction of the court in the settlement of disputes?

3. Should the court be empowered to render advisory opinions?

E. Arrangements for Security

What arrangements and procedures should be provided: 1. for the pacific adjustment of conditions or settlements of disputes likely to lead to a breach of the peace?

2. for the establishment of a system of regulation of armaments and for its enforcement?

3. for the determination of threats to or breaches of the peace?

4. for the application of non-military measures?

5. for the availability and use of armed forces and facilities in the prevention or suppression of threats to or breaches of the peace?

F. Economic and Social Cooperation

What functions and powers should the organization have with respect to development of international cooperation in economic and social activities and the coordination of international agencies and action in these fields?

G. Territorial Trusteeships

What provisions should be made for the performance of such territorial trusteeship responsibilities as may devolve upon the international organization?

H. Administration and Secretariat

What should be the nature and functions of the administrative and secretariat services that may be necessary for the central and related organs and agencies of the organization?

I. Establishment

When and by what procedures should the organization be established?

21 See telegram 3071, April 14, midnight, from London, p. 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386].

Memorandum by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State 500.CC/3–1544

[Document 381]

Memorandum by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 15, 1944.

Our discussions and exchanges of views with the British on the subject of United Nations Organization and of organized international relations in general have been taking place mainly in the following three fields: I. Maintenance of Peace and Security

II. Economic Collaboration

III. Treatment of Dependent Areas

There are indicated below the principal developments in each of these fields and the status of discussion, in so far as they have come to my knowledge.

I. Maintenance of Peace and Security

1. In 1942 the British proposed to us a joint study of a possible revision of the Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice,22 as a first step toward an examination of the whole question of a future international organization. We replied that we considered the study to be premature pending an opportunity for a full examination of the general subject of international organization, and the matter was dropped.

2. Following the Casablanca Conference,23 Prime Minister Churchill, in an informal memorandum to the President, indicated some of his ideas as to the general character of an international organization for the maintenance of peace and security. His basic thought was that there should be created three regional organizations, in Europe, in the Far East, and in the Western Hemisphere, which should constitute the three pillars of a superstructure of some sort of a world-wide organization. He amplified this thought in a conversation at a small luncheon at the British Embassy in May, 1943, and in a public address.24

3. In July, 1943, the British proposed to us and to the Soviet Government the creation of a European Commission25 which was to coordinate the execution of surrender or armistice terms imposed on the enemy and was also to assume far-reaching functions with respect to long-range European arrangements in fields of security and economic integration. We replied that we could agree to the creation of such a body for dealing with the enemy powers, but that we opposed entrusting to such a body long-range peace-time functions. This document became the basis of the discussion at the Moscow Conference26 which resulted in the creation of the European Advisory Commission.

4. At the Quebec Conference in August,27 the President and the Secretary discussed with Mr. Churchill and Mr. Eden our draft of a four-nation declaration. This draft was subsequently communicated to the Soviet and Chinese Governments and eventually became the Moscow Declaration.

5. The Protocol of the Moscow Conference provided that the United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union would undertake exchanges of views, in Washington in the first instance, as regards the establishment of an international organization for the maintenance of peace and security, envisaged in paragraph 4 of the Moscow Declaration. Shortly after the conference, the British Government began pressing us for the inauguration of such exchanges of views.28 The matter remained in abeyance until the beginning of February, when the Secretary instructed Mr. Dunn and me to inform the British and Soviet Embassies,29 for communication to their governments, that we should like to proceed by way of an exchange of documents setting forth the tentative views of each government as to the nature and functions of the projected organization. A week later, we handed the British and the Russians a list of topics30 on which we are preparing studies, and received in return a similar list from the British.31 We have had no word from the Russians. The present status is that we are nearing the completion of the documents to be exchanged; the British have informed us that they are likewise hard at work; and we assume that the Russians, too, are working.

6. During a recent visit to Washington of Mr. J. Ward of the Foreign Office, he and Col. Walker (Washington representative of the British Post-Hostilities Committee) proposed to us an exchange of views on problems of immediate post-war security arrangements including use of international bases, use of force, etc.33 It was agreed that we would first exchange a list of the problems to be examined and then proceed, as possible, with an exchange of documents. Mr. Ward was to report to his superiors. We have heard nothing further about this matter, but work is in progress here.

7. Shortly before Mr. Ward’s visit, the British Embassy gave us informally a paper34 on the future organization of security forces, in which an argument was made in favor of regional security police arrangements. In the course of our discussion, Mr. Ward indicated that the thought in London has now shifted somewhat and is beginning to move in favor of world-wide rather than merely regional arrangements for this purpose.

8. I have no information as to what discussion took place at Cairo and Teheran.35

II. Economic Collaboration

1. Prior to the convocation of the Conference on Food and Agriculture,36 our principal economic discussions with the British related to the creation of a relief and rehabilitation organization37 and to repeated efforts on their part to begin consultations under Article VII of the Mutual Aid Agreement.38 In this latter connection, monetary discussions were begun toward the end of 1942 and commercial policy discussions in September, 1943.39

2. In accepting our invitation to the Conference on Food and Agriculture, the British expressed open dissatisfaction over the fact that we did not consult them prior to making the decision to convoke such a conference and suggested that there be created a small steering committee of the principal United Nations to plan future steps. The Russians expressed a similar view as to the need for prior consultation and planning.40

3. The monetary discussions were carried on sporadically until September 1943, when they were undertaken very intensively during the visit of Lord Keynes.41 The result was a draft joint statement of basic principles,42 which contained many points of disagreement. Most of these have now been ironed out by cable. The draft is being currently discussed with the Soviet experts.

4. On the same occasion, a brief discussion took place on the subject of a bank for reconstruction and development.43 The British promised to give us their views on the subject after their return to London, We have not as yet heard from them.

5. In September and October, 1943, we had a four-week discussion, under the terms of Article VII, with a large British group of experts on commercial policy, commodity policy, cartels, and full employment measures. The result was a comprehensive agreed statement,44 which indicated the problems that still needed to be explored by both sides. It was agreed that discussions would be resumed, possibly in February of this year.45 In December 1943, the British Embassy inquired as to whether or not we intended to resume discussions as planned. We asked in turn whether the British would be ready by that time.46 The Embassy had no knowledge, but undertook to find out. We have had no word from them since, except for an informal indication that the British preferred to wait until they had discussed these matters with the Dominions.47 Such discussions took place at the end of February. In the meantime, in January and February of this year we had similar discussions with the Canadians.48 The present status is that the British are to tell us when they are ready to resume discussions. We can accommodate ourselves to any date they set.

6. At the time of arranging for Article VII discussions with the British, we issued a similar invitation to Soviet Russia and China.49 No reply having been received from the Soviet Government, the Secretary raised the question at the Moscow Conference.50 At the same time, bearing in mind the views expressed by the British and Soviet Government at the time that invitations were issued to the Food Conference, the Secretary proposed the creation of a small committee for joint planning of United Nations activities in the economic field. No decision was reached.

7. The President’s recent messages to Prime Minister Churchill and Marshal Stalin51 reinforced the Moscow proposal and carried it a step further. The reaction from London so far indicates somewhat divided counsels in the British Government.52 The reply from Moscow is favorable.52a

8. The President apparently had some conversations on this subject at Teheran,53 on which I have no information.

9. My information is incomplete on the status of our aviation and oil discussions.54

III. Treatment of Dependent Areas

1. At the beginning of 1943, the Secretary had some conversations with Lord Halifax55 regarding post-war international arrangements for the treatment of colonial and other dependent areas.56 As a result of these conversations, the Foreign Office communicated to us a paper57 setting forth their ideas some of which were at variance with ours. These ideas were somewhat later amplified in a speech by Col. Stanley, the Secretary of State for Colonies.58 In an attempt to reconcile the two points of view, we incorporated some of the British ideas in our draft declaration of March 9, 1943,59 a copy of which was given to Mr. Eden during his visit to Washington.

2. The Secretary made several attempts to discuss the draft of March 9 with Mr. Eden at Quebec and Moscow,60 but without much success. Mr. Eden did indicate, however, that the British cannot agree to a promise of independence for all dependent areas, but prefer to foreshadow a development toward self-government.

3. In September, 1943, Mr. Ronald of the Foreign Office raised with us the question of the future status of Italian colonies in Africa.61 In the course of a long discussion, it developed that neither our studies of this question nor those made in London were adequate. It was accordingly arranged that an agreed questionnaire would be drawn up as a basis for further studies. This was done, and appropriate studies are under way both in London and here.62 In revising the first draft of the questionnaire, the Foreign Office brought in the question of trusteeship arrangements and of the mandate system.63 This was the first time that they showed any willingness to examine these problems.

Leo Pasvolsky

22 For correspondence on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1942, vol. i, pp. 39 ff.

23 Documentation on the Casablanca Conference, January 14–24, 1943, is scheduled for publication in a subsequent volume of Foreign Relations.

24 For summaries of the memorandum of February 2, 1943, by Prime Minister Churchill to President Roosevelt, and his views expressed at a luncheon at the British Embassy on May 22, see The Memoirs of Cordell Bull, vol. ii, pp. 1640–1641; for his radio address of March 21, 1943, on postwar plans, see the New York Times, March 22, p. 4, col. 1. See also Winston S. Churchill, The Second World War: The Hinge of Fate (Boston, 1950), pp. 711–712 and 802–807.

25 For correspondence on the establishment of the European Advisory Commission, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 801 ff.

26 For documentation on the Tripartite Conference of Foreign Ministers at Moscow, October 18–November 1, 1943, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 513 ff.

27 Documentation on the First Quebec Conference, August 17–24, 1943, is scheduled for publication in a subsequent volume of Foreign Relations. For “Tentative Draft of a Joint Four-Power Declaration” and a summary account of the Conference, see Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, pp. 553 and 187–189, respectively; see also The Memoirs of Cordell Hull, vol. ii, pp. 1237–1239, and Ruth B. Russell, History of the United Nations Charter (the Brookings Institution, Washington, 1958), pp. 116–124.

28 On November 26, 1943, the British Embassy compared notes, orally, with the Department on questions of procedure in connection with this Government’s proposal of November 18, if the other three Governments concurred, to announce that the four parties to the Moscow Declaration would welcome adherence by all peace-loving states to the statement in paragraph 4 of the Declaration. The Embassy was informed that some exchange of views could begin within a reasonably short time, as soon as the United States had “something definite to propose.” (Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, p. 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 129].)

29 See telegram 276, February 10, 9 p.m., to Moscow, repeated to London as 1043, p. 622 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 402].

30 See memorandum by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, February 19, p. 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380].

31 See memorandum by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, February 16, p. 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379].

33 Memorandum of conversation with Departmental officials on January 29, 1944, not printed. The proposed exchange of views did not take place as another plan came under consideration in the spring of 1944.

34 Memorandum entitled “Post-war World Security: Possible Military Organisation”, handed to Mr. Harley Notter, Adviser, Office of Special Political Affairs, by Mr. Gore-Booth of the British Embassy on December 18, 1943, not printed; for summary, see The Memoirs of Cordell Hull, vol. ii, p. 1649.

35 See Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehran, 1943, index entry on “International security, postwar”, p. 912.

36 For correspondence on the United Nations Conference on Food and Agriculture, Hot Springs, Virginia, May 18–June 3, 1943, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 820 ff.

37 For correspondence on the agreement establishing the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration signed on November 9, 1943, see ibid., pp. 851 ff.

38 For correspondence on discussions of countries signatory to Article VII of the Lend-Lease Agreement between the United States and the United Kingdom signed February 23, 1942, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 1099 ff.; for text of the Lend-Lease Agreement, see Department of State Executive Agreement Series No. 241, or 56 Stat. (pt. 2) 1433.

39 See Foreign Relations, 1942, vol. i, pp. 163 ff., and ibid., 1943, vol. i, pp. 1054 ff. and pp. 1099 ff.

40 See telegrams 1713, March 10, 1943, 7 p.m., from London, and 186, March 21, 1943, 1 p.m., from Moscow, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 821 and 822, respectively.

41 John Maynard Keynes, Economic Adviser to the British Government.

42 For text, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 1084.

43 See minutes of meeting with British experts on proposal for a United Nations Bank for Reconstruction and Development, October 11, 1943, ibid., p. 1092.

44 See Annex 9 to the Secret Protocol of the Tripartite Conference in Moscow, ibid., p. 763.

45 See vol. ii, pp. 1 ff.

46 See telegram 56, January 4, 5 p.m., from London, ibid., p. 1.

47 See telegram 2389, March 24, 3 p.m., from London, ibid., p. 25.

48 See instruction 3801, March 2, to London, ibid., p. 18.

49 See telegram 791, September 3, 1943, 5 p.m., to Moscow, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 1111; memorandum handed to the Chinese Ambassador on September 4, 1943, not printed.

50 See summary of proceedings of the fourth session of the Tripartite Conference, October 22, 1943, 4 p.m., Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 604.

51 Telegram 476, February 23, to Prime Minister Churchill (identical message to Stalin), vol. ii, p. 14.

52 See telegram 1973, March 10, ibid., 9 p.m., from London, p. 23.

52a See unnumbered telegram dated March 10, from Moscow, ibid., p. 22.

53 See Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehran, 1943, pp. 530–531, and 875.

54 For correspondence on discussions regarding international civil aviation, and the Conference at Chicago, November 1–December 7, 1944, see vol. ii, pp. 355 ff. For correspondence on Anglo-American petroleum discussions and unperfected agreement signed August 8, 1944, see vol. iii, pp. 94 ff.

55 British Ambassador in the United States.

56 For memoranda of conversations of March 22, 27, and 29, 1943, on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. iii, pp. 28, 36, and 40, respectively.

57 “Draft of Joint Declaration of Colonial Policy”, handed to Secretary Hull by the British Ambassador on February 4, 1943; see ibid., p. 31, footnote 47.

58 For speech by Col. Oliver Stanley, in the British House of Commons, July 13, 1943, see Parliamentary Debates, House of Commons, 5th series, vol. 391, col. 47.

59 For U.S. draft of a declaration by the United Nations on national independence, March 9, 1943 (submitted to President Roosevelt on March 17), see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 747.

60 For summary of conversation of Secretary Hull with Foreign Secretary Eden at Quebec on August 21, 1943, see The Memoirs of Cordell Hull, vol. ii, p. 1236; for Mr. Hull’s remarks on introducing the March 9 declaration at the Moscow Conference, and Mr. Eden’s reply, see the summary of the proceedings of the eleventh session, October 29, 4 p.m., Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 662, 666–667.

61 Memorandum of conversation of Nigel Ronald, of the British Foreign Office, with Mr. Pasvolsky, September 26, 1943, not printed.

62 Copies of British studies dated June 13, 1944, were submitted to the Department (not printed).

63 Draft questionnaire of December 14, 1943, not printed.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 43: PIO 224

[Document 382]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 15, 1944.

Mr. Wright called on instruction to deliver the attached Aide-Mémoire. I told him that we would study the document and give him our reaction to it soon.

He informed me that the British Government is setting up a Cabinet Sub-committee to pass on the documents in this field which are being prepared by the various experts. He also said that they expect to have their documents ready in four to eight weeks and inquired whether or not we could give them some idea of our time schedule. I replied that we are not in a position to do so at this time, but that we are hard at work.

He inquired whether Dr. Bowman64 would discuss these matters in London. I replied that I was not in a position to tell him anything on that subject.

Leo Pasvolsky

[Annex]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom have carefully considered the “Summary of Topics” provided by the United States Government65 in connection with the projected discussions on future world organisation. They suggest that it might now be profitable for the three Governments concerned to start work on papers which it is to be hoped they will fairly shortly communicate to each other. If this is agreeable to the United States Government in principle, His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom propose that such papers should deal with the following main categories of subjects chosen so as to cover important points mentioned in the American and British “Summaries of Topics”: (A) Scope and nature of international organisation. This would deal with membership, constitution of the assembly and world council, secretariat, etc. and give the general framework of the organisation.

(B) Guarantees, determination of breaches of the peace, and pacific settlement of disputes, including Permanent Court of Justice. This would cover main political obligations.

(C) Security. This would deal with the means by which threats to or breaches of the peace should be prevented and with plans for joint action.

(D) Coordination of economic and political machinery. This would deal with relations to be established between functional bodies and the main organisation.

(E) Method and procedure by which world organisation should be established.

2. Acceptance of this plan would not of course preclude any other topic being developed in appendices or in special papers.

Washington, March 15, 1944.

64 Isaiah Bowman, a member of the Department of State Informal Political Agenda Group concerned with planning for an international organization, who accompanied Under Secretary of State Stettinius on a special mission to London in April 1944; see vol. iii, pp. 1 ff.

65 See memorandum prepared in the Department of State, February 17, p. 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War/33802

[Document 383]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 29, 1944.

Subject: Further Support of the Four Nation Declaration

The Soviet Ambassador66 called at his request. He said that Mr. Molotov,67 in reply to my recent message urging that he take occasion to show some interest in further support of the Four Nation Declaration, agreed that it would be a fine and timely thing to do. I pointed out how Russia was suffering in the eyes of the American public on account of a number of acts which were being construed as unilateralism on the part of Russia, et cetera. I covered this whole field.

The Ambassador said that Mr. Molotov now sends me a reply to the effect that he sees no reason why Russia should come out at this time reiterating its support of the Four Nation Declaration, but that his Government would be willing for the United States, Great Britain and Russia to make a joint statement reiterating their interest in and their support of the Four Nation Declaration. I thanked him and said that I would think more about this matter in the hope that something could be done to break down the rising hostility to Russia on account of these small acts on her part which are being interpreted as a movement toward unilateralism.68 I made this full and clear by means of several illustrations. The Ambassador said he fully understood; that he would give the matter further attention and communicate again with Mr. Molotov.

C[ordell] H[ull]

66 Andrey Andreyevich Gromyko.

67 Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov, People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union.

68 On this subject, see telegram 268, February 9, to Moscow, vol. iv, p. 824.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 51: ISO 20

[Document 384]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 8, 1944.

Mr. Wright handed me the attached telegrams. I told him that we were glad to have them and will similarly keep the British Government informed of developments.

Leo Pasvolsky

[Annex 1]

Text of a telegram from Mr. Eden to the British Ambassador at Moscow, dated march 31st

[London,] March 31, 1944.

Have the Soviet Government reacted in any way? Good progress is being made here with preparation of papers on interdepartmental level and I should be grateful for any indication you can obtain of (a) the Soviet Government’s attitude in general to proposed talks; (b) whether they favour preliminary written exchange of views on topics suggested, and if so whether they are thinking of making any suggestions about time-table; or (c) whether they intend to put forward alternative suggestion to those made by the Americans and ourselves.

[Annex 2]

Text of a telegram from the British Ambassador at Moscow to the Foreign Office, dated April 5th

[Moscow,] April 5, 1944.

In written reply Molotov states that lists of questions communicated by the British and United States Governments in February will undoubtedly assist in forthcoming discussions at Washington. Acceptance for discussion of a list of questions does not, however, mean settlement of all of them in favourable sense or adoption of same as order for discussion. Fundamental questions should, he thinks, be discussed first, such as relationship between general organisation and directing body, method of reaching decisions in both cases, and relation of mutual defence arrangements and any regional systems to general security system. On the other hand such questions as relationship between international labour organisation and security system, and “provision of bases for common use” have not been clarified.

2. Subject to these provisos he has no objection to British and American lists forming the basis of discussion in framing programme for negotiations about international security organisation.

3. He does not object in principle to the proposal that the three Governments should exchange documents on questions listed, but thinks it necessary to settle first the order of questions and then to exchange documents on the questions which, as a result of negotiations in Washington, are recognized to have first priority.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 Stettinius Mission/24: Telegram

[Document 385]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]

London, April 14, 1944—midnight.
[Received April 15—2 a.m.]

3071. Deles69 No. 8. For the Secretary from the Under Secretary.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

IV. I conferred with Sir Alexander Cadogan70 and Richard Law71 on Wednesday morning.72 … The most important points taken up were:

1. Security discussions.… Our preliminary discussions here indicate that we and the British are in general agreement on the basic principles of a world organization.73 Therefore you might wish to consider the desirability of endeavoring to speed up the discussions on this subject if this commends itself to your wiser judgment and fuller knowledge of the congressional and political situation.…

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

[Stettinius]
Winant

69 Designation for a series of telegrams from Under Secretary of State Edward R. Stettinius, Jr., to the Secretary of State, in connection with his mission to London, April 7–April 29, 1944. For Mr. Stettinius’ report to Secretary Hull on the London conversations, with particular reference to Section II, Postwar Topics (World Organization, World Court, and Colonial Policy), see vol. iii, p. 1.

70 British Permanent Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

71 Richard K. Law, British Minister of State.

72 April 12.

73 Mr. Stettinius advised the Soviet Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Gusev), before his departure from London, of his agreement with the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Eden) that “the two countries should participate in conversations that summer in the United States on the world security organization”. (Edward R. Stettinius, Roosevelt and the Russians: The Yalta Conference (Garden City, N.Y., Doubleday & Co., 1949), p. 16.)

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Bucknell) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/46: Telegram

[Document 386]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Bucknell) to the Secretary of State

London, May 18, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received May 19—1:53 p.m.]

4045. For the Secretary and Under Secretary. In a conversation with Mr. Eden last evening he said, among other things, that there had been some divergence of view in British circles with regard to the timing of the organization of post-war security organizations. The Prime Minister had inclined to the view that it might be better to proceed first with the formulation of regional organizations such as a council for Europe and perhaps a similar organization for the Pacific, et cetera, later proceeding to the organization some central international mechanism. Mr. Eden felt, on the contrary, that it would be much wiser to proceed with the formulation of the central organization first, whereupon, when this was firmly established, the regional organizations could be proceeded with. He said it was interesting to note that the Dominion Prime Ministers in their conversations during the past 2 weeks74 had agreed with Mr. Eden’s view on the matter.

Bucknell

74 A conference was held May 1–16, 1944, between the Prime Ministers of Great Britain and the four Dominions of the British Commonwealth, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa; for a summary statement of developments, see M. Epstein (ed.), The Annual Register, A Review of Public Events at Home and Abroad for the Year 1944 (London, New York, Toronto, Longmans, Green and Co., 1945), p. 43.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 500.CC/54

[Document 387]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] May 30, 1944.

The British Ambassador,75 together with the Soviet Ambassador, called at my request. I reviewed the course of my conversations with the eight Senators on post-war security plans and principles76 and said that I was now ready to proceed with informal talks with the British and the Russians and that I had called them in to ask that they request their Governments to fix a date, as early as might be convenient, for these conferences to begin. I added that this Government would be ready as soon as the other two Governments were. I summed up the American attitude toward the post-war security problem from the political and every other standpoint that might be a factor in the success of the undertaking. They both seemed gratified and said they would communicate with their Governments.

I then reviewed the Chinese angle and made a most earnest appeal to each of their Governments, through them, to let China sit in the conferences.77 They said they would present this matter fully to their respective Governments.

I did not give them the provisions of this Government’s draft of the proposed security organization78 but suggested that each of the Governments bring its respective draft and let them all be considered together at the opening of this informal conference. This suggestion seemed to be acceptable to them.

C[ordell] H[ull]

75 Viscount Halifax.

76  Secretary Hull, meeting with the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations in executive session on March 22, 1944, indicated that the Department of State was ready to confer with the Committee on a number of postwar plans, especially an international organization to maintain peace and security. He invited the Committee to set up a special committee (non-partisan) to confer with him from time to time. Four informal meetings were held with the four Democratic and four Republican members of the committee on April 25, May 2, 12, and 29.

Meeting with the leading members of the House of Representatives on June 2, Secretary Hull covered virtually the same ground as during his first conference with the eight Senators and gave each one a copy of the United States draft proposals for an international organization. The series of consultations was interrupted by the recess of Congress but was resumed later in the summer.

For additional information on these Congressional meetings, see The Memoirs of Cordell Hull, vol. ii, pp. 1658–1670, and Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, pp. 260–267.

77  On May 30 the Chinese Ambassador (Wei) called at the request of the Secretary, who repeated to him his remarks to the British and Soviet Ambassadors about admitting China to the Conference. (Memorandum of conversation, May 30, 1944, filed under 840.50/3813.)

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union was instructed in telegram 1387 of June 1, midnight, to emphasize, in any conversations with the Soviet officials on that subject, the desirability of including Chinese in the preliminary discussions (500.CC/55a).

78 For text of the April 29 draft of a “Possible Plan for a General International Organization”, see Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, p. 582. For a statement to the press by President Roosevelt on June 15 concerning the development of the “Possible Plan” up to that time, see post, p. 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393].

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Secretary of State 500.CC/82

[Document 388]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] May 31, 1944.

In the absence of Lord Halifax, I spoke over the telephone with Minister Campbell79 at the British Embassy, and said that in the event the Soviet Government should not agree that China sit in on the informal conferences on post-war security plans in accordance with my recent invitation to the four great nations, I most earnestly hoped that the British Government would be willing to sit in with the United States and China, and at another time, of course, with Russia and the United States, as was done at the Cairo and Tehran conferences.80 I said it would be a tragedy for enemy critics to charge that not even three of the great nations could even at this stage in the war sit down together and discuss post-war matters. The Minister said he agreed with me and would bring this especially to the attention of his Government. I said that Russia might prefer not to sit with China on post-war penalties for Japan at this stage.81

C[ordell] H[ull]

79 Sir Ronald I. Campbell.

80 For documentation on the conferences at Cairo, November 22–26, 1943, and Tehran, November 28–December 1, 1943, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehran, 1943.

81  The Neutrality Pact between Japan and the Soviet Union, signed at Moscow, April 13, 1941, continued at this time in full force, though of uncertain effectiveness. Furthermore, reports indicated that relations between the Soviet Union and China were somewhat strained.

Secretary Hull called the Chinese Ambassador on the telephone and made a statement similar to that made to Minister Campbell in regard to having China, the United States, and Great Britain meet together because of the Soviet Union’s relations with Japan. (Memorandum of conversation, May 30 [31], filed under 500.CC/63.)

In further conversation on June 1, the Secretary informed the Soviet Ambassador that the United states would undertake to hold two separate conferences of three nations each, as at Tehran and Cairo, should the Soviet Union participation in the projected conferences (701.6111/1251).

The Ambassador in China (Gauss) was informed of the Secretary’s series of conversations with the British, Soviet, and Chinese Ambassadors, in telegram 761, June 3, noon, which was repeated on the same date to London as telegram 4396 (500.CC/61a).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/52: Telegram

[Document 389]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 1, 1944.
[Received June 1—9:15 a.m.]

Netherland series [No.] 6. From Schoenfeld.82 Referring to Churchill’s advocacy of a world council comprising four or five largest states and the Secretary’s declaration that the United States was ready to discuss the organization of an international security body. Foreign Minister Van Kleffens83 in an authorized statement distributed yesterday by the Netherlands press agency in London said that he does not believe it likely that an attempt will be made to place exclusive control of post-war world affairs in the hands of America, Britain, China and Russia, and, it is assumed, of France when restored. No such step, he said, could count on the active support of the smaller powers with an aggregate population of scores of millions.

Although too early for him to express an opinion on the plan, details of which are not disclosed, Van Kleffens said there are certain considerations which will be vital for the smaller powers in any event. Experience gained in this and previous wars shows that actual conduct of operations is a matter for very few, but it is a very different thing when it comes to the shaping or execution of policy when there is no actual warfare. Smaller states are made to feel the burden of war no less and often more acutely than the greatest powers; it seems therefore reasonable that they should have their due voice in attempts to prevent war; no such burden without representation. He did not advocate that all smaller nations should be at all times represented on all organs of postwar setup but a system of rotation could be devised allowing them to take turns side by side with the larger powers who if desired would have permanent representation. [Schoenfeld.]

Winant

82 Rudolf E. Schoenfeld, Chargé at the American Embassy near the Netherlands Government in Exile, established in England.

83 Eelco N. van Kleffens, Netherlands Minister for Foreign Affairs.

The Chinese Ambassador (Wei) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/64

[Document 390]

The Chinese Ambassador (Wei) to the Secretary of State

Washington, June 3, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I hasten to inform you that I have just received a telegram addressed to President Roosevelt by President Chiang, which reads as follows: “To President Roosevelt: The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has informed me of Ambassador Wei’s conversations with Secretary Hull on the proposed conference at Washington to discuss the creation of an international organization for the maintenance of world peace. China has always been an advocate of the early creation of such an organization, if possible before the termination of the war; and we are gratified that you are taking the leadership in realizing this idea. I am particularly grateful to you and Secretary Hull for the insistence on the necessity of China’s being represented at the conference. Without the participation of Asiatic peoples, the conference will have no meaning for half of humanity.

(Signed) Chiang Kai-shek”

I shall be obliged if you will be so good as to transmit the above message to its high destination.85

I am [etc.]

Wei Tao Ming

85 The message was transmitted to President Roosevelt immediately upon its receipt.

The British Foreign Office to the British Embassy in the United States 500.CC/6–544: Telegram

[Document 391]

The British Foreign Office to the British Embassy in the United States 86

[London,] June 4, 1944.

It is most satisfactory that the Administration should have made such good progress and we ourselves would be fully prepared to send a delegation to the United States for a conference on official level in the near future. We would fall in with any date after July 1st agreeable to the Americans and Russians, but would rather hope that in view of the heat it might be possible to hold the conference outside Washington itself.

2. On the other hand, we should prefer to exchange papers with the Americans (and with the Russians too if theirs are ready) before the conference actually meets. If we wait for the opening of the conference before doing so much time will be wasted in consulting the Government and agreement is likely to be delayed. Please therefore ask Mr. Hull to let us see his proposals before delegation leaves. Our own papers should be ready for communication to him and the Russians at an early date.

3. So far as the Chinese are concerned we should ourselves be ready to accept them as full members of the conference provided the Russians agree. If however the Russians do not, it seems to us that a much less cumbersome procedure than that suggested in your telegram of May 31st should suffice. Would not in fact the Chinese Ambassador be present at the meeting place of the conference and be kept informed of the proceedings by ourselves and the Americans behind the scenes (see your telegram of December 13th).

4. We could also take into account in our discussions with the Russian representatives any comments or suggestions which the Chinese Ambassador might make. Since the main reason for Russian opposition to Chinese participation will be obvious, procedure we propose need not imply divergencies of view between the four powers.

5. In any case we do not understand Mr. Hull’s proposal that the United States, ourselves and China should only discuss “matters affecting Japan”. As the whole subject for debate will be world organization it is difficult to see how the discussions could be thus confined.

86 Copy handed to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) by the British Ambassador (Halifax) on June 5. Mr. Stettinius transmitted copies of this telegram on the same date to President Roosevelt and to Secretary Hull.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 500.CC/6–1244

[Document 392]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 87

[Washington,] June 12, 1944.

The British Ambassador called at his request. He said he desired to take up the matter of the proposed conversations in July between the four large nations on the postwar security proposal. (I may say here that in this conversation I failed to understand clearly what the British Ambassador meant in certain important respects. I thereupon reopened this conversation over the telephone on the morning of June thirteenth when the British Ambassador fully clarified what he said he had in mind to say in the conversation on June twelfth. I am, therefore, combining the two conversations and eliminating some of my misunderstandings in connection with the conversation of June twelfth.) The Ambassador said that it was felt that Sir Alexander Cadogan would come to represent the British Government, and he then proceeded to indicate rather definitely that he, the Ambassador, would remain here to cooperate in the conversations. I understood him to say that he would serve as a representative of Eden in addition to Cadogan. He inquired if I thought he could be of use. I promptly said that, of course, he was always of great use in anything with which he is connected. The Ambassador said that his situation would depend on Eden’s final word and by that he meant on any possible change of mind on Eden’s part.

I informed the Ambassador that we had heard nothing from the Russians but had instructed our Ambassador to remind them about making a reply to our invitation.88 He was pleased with this. I then said that we have heard nothing from the British about sitting in with us and China and that it would be most calamitous if this project should fail.89 He felt that his Government would be agreeable and said he would bring the matter up further with them at once and advise me.90 The Ambassador agreed that we could not exchange documents with the British until we had heard from the Russians.

C[ordell] H[ull]

87 Copy transmitted to London in instruction 4221, June 22, not printed.

88 Telegram 1469, June 10, noon, to Moscow, not printed. Mr. Harriman responded in telegram 2115, June 13, 7 p.m., that he had discussed with Foreign Minister Molotov the question of a reply to the Secretary’s invitation to confer on a world security organization, and Mr. Molotov had indicated that the Soviet Government was actively working on the matter and would make a reply to the invitation in the very near future (500.CC/69a; 67).

89 Perhaps Mr. Hull had not yet seen a Foreign Office reply which Under Secretary Stettinius had sent to him on June 5 (supra).

90 No record of a further communication on this subject found in Department files.

Statement to the Press by President Roosevelt [Document 393]

Statement to the Press by President Roosevelt 91

June 15, 1944

Post-War Security Organization Program

The conference today with officials of the Department of State on the post-war security organization program is a continuation of conferences which have been held from time to time during the past 18 months. These conferences have enabled me to give personal attention to the development and progress of the post-war work the Department of State is doing.

All plans and suggestions from groups, organizations, and individuals have been carefully discussed and considered. I wish to emphasize the entirely non-partisan nature of these consultations. All aspects of the post-war program have been debated in a cooperative spirit. This is a tribute to the political leaders who realize that the national interest demands a national program now. Such teamwork has met the overwhelming approval of the American people.

The maintenance of peace and security must be the joint task of all peace-loving nations. We have, therefore, sought to develop plans for an international organization comprising all such nations. The purpose of the organization would be to maintain peace and security and to assist the creation, through international cooperation, of conditions of stability and well-being necessary for peaceful and friendly relations among nations.

Accordingly, it is our thought that the organization would be a fully representative body with broad responsibilities for promoting and facilitating international cooperation, through such agencies as may be found necessary, to consider and deal with the problems of world relations. It is our further thought that the organization would provide for a council, elected annually by the fully representative body of all nations, which would include the four major nations and a suitable number of other nations. The council would concern itself with peaceful settlement of international disputes and with the prevention of threats to the peace or breaches of the peace.

There would also be an international court of justice to deal primarily with justiciable disputes.

We are not thinking of a superstate with its own police forces and other paraphernalia of coercive power. We are seeking effective agreement and arrangements through which the nations would maintain, according to their capacities, adequate forces to meet the needs of preventing war and of making impossible deliberate preparation for war and to have such forces available for joint action when necessary.

All this, of course, will become possible once our present enemies are defeated and effective arrangements are made to prevent them from making war again.

Beyond that, the hope of a peaceful and advancing world will rest upon the willingness and ability of the peace-loving nations, large and small, bearing responsibility commensurate with their individual capacities, to work together for the maintenance of peace and security.

91 Released to the press by the White House, June 15, 1944; reprinted from Department of State Bulletin, June 17, 1944, p. 552.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/6–2944: Telegram

[Document 394]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, June 29, 1944—noon.
[Received 8:50 p.m.]

2328. Your 1570, June 27, 9 p.m.92 I sent a secret and urgent letter to Molotov on June 28 inquiring when we may expect the Soviet reply to the invitation to participate in a preliminary exchange of views on an international security organization. I emphasized that my Government was most anxious to have the acceptance of the Soviet Government as soon as possible.

Harriman

92 Not printed; Secretary Hull instructed Ambassador Harriman to endeavor “to expedite the Soviet reply and telegraph urgently” (500.CC/6–2744).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 500.CC/7–744: Telegram

[Document 395]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, July 7, 1944—9 p.m.

1646. I wish you would take up with Molotov immediately the question of the arrangements for the discussion of plans for the International Organization for Security and Peace. I think you might well remind Mr. Molotov that he took the initiative at the meeting of Foreign Ministers at Moscow in suggesting that consultations be undertaken on this subject initially in Washington.93

You might also tell the Commissar for Foreign Affairs that the conversations suggested in my message of May 3094 are to be held on an informal basis, and that while we wish to discuss and come to an understanding on the major points in the organization, any understandings reached here would of course be subject to reference back to each of the Governments for final acceptance.

You should also tell Mr. Molotov that as soon as he notifies us of the time it will be convenient for the Soviet representation to start the conversations here, we will be very glad to forward to him for preparatory study the drafts of the suggested organization which we expect to circulate at the beginning of the conversations. We would also be very glad to receive from the Soviet Government any drafts of studies which they may have made on the subject.

There are various rumors circulating in the press here to the effect that the Soviet Government is hesitating to take part in the conversations here because of a reluctance to have the Chinese Government participate in the consultations. We have no reason to believe that there is any foundation to these rumors, but in any event it would be helpful, in order to prevent any adverse speculation in the press with regard to the forthcoming conferences, if the Soviet Government would give us a reply to our message of May 30 last and follow up, as a delay in the holding of conversations between important nations would result in a delay in going forward with the subsequent steps necessary to bring about general agreement with respect to the form of the International Organization.

Hull

93 At the eighth regular session of the Tripartite Conference on October 26, 3943, 4 p.m., Mr. Molotov suggested that consultations might be undertaken in any one of the three capitals ( Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 637, 642).

94 Secretary Hull’s memorandum of conversation, May 30, p. 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], concerned his invitation to the Soviet Government to be conveyed by Ambassador Gromyko; telegram 1387, June 1, to Moscow (not printed), informed Ambassador Harriman of this conversation.

The Soviet Embassy to the Department of State 500.CC/7–944

[Document 396]

The Soviet Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

In connection with the question of creating an organization for the maintenance of peace and safety in the whole world, touched upon by the Secretary of State, Mr. Hull, in a talk with Soviet Ambassador A. A. Gromyko on May 30 and June 1, 194495 the Soviet Government considers it necessary to inform the Government of the United States about its readiness to take part in the negotiations in Washington on the said question, bearing in mind besides, as Mr. Hull suggested, the organization of double negotiations, i.e. negotiations of representatives of the United States and Great Britain separately with the representatives of the U.S.S.R. and China.

The Soviet Government agrees to start these negotiations without preliminary exchange between the Soviet, American and British Governments of documents on the questions of post-war safety. As regards the questions which are subject to discussion at the time of the negotiations, the Soviet Government considers it necessary to inform the Government of the United States that in the process of exchange of letters with the British Government on this subject through the British Ambassador to the U.S.S.R., Mr. Kerr, the British Government introduced a proposal to discuss during the forthcoming negotiations the following questions:

[Here follow items the same in substance as points A to E, inclusive, in aide-mémoire from the British Embassy, March 15, printed on page 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 382].]

The Soviet Government, however, would consider it expedient during the first phase of the negotiations to limit itself to discussion of questions of primary importance such as those which are stated in the cited above enumeration of British questions in the paragraphs “a”, “c”, and“e”. The Soviet Government has approached the British Government with a similar proposal.

As regards the date of the negotiations, the Soviet Government on its part would consider it possible to set the time for the negotiations for the beginning of August, 1944. In case the Government of the United States and the Government of Great Britain will have no objections to that date it will be possible to agree on an exact date of the beginning of the negotiations, to which date would be timed the return to Washington of Soviet Ambassador A. A. Gromyko, who is authorized by the Soviet Government to participate in the negotiations.

Washington , July 9, 1944.

95 For memorandum of conversation of May 30, see p. 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]; memorandum of conversation of June 1 not printed, but see third paragraph of footnote 81, p. 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 500.CC/7–1044

[Document 397]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 96

[Washington,] July 10, 1944.

The Chinese Chargé d’Affaires97 called at my request. I gave him the substance of the Soviet Aide-mémoire received yesterday in regard to the proposed informal conferences on the peace and security organization to be held in Washington between the four large nations. I said that, in sending out the invitations some weeks ago, I made a most earnest plea to the British and the Russians jointly to agree to have all the four large nations sit at this conference together; that later when acceptance of this plea looked doubtful and when it appeared possible that the Russians might turn the whole matter down in an undesirable manner, I sent word to the effect that, in the event the Russian Government could not possibly proceed in conjunction with the other three, it say so, and that the United States and Great Britain would meet with China in separate conferences on the same subject. I added that, in its reply of yesterday, the Soviet Government stated that it preferred two separate conferences, as aforesaid. I said that I had cabled Russia and Great Britain suggesting a meeting between those two countries and mine on August second; that the whole matter in the meantime was being kept confidential. I stated that it would be necessary for us to talk over with the British the question of a suitable time for a meeting between them, the Chinese and ourselves; that it might be necessary to confer with the Russians so as to have everybody satisfied about the arrangements and programs with respect to the two separate conferences; and that the Chinese Government might think over all phases and let me have its suggestions. I said that I would confer with the British, who might desire to confer with the Russians; that in any event I would get all phases of developments as soon as possible with respect to both conferences. I concluded by saying that I deeply regretted that we could not have one single conference.

C[ordell] H[ull]

96 The Ambassador in China (Gauss) was informed of the substance of this conversation in telegram 947, July 13, 4 p.m. (500.CC/7–1344).

97 Liu Chieh.

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt [Document 398]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 98

[Washington,] July 11, 1944.

We have developed the following plans for handling the forthcoming discussions with the British, Russians, and Chinese on the subject of international organization and security:

Plan for discussions

The discussions, which are scheduled to begin on August 2, are envisaged as an informal interchange of views at a high diplomatic level, relating both to basic policies and to technical questions. It is contemplated that the order of the discussions will follow three phases: (1) consideration of basic policies; (2) detailed technical discussions in separate groups, based on the discussion of basic policies; and (3) further consideration of basic policies in the light of the detailed technical discussions.

The topics to be discussed fall naturally into three broad categories: (1) the structure and establishment of the proposed international organization, (2) arrangements for pacific settlement of disputes, and (3) security arrangements. The detailed discussions would be conducted in three separate sections corresponding to these categories, as indicated in the attached tentative agenda.

Assignments of American group

The Secretary of State would be the senior American representative. He would have general direction of the proceedings and would preside over the first and third phases of the discussions.

The Under Secretary of State would head the American group responsible for the detailed technical discussions and would be chairman of the third section, to which the detailed technical discussions of security arrangements is assigned.

It is contemplated that, in the American-British-Soviet phase of the discussions, a British official would be chairman of the first section and a Soviet official would be chairman of the second section. In the American-British-Chinese phase, a Chinese official would be chairman of the second group.

The American group would be assigned to the three sections as follows: First section: Messrs, Bowman,99 Grew,1 and Pasvolsky.

Second section: Messrs. Hackworth,2 Hornbeck,3 and Cohen.4

Third section: Messrs. Stettinius, Dunn and Wilson,5 Admirals Hepburn,6 Willson7 and Train,8 and Generals Embick,9 Strong10 and Fairchild.11

Members of all sections and Assistant Secretary of State Long12 would be present at the first and third phases of the discussions.

Advisers and Secretariat

The American group would have advisers and a secretariat to assist them in preparation for and in the conduct of the discussions. Arrangements would be made for the assignment of Army and Navy officers to the secretariat. This secretariat would also function as the secretariat for the discussions. The advisers would be Mr. Notter and officers of the four geographic offices of the Department. Mr. Alger Hiss13 would act as executive secretary.

Arrangements

Tentative arrangements have been made for using Dumbarton Oaks in Georgetown, the former estate of Mr. Robert Woods Bliss, now the property of Harvard University, as headquarters for the discussions.

Meetings might be held there for a few hours in the latter part of each morning and afternoon, with luncheon and perhaps tea being served. There would be a few offices available for consultation and immediate drafting needs, but the groups representing the other nations would presumably do the major part of their separate drafting in their own embassies before and after the daily meetings.

Preparatory period

The members of the American group would immediately organize themselves in three committees, corresponding to the three sections. Mr. Stettinius would take general charge of the necessary preparations for the discussions and would look to Mr. Pasvolsky as responsible for the activities of the first committee; Mr. Hackworth for the second; land Mr. Dunn for the third. We are planning to have the entire group meet once a week with the Secretary of State. There would also be a small informal steering committee, both for the period of preparation and of actual discussions. It would be under the chairmanship of the Secretary with Mr. Stettinius as vice chairman. Its members would be Messrs. Dunn, Hackworth, Pasvolsky, Admiral Willson and General Strong.

I hope that these arrangements meet with your approval.

[Annex]

Tentative Agenda

I. The structure and establishment of the proposed international organization: 1. General structure and scope of the organization.

2. Membership, functions, powers, and voting procedures of a general assembly.

3. Membership, functions, powers, and voting procedures of a smaller executive body (executive council).

4. Administration and secretariat of the organization.

5. Arrangements for coordination of economic and other functional activities and agencies, and the relation of such agencies and of any regional arrangements to the general organization.

6. Procedure of establishment and inauguration of the organization.

II. Arrangements for pacific settlement of disputes. 1. Methods of pacific settlement.

2. Procedures, regional and otherwise, outside the central organization.

3. Procedures in the council and in the assembly.

4. The structure and functions of the Court of Justice.

III. Security arrangements. 1. Scope and character of joint action with respect to a. Determination of threats to or breaches of the peace;

b. Prevention or suppression of such threats or breaches;

c. Enforcement of decisions.

2. Methods of joint action. a. Not involving use of armed forces.

b. Involving use of armed forces.

3. Arrangements for provision of armed forces and facilities.

4. Relationship to mutual defense and regional systems.

5. Arrangements for the regulation of armaments and the manufacture and traffic in arms.

6. Structure and functions of an armaments and security commission.

7. Interim arrangements pending the effective functioning in the field of security of the general organization.

98 Copy obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N. Y. Memorandum handed to President Roosevelt by Secretary Hull on July 12, 1944. At the same time he handed the President a draft of the Tentative Proposals completed on July 6, which had been constructed along the lines approved by the President on February 3, and those embodied in the draft of April 29, previously submitted to the President. The July 6 draft, however, included proposals on economic and social cooperation and on international trusteeship to which only a reference had been made in the “Possible Plan” of December 29, 1943. See Tentative Proposals of July 18, p. 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 402].

99 Isaiah Bowman, Adviser to the Secretary of State.

1 Joseph C. Grew, Director of the Office of Far Eastern Affairs.

2 Green H. Hackworth, Legal Adviser.

3 Stanley K. Hornbeck, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for postwar problems and plans.

4 Benjamin V. Cohen, General Counsel, Office of War Mobilization.

5 Edwin C. Wilson, Director of the Office of Special Political Affairs.

6 Adm. Arthur J. Hepburn, Department of the Navy, Chairman of the General Board of the Navy Department.

7 Vice Adm. Russell Willson, member of the Joint Strategic Survey Committee in the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

8 Rear Adm. Harold C. Train, Department of the Navy, member of the Joint Post-War Committee in the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

9 Lt. Gen. Stanley D. Embick, Department of the Army, member of the Joint Strategic Survey Committee.

10 Maj. Gen. George V. Strong, Department of the Army, member of the Joint Post-War Committee in the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

11 Maj. Gen. Muir S. Fairchild, U. S. Army Air Forces, member of the Joint Strategic Survey Committee.

12 Breckinridge Long.

13 Alger Hiss, Special Assistant to the Director, Office of Special Political Affairs.

The Department of State to the Soviet Embassy 500.CC/7–1244

[Document 399]

The Department of State to the Soviet Embassy 14

Aide-Mémoire

The Government of the United States has noted zwith pleasure the aide-mémoire dated July 9 of the Embassy of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in which it is stated that the Soviet Government is ready to take part in discussions in Washington with representatives of the United States and of the United Kingdom on the subject of creating an organization for the maintenance of peace and security throughout the world.

It is further noted that the Soviet Government would consider it possible to set the time for these discussions at the beginning of August. It is accordingly suggested, subject to the concurrence of the Soviet and British Governments, that the date be now fixed as August 2.15

The Embassy’s aide-mémoire also contains a statement that the Soviet Government would consider it expedient during the first phase of the discussions to limit itself to the discussion of questions relating to the scope and character of the international organization, to arrangements designed to promote security, and to the methods and procedures for the establishment of the international organization. In this connection this Government wishes to make special reference to the topical outline, dated February 17,16 which was handed to the Soviet Ambassador on February 19. As indicated in that outline, it is the view of this Government that the primary purpose of the proposed international organization is the peaceable adjustment of disputes, to which end it is recognized that the organization must possess the ultimate authority to use force as a measure of last resort. Consequently, in the view of this Government procedures for a peaceful adjustment of disputes must necessarily constitute an integral part of any effective scheme for an international organization. It is confidently believed that discussions of the structure of a world organization for the maintenance of peace and security will necessarily extend to consideration of procedures of pacific settlement and this Government will expect in the forthcoming discussions to state fully its views on this subject. This Government also expects during the course of the forthcoming discussions to express its views on the subject of possible arrangements for territorial trusteeship and of those aspects of international economic relations which concern the relationship of specialized economic and social agencies to the general organization, as distinguished from questions involving substantive policies in these fields. It is hoped that upon further consideration the Soviet Government will feel disposed to enter into preliminary discussion of these topics.

It is perhaps unnecessary to emphasize that this Government regards the forthcoming discussions as constituting an informal exchange of views, subject, of course, to eventual acceptance by the governments concerned of any understandings that may be reached. Moreover, it is to be anticipated that subsequent discussions with the other United Nations and continuing interchange of views between the three powers may well lead to modifications of the statements which it is to be anticipated will be jointly formulated as a result of the forthcoming discussions.

Washington , July 12, 1944.

14 Text of this document was transmitted on July 13 to London in telegram 5485 and to Moscow in telegram 1680.

15  The Ambassadors in the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union were instructed on July 12, in telegrams 5475 and 1679, respectively, and the Ambassador in China, on July 13, in telegram 948, to inform the Foreign Offices there of the suggested date of August 2 to open the conversations in Washington and of this Government’s intention so to announce on July 15 unless there were objections (500.CC/7–1344).

The Chinese Chargé (Liu) was similarly informed by the Director of the Office of Far Eastern Affairs (Grew) on July 13.

Ambassador Winant, in his telegram 5523, July 13, 5 p.m., reported Mr. Eden’s approval of the opening date early in August and the Secretary’s proposed announcement to the press (500.CC/7–1344). Chinese approval of the announcement was indicated in telegram 1226, July 15, 1 p.m. (500.CC/7–1544). Soviet approval was given in telegram 2623, July 17, 11 p.m. (500.CC/7–1744).

16  Ante, p. 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 500.CC/7–1344: Telegram

[Document 400]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, July 14, 1944—1 p.m.

1691. Present plans for informal discussions on an international organization are that the two tripartite conversations, namely between the United States, Great Britain and the Soviet Union and between the United States, Great Britain and China, will take place concurrently in Washington early in August.

In order to keep our discussions with the British and the Chinese more or less on a parity with the similar discussions in which the Soviet representatives will participate, our present plans call for holding both sets of conversations at Dumbarton Oaks, which has appropriate facilities for informal conversations of this nature. There is no other suitable location in Washington at which talks of this kind could be held this summer and the fact that the American representatives and presumably the British representatives for the two sets of talks are identic makes it imperative that the two sets of talks be held in the same place.

Please convey the foregoing information concerning the proposed arrangements to Molotov for his information and at the same time assure him that although held in the same place the two sets of conversations will be kept entirely separate.

We do not anticipate any objection from the Soviet Government to the proposed arrangements but should Molotov have any doubts on the subject we hope you will find it possible to dispel them since for a number of reasons we consider it most desirable that the contemplated arrangements for the talks be accepted.

Your 2557, July 13, 10 p.m.17 just received. Is answered by our 1680, July 13, 9 a.m.18 which crossed it.

Hull

17 Not printed; it inquired concerning a reply to Soviet aide-mémoire of July 9.

18 See footnote 14, p. 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399].

President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State 500.CC/7–1544

[Document 401]

President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State 19

[Aboard the Presidential Special,] July 15, 1944.

I have read the memorandum20 with great interest and it has my approval. I like the plans for discussion and the preliminary outline of the proposals for a general international organization. Good luck!

Franklin D. Roosevelt

19 President Roosevelt had left Washington aboard the Presidential Special on July 13 and returned on August 17. For an itinerary of this trip, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, p. 3, footnote 3.

20 Reference is made to both the memorandum of July 11, p. 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 398], on recommended arrangements for the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations and the July 6 draft of Tentative Proposals handed to President Roosevelt on July 12. The final draft of the “Possible Plan” of July 6, with one exception, the submission of the section regarding international trusteeship, was identical with that transmitted after approval by the President on July 15, to the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and China on July 18, 1944, infra.

United States Tentative Proposals for a General International Organization, July 18, 1944 Lot 60–D 224, Box 51: ISO 23g (Special)

[Document 402]

United States Tentative Proposals for a General International Organization, July 18, 1944 21

July 18, 1944

[Here follows Table of Contents, not printed.]

I

General Character of an International Organization

A. Nature of the Organization

1. The general international organization to establish and to maintain security and peace, as projected in the Four-Nation Declaration, signed at Moscow, October 30, 1943, should be based on the principle of cooperation freely agreed upon among sovereign and peace-loving states. The organization should be open to membership by all such states, large and small, and should be world-wide in character.

2. The United Nations and the nations associated with them, and such other nations as the United Nations may determine, should comprise the initial membership of the organization.

3. The organization should be empowered to make effective the principle that no nation shall be permitted to maintain or use armed force in international relations in any manner inconsistent with the purposes envisaged in the basic instrument of the international organization or to give assistance to any state contrary to preventive or enforcement action undertaken by the international organization.

4. The organization should be so constituted as to make possible the existence of regional organizations or other arrangements or policies not inconsistent with its purposes, and to enable such organizations and arrangements to function on their own initiation or by reference from the general organization on matters of security and peace which are appropriate for regional adjustment. The general organization should at all times be kept informed of the activities in matters of security and peace undertaken by regional organizations or under regional or other arrangements.

5. The organization should comprise arrangements for cooperation in the fields of economic and other specialized activities.

B. Purposes

1. The primary purposes of the organization should be, first, to maintain international security and peace, and second, to foster through international cooperation the creation of conditions of stability and well-being necessary for peaceful and friendly relations among nations and essential to the maintenance of security and peace.

C. Methods

As methods to be used for the maintenance of security and peace, the international organization should: a. encourage peaceful adjustment of controversies by the parties themselves;

b. initiate cooperative action by member states for the settlement of disputes;

c. encourage the use of local or regional procedures for the settlement of disputes capable of adjustment by such procedures;

d. recommended political or diplomatic action to adjust differences;

e. provide for, and encourage resort to, processes of mediation, conciliation, and arbitration;

f. encourage reference of justiciable matters to the international court of justice;

g. refer to the court justiciable questions pending before the organization;

h. settle disputes referred to it by the parties or over which it assumes jurisdiction on its own initiative;

i. determine the existence of threats to the peace or breaches of the peace;

j. arrange, when necessary, for economic, commercial, financial, and other measures of enforcement not involving use of armed force;

k. provide for the use of armed force, when necessary in support of security and peace, if other methods and arrangements are inadequate.

D. Principal Organs and Agencies

1. The international organization should have as its principal organs: a. A general assembly;

b. An executive council;

c. An international court of justice; and

d. A general secretariat.

2. The international organization should have additional organs, councils, commissions, or other agencies for cooperation in international economic and social activities, for territorial trusteeship responsibilities, and for such other functions as may be found necessary.

II

A General Assembly

A. Composition

The general assembly should be composed of representatives of the states members of the international organization.

B. Powers

1. It should be empowered to receive and to examine representations addressed to the international organization on matters deemed to be of concern to the organization, and to take action in matters of concern to the international organization which are not allocated to other organs by the basic instrument.

2. The principal powers of the general assembly should be as follows: a. to make, on its own initiative or on request of a member state, reports on and recommendations for the peaceful adjustment of any situation or controversy the continuation of which it deems likely to impair the general welfare;

b. to assist the executive council, upon its request, in enlisting the cooperation of all states toward giving effect to action under consideration in or decided upon by the council with respect to: (1) the settlement of a dispute the continuance of which is likely to endanger security or to lead to a breach of the peace;

(2) the maintenance or restoration of peace; and

(3) any other matters within the jurisdiction of the council;

c. to initiate studies and make recommendations for: (1) the promotion of international cooperation;

(2) the development and revision of rules of international law; and

(3) the promotion of the observance of basic human rights in accordance with principles or undertakings agreed upon by the states members of the international organization;

d. to admit to membership in the organization independent states not initial members of the organization;

e. to elect the members of the executive council not having continuing tenure and the judges of the international court of justice;

f. to approve the budget of the organs and agencies of the organization, to determine a provisional and a continuing basis of apportionment of expenses of the organization among the member states together with the procedure of apportionment, and to review, make recommendations on, and take other action concerning the budgets of specialized agencies brought into relationship with the international organization in accordance with the terms agreed upon between such agencies and the international organization;

g. to receive reports from the executive council and other organs and agencies of the organization and from all specialized bodies or agencies brought into relationship with the international organization;

h. to exercise the powers with respect to economic and social activities and territorial trusteeship stipulated in Sections VIII and IX;

i. to provide for the coordination of the general policies of all organs and agencies of the international organization and organizations and agencies brought into relationship with it;

j. to set up any bodies or agencies it may deem necessary for the performance of its functions; and

k. to propose amendments of the basic instrument, which should come into force when approved by two thirds of the member states through their constitutional processes, including the members having continuing tenure on the executive council.

C. Representation and Voting

1. The delegation of each member state should consist of not more than six representatives.

2. Each member state should have one vote in the general assembly, except as provided for in paragraph 3 below.

3. In taking decisions with respect to the budget of the organs and agencies of the organization, the continuing basis of apportionment of expenses of the organization, and the budgets of specialized agencies brought into relationship with the organization each member state should have voting power in proportion to its contribution to the expenses of the organization.

4. Decisions with respect to the admission to membership in the organization, the election of the members of the executive council, the election of judges of the international court of justice, and the provisional basis of apportionment of expenses, should be taken by a two-thirds vote. Other decisions should be taken by a majority vote.

D. Organization and Sessions

1. The general assembly should meet annually, but it may be convened in special session on the initiative of the executive council or under any procedure the assembly may adopt.

2. It should elect its president, vice-presidents, and other principal officers who should serve for annual terms or until their successors assume office. It should perfect its organization and adopt its own rules of procedure.

3. It should maintain headquarters at the seat of the international organization but may hold its sessions in whatever places would best facilitate the accomplishment of its work.

III

An Executive Council

A. Composition and Representation

1. The executive council should consist of eleven states members of the international organization. These states should be elected annually by the general assembly and should not be immediately eligible for re-election except that the United States of America, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and the Republic of China should have continuing tenure.

2. There should be a provision in the basic instrument that whenever the executive council finds that a government freely chosen by the French people has been established and is in effective control of the territory of the French Republic, France should be added to the list of states members having continuing tenure on the council.

3. Each state member of the executive council should have one representative.

4. Any state member of the organization not having a seat on the executive council should be entitled to attend and to be heard on matters specially affecting that member.

B. Powers

1. The executive council should have primary responsibility for the peaceful settlement of international disputes, for the prevention of threats to the peace and breaches of the peace, and for such other activities as may be necessary for the maintenance of international security and peace. It should in such matters represent, and act on behalf of, all the members of the international organization and should in every case seek a just and equitable settlement of international disputes.

2. The principal powers of the executive council are enumerated below in Section V, Pacific Settlement of Disputes, Section VI, Determination of Threats to the Peace or Breaches of the Peace and Action with Respect Thereto, Section VII, Regulation of Armaments and Armed Forces, and Section X, General Administration and Secretariat.

C. Voting

1. Each state member of the executive council should have one vote.

2. Decisions with respect to the following matters should be taken by a majority vote including the concurring votes of all member states having continuing tenure, except as provided for in paragraphs 4 and 5 below: a. the assumption on its own initiative or on reference to it of jurisdiction over a dispute;

b. the terms of settlement of disputes;

c. the negotiations for a general agreement on the regulation of armaments and armed forces;

d. the determination of threats to the peace, of breaches of the peace, and of acts obstructing measures for the maintenance of security and peace; and

e. the institution and application of measures of enforcement.

3. Other decisions should be taken by a simple majority vote.

4. In all decisions any state member of the executive council should have the right to abstain from voting, but in such case the abstaining member should be bound by the decision.

5. Provisions will need to be worked out with respect to the voting procedure in the event of a dispute in which one or more of the members of the council having continuing tenure are directly involved.

D. Organization and Sessions

1. The executive council should be in continuous session. Its headquarters should be maintained at the seat of the organization, but its meetings may be held at any places best facilitating its work.

2. It should elect its chairman.

3. It should be empowered (a) to set up any bodies or agencies it may deem necessary for the performance of its functions, (b) to perfect its own organization, and (c) to adopt its own rules of procedure.

IV

An International Court of Justice

1. The Permanent Court of International Justice should be reconstituted in accordance with a revision of its present Statute.

2. The revised Statute should be made a part of the basic instrument of the international organization.

V

Pacific Settlement of Disputes

1. All states, whether members of the international organization or not, should be required (a) to settle disputes by none but peaceful means, and (b) to refrain from the threat or use of force in their international relations in any manner inconsistent with the purposes envisaged in the basic instrument of the international organization.

2. The parties to any dispute the continuance of which is likely to endanger international security or peace should be obligated, first of all, to seek a settlement by negotiation, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, reference to the international court of justice, or other peaceful means of their own choice.

3. Where feasible, regional or other arrangements should be employed to bring about adjustment or settlement of local or regional controversies.

4. If the parties fail to effect a settlement of such a dispute by the means above indicated, they should be obligated to refer it to the executive council.

5. Any member state should have the right to bring to the attention of the general assembly or the executive council any condition, situation, or controversy the continuance of which the member deems likely to endanger international security or peace.

6. The general assembly should refer to the executive council any such condition, situation, or controversy which it deems to require action to prevent an immediate threat to the peace or breach of the peace.

7. The executive council should be empowered to investigate any such condition, situation, or controversy and should recommend appropriate procedures or measures of adjustment. It should be empowered to do this upon its own initiative, or upon reference from the general assembly, or at the instance of a member state.

8. The executive council, when it determines upon its own initiative that there exists between member states a dispute which constitutes a threat to security or peace, and which is not being adequately dealt with by other procedures, should be authorized to assume jurisdiction to effect a settlement.

9. In case of a dispute involving a member and a non-member state, or non-member states only, and which is likely to lead to a breach of the peace, the executive council should be authorized to take jurisdiction either upon its own initiative or at the request of any party.

10. In discharging its responsibilities with respect to pacific settlement the executive council should be authorized to seek the advice and assistance of the general assembly, to appoint commissions of inquiry or conciliation, to refer to the international court of justice justiciable disputes or legal aspects of disputes not wholly justiciable, to employ regional or local procedures, or to take any other appropriate measures to effect a settlement.

11. The executive council should be empowered with respect to any dispute referred to in the preceding paragraphs to encourage and facilitate the execution of the terms of any settlement determined under the authority of the international organization.

VI

Determination of Threats to the Peace or Breaches of the Peace and Action With Respect Thereto

A. Determination of Threats to the Peace or Breaches of the Peace

1. The executive council should be empowered to determine the existence of any threat to the peace or breach of the peace, and to decide upon the action to be recommended or taken to maintain or restore peace. It should be empowered to seek the advice and assistance of the general assembly in any matter in this connection, and of the international court of justice in any matter within the competence of the court.

2. The executive council should be empowered to determine whether any condition, situation, or act involving an alleged threat to the peace or breach of the peace is of sufficient gravity to require action.

Note: The conditions, situations, and acts envisaged above include, for example: a. employment of military forces by a state within the jurisdiction of another state not authorized by the international organization;

b. failure to comply with a request of the executive council to accept procedures of pacific settlement in any dispute;

c. failure to accept terms of settlement of a dispute as prescribed under the authority of the international organization;

d. failure to comply with a request of the executive council to maintain the existing position or to return to a prior position as determined by the executive council;

e. failure to observe obligations with respect to the regulation of armaments and armed forces and the manufacture of and international traffic in arms; and

f. obstruction of measures for the enforcement of security and peace through failure to comply with a call from the council (1) to carry out agreed undertakings regarding measures of enforcement, and (2) to make available, upon the basis of agreed obligations, forces and facilities for enforcement action.

B. Initiation of Action

1. When the executive council determines that a threat to the peace or breach of the peace exists, it should immediately (a) require the parties to refrain from any action likely to aggravate the situation and (b) decide upon the measures to be recommended or taken.

2. All states, whether members of the international organization or not, should be required to refrain from giving assistance to any state contrary to preventive or enforcement action undertaken by the international organization or with its authorization.

C. Measures not Involving the Use of Armed Force

1. The executive council should be empowered to call upon member states to institute measures not requiring the use of armed force in support of its decisions and to determine, in any instance necessitating such action, what measures should be employed and the extent to which the respective member states should be called upon to apply them.

2. In any case in which such action has been decided upon by the executive council, member states should be obligated: a. to cooperate with the executive council and the general assembly in obtaining the information necessary for action and in appropriate measures of publicity;

b. to take part in concerted diplomatic measures;

c. to take part in collective economic, commercial, and financial measures; and

d. to join in mutual efforts to afford relief and aid to states assuming undue burdens through participation in such measures instituted by the executive council.

D. Measures Involving the Use of Armed Force

1. In the event that other measures prove to be inadequate, the executive council should be authorized to provide for the use of armed force to assure the maintenance of security and peace.

2. The member states should undertake to furnish forces and facilities when needed for this purpose at the call of the executive council and in accordance with a general agreement governing the number and type of forces and the kind and extent of facilities to be provided. Such an agreement should be concluded among the member states at the earliest possible moment after the organization comes into existence. It should be a duty of the executive council to formulate as rapidly as possible plans and procedure for the negotiation of such agreement. In formulating plans for the agreement and in carrying out operations under the agreement, the council should take account of the geographical position of the member states, their regional or special obligations, their population, and their relative resources. This agreement would be subject to ratification by each country in accordance with its constitutional processes.

3. The general agreement should provide that member states should be obligated to maintain in condition of effective readiness the armaments and armed forces which by the agreement they respectively undertake to make available for international cooperative action.

4. Pending the conclusion of the general agreement, the states parties to the Four-Nation Declaration, signed at Moscow, October 30, 1943, and other states in position to do so should provide, on the basis of their various capacities and of undertakings among themselves, such forces and facilities as may be needed for establishing and maintaining security and peace.

5. The executive council should be empowered to call upon the member states for economic, financial, and commercial and other assistance necessary to support and to supplement international action involving the use of armed force as and when undertaken. Member states should undertake: a. to afford such assistance, the terms to be determined in consultation between the executive council and member states;

b. to deny economic or other assistance to a state against which enforcement action is undertaken, the nature of such assistance to be defined by the executive council at the time of the action; and

c. to join in mutual efforts to afford relief and aid to states assuming undue burdens through participation in security measures involving the use of armed force instituted by the executive council.

6. The executive council should be empowered to call upon member states to grant rights of passage and to furnish facilities, including bases, necessary to the effective action of forces operating under authority of the council. The conditions of the exercise of these rights and of the furnishing of facilities, including bases, should be determined, in advance or at the time of action, by agreement between the executive council and the member states in whose territories these rights and facilities are required.

7. The executive council, advised and assisted by the permanent security and armaments commission described in part E below, should be responsible for the planning of, and should exercise general supervision over, any use of force determined to be necessary under the provisions of the basic instrument of the international organization.

E. Security and Armaments Commission

1. The executive council should establish a permanent security and armaments commission.

2. The permanent security and armaments commission should provide the executive council with the expert military advice and assistance necessary for the discharge of the responsibilities of the council concerning the employment of force and the regulation of armaments and armed forces, and should perform such duties of study, recommendation, administration, and execution as the council may assign to it.

3. The security and armaments commission should have authority, with the approval of the executive council, to establish subordinate agencies and otherwise perfect its organization.

VII

Regulation of Armaments and Ahmed Forces

1. In order to promote the establishment and maintenance of international security and peace with the least diversion of the world’s human and economic resources for armaments, the executive council should be made responsible for initiating negotiations for the conclusion of a general international agreement, envisaged in the Four-Nation Declaration signed at Moscow, October 30, 1943, for the establishment of a system of regulation of armaments and armed forces and for the regulation of the manufacture of and international traffic in arms.

2. The executive council should be authorized to exercise such powers for the execution of obligations stipulated in the general international agreement as may be assigned to it by the agreement.

3. The armaments and armed forces of the Axis states [to be named later]21a should be governed by the terms of their surrender and by the authority established thereunder. The executive council should be empowered to take responsibility for assuring the execution of stipulations governing the armaments and armed forces of the Axis states, to the extent that such responsibility may be assigned to it in succession to the authority established under the surrender terms.

VIII

Arrangements for Economic and Social Cooperation

A. Purpose and Relationships

1. With a view to the creation of conditions of stability and well-being which are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations among nations, the general international organization should facilitate and promote solutions of international economic and social problems, including educational and cultural problems. Responsibility for the discharge of this function should be vested in the general assembly, and under the authority of the general assembly, in an economic and social council, established in the basic instrument of the organization.

2. The various specialized economic and social organizations and agencies would have responsibilities in their respective fields as defined in their statutes. Each specialized economic or social organization or agency should be brought into relationship with the general international organization. The terms under which each specialized organization or agency should be related to the general international organization should be determined by agreement between the economic and social council and the appropriate authorities of the specialized organization or agency, subject to approval by the general assembly.

B. Powers

1. The economic and social council should be empowered: a. to carry out, within the scope of its functions, recommendations of the general assembly in regard to economic or social matters;

b. to make recommendations, on its own initiative, to the various specialized organizations or agencies, to governments, or to the general assembly, with respect to economic or social problems, including those beyond the scope of the specialized organizations, with a view to promoting the fullest and most effective use of the world’s economic resources, to achieving high and stable levels of employment, and in general to advancing the well-being of all peoples;

c. to coordinate the activities of the specialized economic and social organizations or agencies through advisory consultations with, and recommendations to, such organizations;

d. to receive and consider reports of the activities, decisions and recommendations of the specialized organizations or agencies, and to submit annually an analysis of such reports to the general assembly;

e. to examine the administrative budgets of the specialized organizations or agencies with a view to recommending to the organization or agencies concerned, and in appropriate cases to the general assembly, as to the most effective utilization of resources; and

f. to perform such other functions within the general scope of its competence as may be assigned to it by the general assembly, or as may be provided for in future agreements among member states.

C. Composition and Voting

1. The economic and social council should consist of qualified representatives of a specified number [24]21b of member states. The states designated for this purpose should be selected by the general assembly for terms of three years, and each such state should have one representative.

2. Each representative of a state designated as a member of the economic and social council should have one vote. Decisions of the council should be taken by majority vote.

3. The economic and social council should make suitable arrangements for representatives of the specialized organizations or agencies to participate without vote in its deliberations and in those of the commissions established by it.

D. Organization

1. The economic and social council should establish an economic commission, a social commission, and such other commissions as may be required to facilitate the consideration of problems within the scope of its functions. Such commissions should consist of experts specially qualified in their respective fields, who may be nationals of any member state of the general international organization. The members of the commissions should be appointed for periods of three years.

2. The economic and social council should elect a chairman from among its members. A director and a staff of competent experts should serve as the permanent secretariat of the economic and social council and of the commissions, and should constitute a part of the central administrative staff of the general international organization.

3. The council should adopt its own rules of procedure and otherwise perfect its organization.

IX

Arrangements for Territorial Trusteeships 22

A. Scope and Purposes

1. Subject to such exceptions as may be made by common agreement in the interests of international peace and security, the international organization should establish a system of international trusteeship by which it would (a) succeed to the rights, titles, and interests of the Principal Allied and Associated Powers under the Treaty of Versailles23 and the Treaty of Lausanne24 and to the rights and responsibilities of the League of Nations under the Covenant with respect to the non-self-governing territories detached from previous sovereigns in 1919, and (b) acquire authority over certain territories which may be detached from the present enemy states. By action of the general assembly the system might be extended to any territories for which assistance is requested by member states having control over such territories. Italy and Japan should be required by the terms of the peace settlement to relinquish all their rights, titles, and interests in the present mandated territories.

2. The basic objectives of the trusteeship system should be: (a) to promote, in accordance with the provisions of any declaration or code that may be agreed upon, the political, economic, and social advancement of the trust territories and their inhabitants and their progressive development toward self-government;25 (b) to provide non-discriminatory treatment in trust territories for appropriate activities of the nationals of all member states; and (c) to further international peace and security.

B. Structure and Composition

1. The responsibilities of trusteeship should be vested in the general assembly and should be exercised through a trusteeship council and through administering authorities in the trust territories.

2. The trusteeship council should be composed of persons of special competence designated (a) one each by the states administering trust territories as continuing members and (b) one each by an equal number of other states named periodically for that purpose by the general assembly.

3. The administering authority in each trust territory should be a state or a specially constituted international administration. Each territory now administered under a mandate, except those so administered by Japan, should be administered under the trusteeship arrangements by the state which now administers it, unless in a particular case or cases some other disposal is made by the international organization.

4. Each territory should be governed in accordance with a territorial charter, which should constitute the fundamental law of the territory, defining the rights and obligations of the parties concerned. Each charter should be so drawn as to take into account the special circumstances of each territory.

C. Powers

1. The general assembly should be empowered: (a) to call for, receive, and consider the reports, recommendations, and decisions of the trusteeship council; (b) to take action upon the recommendations of the trusteeship council concerning the initial territorial charters, alterations in such charters, designation of administering authorities, removal of such authorities for cause, and the conditions of termination and the act of termination of trusteeship in any territory; (c) to establish advisory commissions of a regional or technical character with respect to trust territories situated in a given region; and (d) to encourage and facilitate cooperation between the administering authorities and the specialized agencies brought into relationship with the international organization.

2. The trusteeship council exercising general supervision over trust territories, should be empowered: (a) to advise the administering authorities; (b) to examine reports from the administering authorities; (c) to interrogate representatives of those authorities; (d) at its discretion, to receive petitions and to hear petitioners in person; (e) to recommend or pass upon economic projects of more than a minor local character and to conduct investigations relevant to such projects; (f) to conduct periodic inspections in the trust territories; and (g) to make recommendations to the general assembly regarding the territorial charters, the administering authorities, and other aspects of the trusteeship system.

D. Procedures

1. The financial position of each trust territory should be reviewed periodically by the trusteeship council. The costs of administration should in general be met from the regular revenues of the trust territory, and the costs of supervision should be provided in the budget of the international organization.

2. The administering authorities should cooperate fully in the application of any international security measures specified by the executive council.

X

General Administration and Secretariat

A. Office of Director-General and the Central Administrative Staff

1. A director-general of the international organization should be elected by the general assembly with the concurrence of the executive council. He should serve for a period of five years and should be eligible for re-election.

2. The director-general should have the responsibilities of the chief administrative officer of the organization. He should serve as the secretary-general of the general assembly, of the executive council, and of such other organs and agencies of the international organization as the assembly or the council may direct. He should also provide for coordination, within the general policies appertaining to administration established by the general assembly, of the administrative procedures and regulations of the specialized agencies brought into relationship with the international organization. He should report to the general assembly on the work of all the organs and agencies of the organization and of commissions, agencies, and other bodies of concern to the international organization.

3. The director-general should appoint such deputies and principal officers of the central administrative staff as may be required, subject to confirmation by the general assembly, and such other personnel of secretariats for which he is responsible. He should recommend for appointment by the general assembly or the executive council respectively the directors of commissions and agencies responsible respectively to these two organs.

4. The director-general and his deputies should not during their terms of office hold any other public office.

5. Officers appointed to the central administrative staff should be selected on the basis of technical or administrative competence and experience, and of the widest practicable distribution among nationalities. These officials should be constituted as a continuing international civil service, and they should upon their appointment pledge themselves to perform the duties entrusted to them in the impartial manner and spirit necessary to advance the interests and purposes of the international organization.

B. Obligations of Member States With Respect to Officials of the Organization

1. Member states should impose no obligations upon their nationals who are officials of the international organization that are inconsistent with the performance of their duties.

2. Member states should grant the customary diplomatic immunities to officials of the international organization when engaged on business of the international organization or when traveling to and from their offices.

XI

Procedure of Establishment and Inauguration

1. The general international organization for the maintenance of peace and security projected in the Four-Nation Declaration signed at Moscow, October 30, 1943, should be established at the earliest practicable date—if feasible, prior to the termination of hostilities.

2. The United States of America, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and the republic of China, the signatories of the Four-Nation Declaration, should take immediate steps to reach agreement in principle on the fundamental features of a plan of the organization.

3. An agreed statement of the fundamental features of the plan of the organization should then be transmitted to the governments of the other United Nations and the nations associated with them, together with an invitation to communicate comments and suggestions for the purpose of arriving at a substantial consensus of views on the fundamental features of the plan.

4. As soon as practicable, the signatories of the Four-Nation Declaration should convene a conference of the United Nations and the nations associated with them for the formulation and signature of an agreement which would constitute the basic instrument of the organization. The agreement should be submitted to the participating governments for ratification in accordance with their respective constitutional procedures.

5. Provision should be made in the agreement for its coming into force when ratified by fifteen states including the signatories of the Four-Nation Declaration.

6. The signatories of the Four-Nation Declaration should be empowered by the agreement to call the first meeting of the general assembly of the organization under the agreement upon its coming into force.

7. The general assembly should elect at its first meeting the non-continuing members of the executive council, and the council should thereupon immediately come into existence and proceed to organize itself.

21  Handed on July 18 to representatives of the British, Soviet, and Chinese Embassies; the American Embassies in the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and China were so informed in telegrams 5735, 1728, and 978 to London, Moscow, and Chungking, respectively.

Chapter IX, Arrangements for Territorial Trusteeships, printed herein, was included in the July 6 draft submitted to the President on July 12 but was omitted in the original document of July 18; a notation was inserted at this point as follows: “Note: Documents on this subject will be available later.” The omission was made, at the urging of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to avoid international discussions at this period of the war on the question of international trusteeship for dependent territories, and the subject was not brought forward in the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations.

Each representative of the other three Governments was advised by the Secretary of State that this Government would be glad to have copies in return of any similar draft proposals which each of them might have (memorandum by the Secretary of State of conversation with the Soviet Chargé, July 18, filed under 500.CC/7–1844). For texts of British, Soviet, and Chinese proposals, see pp. 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], and 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], respectively.

21a Brackets appear in the original.

21b Brackets appear in the original.

22 This chapter was omitted in the original document of July 18, and a notation was inserted at this point as follows: “Note: Documents on this subject will be available later.”

23 Signed June 28, 1919; for text, see Foreign Relations, The Paris Peace Conference, 1919, vol. xiii, p. 55.

24 Signed August 6, 1923; for text, see Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. ii, p. 1153.

25 For Secretary Hull’s comments on commitment by the United States and Great Britain to the “progressive development of dependent peoples toward self-government”, in a conversation with the British Minister of State, Richard Law, on July 20, 1944, see vol. iii, p. 50.

The Soviet Embassy to the Department of State 500.CC/7–2044

[Document 403]

The Soviet Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

The Embassy of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics refers to the Aide-Mémoire handed by Secretary of State Hull to Soviet Chargé d’Affaires Kapustin on July 12.

The Soviet Government agrees that the forthcoming negotiations be regarded as a preliminary stage of discussing the question regarding the organization of international security and, in connection with it, does not consider it necessary for the parties to start the exchange of views with a presentation of any written drafts. The principal task in the mentioned informal discussions should be considered the exchange of views for the establishment of a common point of view of the three Governments on the main questions of the universal organization of security with the purpose of working out the principal provisions for the establishment of the mentioned organization. Therefore the Soviet Government considers it desirable to accept in the beginning a less binding form of discussion. Such a preliminary exchange of views, possibly, would contribute in a better way for a quicker working out by the Allied Governments drafts of an international organization of security, which would serve as basis for working out afterwards an agreed upon draft of the three Governments. The Soviet Government supposes besides that, after such a preliminary exchange of views in Washington, the participating in the discussions parties, if they will have any prepared drafts, could enter their proposals in written form.

The Soviet Government would prefer to start the discussions approximately on August 10, if this date would be acceptable for the American and British Governments.

As regards the sequence of the discussions between the United States, Great Britain and the Soviet Union and the discussions between the United States, Great Britain and China the Soviet Government proposes that these discussions be conducted not simultaneously but at a different time, i.e. first should take place one cycle of discussions, and after its completion the other cycle of discussions. Besides, the Soviet Government would agree to any sequence of these two cycles of the discussions.

Washington , July 20, 1944.

Tentative Proposals by the United Kingdom for a General International Organization Lot 60–D 224, Box 57: D.O./Conv.A/Doc. 2

[Document 404]

Tentative Proposals by the United Kingdom for a General International Organization 26

[ July 22, 1944.]

Memorandum A: Scope and Nature of the Permanent Organisation

i. the principles and objects of the organisation

1. The World Organisation will consist of independent States freely associated and working together for the better realisation of the common good of mankind.

2. The principles and objects of the Organisation should be stated in the preamble of the document which brings it into existence. The Organisation should be as simple and flexible as possible. Thus the statement of its principles and objects becomes specially important, since they lay down the conditions in which action is taken by the members of the Organisation.

3. Article 4 of the Moscow Declaration27 lays down that the Organisation shall be based on the “sovereign equality” of States. Two principles follow from these words. In the first place members must agree to respect each other’s political independence, and secondly all members enjoy equality of status, though not necessarily equality of function.

4. Members should not be entitled to receive the benefits of the Organisation unless they are prepared to accept the obligations that go with them. Moreover, it is the assumption of such obligations by all members that ensures to all the benefits of the Organisation. This should be recognised, therefore, as one of the principles of the organisation.

5. The object of the Organisation is stated in Article 4 to be the “maintenance of international peace and security,” and this must be regarded as its primary purpose.

6. But if recourse to violence is ruled out, means must be provided by which members of the Organisation can settle their disputes by other than violent methods; and the establishment of machinery for achieving this must be one of the objects of the Organisation.

7. Moreover, in order that international peace and security shall be maintained there must be in the world some means by which States meet together to review and harmonise their political action. One of the objects of the Organisation, therefore, must be to create a meeting place where statesmen can come together for that purpose.

8. But international peace and security must be made positively, and not only kept by the negative means of suppressing violence. They will be confirmed and strengthened by guarding the right of man to seek his freedom, and by increase in the well-being of human society. Statesmen of the United Nations have declared this to be both the purpose and the condition of development in international order.

9. It will be necessary therefore, for the Organisation to create institutions to promote the betterment of world-wide economic conditions and the removal of social wrongs, and to support and extend institutions which now exist for these purposes.

10. Thus the principles and objects of the Organisation, and consequently the conditions in which its members receive its benefits and accept its obligations and on which actions taken under its authority are based, may be described as follows:—

11. Principles (i) That all members of the Organisation undertake to respect each other’s political independence.

(ii) That all members are equal in status though not necessarily in function.

(iii) That all members undertake to fulfil towards each other the obligations which are the conditions of receiving the benefits of the Organisation.

12. Objects (i) To ensure that peace and security shall be maintained so that men shall not live in fear of war.

(ii) To provide means by which all disputes arising between States may be so dealt with that peace and security are not endangered.

(iii) To provide a centre in which the political action of States can be reviewed and harmonised, and directed towards a common end.

(iv) To promote the betterment of world-wide economic conditions and the well-being of all men by international agreement so that the fear of want may be removed from the world.

(v) To guard and enlarge the freedom of man by institutions for the removal of social wrongs.

ii. the nature of the organization

13. In Article 4 of the Moscow Declaration it is laid down that the organisation is to be founded on the sovereign equality of its members. Its members will, therefore, retain control of their own actions except so far as they are limited by the obligations into which they freely enter and by international law.

14. Nothing has been more clearly proved during the present war than the interconnexion of peace and security in all parts of the world. The future organisation must recognise this fact and be a world organisation in which all peaceful States in every part of the world can cooperate together for their mutual benefit.

15. Though the status of all members is equal and all will enjoy the same rights and undertake the corresponding obligations, their differences in power make necessary some recognition of differences in function. The initiative for the formation of the organisation has come from the Four Powers, the United States, the U.S.S.R., the United Kingdom and China, and it is generally recognised that its success will depend more upon their continued cooperation than on any other single factor. The machinery of the organisation should make it possible for them to carry out the responsibilities which they will have agreed to undertake. They must be given, therefore, a special position in the Organisation in order effectively to maintain peace and security. In general, as regards all States the more power and responsibility can be made to correspond, the more likely is it that the machinery will be able to fulfil its functions.

16. We look forward to the liberation of France and her restoration to the ranks of the Great Powers.

17. It is presumed that there will come into existence a number of specialised technical organisations through which States will combine together for various purposes. There are already such organisations in existence as part of the system of the League of Nations. The relations of these bodies to one another and to the main organisation are considered in Memorandum D. Here it need only be said that such bodies are unlikely to survive as effective instruments in a world from which reasonable security is absent.

18. Just as there are special functional organisations, so there may be regional associations for various purposes when there is obvious advantage to be obtained by limitation of the sphere of action. In particular, there should be some Regional Organisation for the Continent of Europe if only to prevent a repetition of the circumstances which have caused two world wars to originate in that area. The condition of Europe at the close of this war will demand the special care and assistance of the United Kingdom, United States and Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and means must be found to prevent its becoming the centre of a third world tragedy. It is possible to presume that out of some “United Nations Commission for Europe” as proposed in paragraphs nine and ten of Mr. Eden’s memorandum of July 1, 194328 there might grow a European Organisation which, under the guidance of the three major Allies might foster peaceful tendencies, heal the wounds of Europe and at the same time prevent Germany from again dominating the Continent. Such Regional Associations might also come into existence for economic cooperation, for the promotion of welfare in Colonial territories, etc. It is, however, essential that they should not conflict with the world-wide Organisation, but rather assist it to carry out its purpose.

iii. constitution of the organization

19. It is generally recognised that it will be necessary to set up two main bodies, one as a centre of discussion on which all States are represented and the other a smaller body, as a centre of action. It is suggested that these bodies be termed the World Assembly and the World Council respectively.

20. Membership. It is assumed that at the outset all the United Nations will be invited to be members of the Organisation. What States now neutral shall be admitted and at what period is a matter for consideration. The enemy States cannot be admitted until they have shown by their conduct that they accept the objects of the organisation and intend to pursue them.

21. All the members of the Organisation should share in some manner in the admission of new members. It will have to [be] considered how far it is necessary to lay down conditions under which a State shall cease to be a member of the Organisation.

22. World Assembly. The sovereign equality of all members should be recognized by their representatives meeting together on a footing of equality in a World Assembly at least once a year. The right of information and criticism should belong to all members of the organisation.

23. It is not suggested that this body should have all the powers that were possessed by the Assembly of the League. The specialised and technical bodies should undertake some of the duties which that body performed and the initiative in preventing breaches of the peace should lie with the World Council.

24. It is a matter for consideration whether the World Assembly should have the control over finance and the admission of new members which the Assembly of the League possessed; but it is suggested that the States cannot be expected to contribute to the finances of an organisation without some share in their determination, nor to belong to a society to which other States may be admitted without consultation with them.

25. World Council. This body should be sufficiently small and compact to ensure action and of such a character as to possess the confidence of all members of the organisation.

26. The Constitution of this body raises many difficult problems. The relation between the Great Powers and other States has been a matter of dispute for over a century. It is clearly necessary that the Four Powers, which between them are directly responsible for the peace and security of nearly two-thirds of the world’s inhabitants, should always be represented on it. The principle has been generally accepted that where the interests of any State are specially affected it should have the right to lay its case before the Council.

27. It is desirable that the World Council should be strictly limited in size, and it has been suggested in some quarters that its membership should be restricted to the three or four Powers upon whom responsibility of maintaining peace principally depends. It is, however, open to question whether the other States would agree to the establishment of a Council so limited in number. In any case the number and method of their representation is a matter for grave consideration, and the manner in which the decisions of the Council shall be made may depend on the method adopted. The object would be to ensure that the other States on the World Council command general confidence. Some form of election is probably essential and the World Asembly might be used for this purpose.

28. In such a Council, some means must be found to ensure that the various regions of the world are adequately represented. The size and area of States vary so greatly and are so unevenly distributed over the Continents that some agreement on this subject is essential. Thus the Caribbean area has more independent States than all the rest of Latin America, which includes Brazil, Argentina and Chile. Both Europe and South America have many more States than North America or Asia. Hitherto States as different in power and status as Canada and Panama have had equal rights of representation. The principle of rotation has deprived the Council of experienced statesmen, while the creation of “semi-permanent” seats was much resented by some States that did not enjoy the privilege.

29. If the principle which governs the election of the Governing Body of the I.L.O.29 could be accepted, a more satisfactory result might be obtained, but it is difficult to find the principle to apply to a political body.

30. Should Regional Associations of sufficient importance be formed (e.g. a Regional Organisation for Europe) they might furnish a basis for representation on the Council. But for the most part, States do not recognize other States as “representing” them on institutions in which they have a major interest.

31. It is clear that this subject will need careful examination—not only amongst the Four Powers themselves but with the other States whose wishes must be taken into account.

32. The main function of the World Council will be to ensure such intercourse between the statesmen of the countries represented on it as to enable them to secure solutions of international problems by discussion and cooperative action. For this purpose regular meetings with an appropriate procedure and secretariat are indispensable. No other single factor is likely to be so influential in producing harmony between the policies of States. The experience of the last thirty years shows that there is no adequate substitute for it.

33. The functions suggested for the World Council as the body responsible for the peace of the world are described in Memorandum B.

34. It will also be necessary for the World Council to give some common direction to the functional bodies. This question is considered in Memorandum D.

35. In general it is hoped that the Council may become a centre where Governments reconcile their attitudes towards major international problems so as to be able to act decisively towards a common end.

36. Permanent Court of International Justice—It is assumed that there will be general agreement that a Permanent Court of International Justice will be set up. The proposals of the Informal Inter-Allied Committee which recently reported on this question30 seem to indicate the general lines that should be followed.

37. Secretariat—A permanent secretariat will be indispensable. The experience of the League of Nations and the I.L.O. should be utilised. It is assumed, however, that a number of new specialised technical bodies will come into existence. Further consideration of this question might, therefore, await more definite information concerning them.

38. The suggestion that the head of the Secretariat should be given the right of bringing before the World Council any matter which in his opinion threatens the peace of the world might well be incorporated in the rules of the Organisation.

39. Specialised and Technical Organisations—This question is considered in Memorandum D. The position of the International Labour Organisation will need special consideration.

40. Seat of the Organisation—This problem should be left open until further information is available on the number and character of the functional organisations.

41. Name of the Organisation—The term “United Nations” is now in general use and there does not seem to be any strong reason to substitute any other for it.

Memorandum B: The Pacific Settlement of Disputes, the Question of Guarantees and the Conditions in Which Action Should be Taken for the Maintenance of Peace and Security

i. introduction

If war is to be prevented there must be in existence a means to make those decisions which in the past have been made by violence. If an organisation is set up to achieve this end there must be some guarantee that its members will be protected should States, inside or outside it, threaten to subject them to violence. For the purpose of providing protection, action may have to be taken against an offending State, and this necessitates some statement of how and when such action shall be taken.

2. The maintenance of peace and security is not merely an end in itself but a means by which an ordered and progressive community of States may come into existence. The principles and objects of such a society have been indicated in Part I of Memorandum A, and it is on them that all action by the Organisation should be based. A state of peace should be regarded as not simply the acceptance of the status quo but active cooperative [cooperation] between States for the objects and principles of the Organisation.

3. Such ends cannot be obtained by any system of procedure however skilfully designed. Everything depends on the unity of purpose of those States which possess the greatest means of carrying out their purposes. It is impossible to ensure that these States will always be in agreement, and no set of rules will do so. But an agreement to act under certain specific principles in a World Organisation will make their cooperation easier and will enable other States to be associated with them for their common purpose.

4. If all the Great Powers are members of the Organisation and show their intention of acting in accordance with it, all States will be more ready to accept the responsibilities commensurate with their power. The absence of the United States and, for a long period, of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics from the League of Nations caused the United Kingdom to review its responsibilities. For the same reason smaller States were often reluctant to accept full responsibility.

5. For the same reason also there was great anxiety on the part of many States to define very closely the occasion for action by the organs and members of the League of Nations. As is explained below, this attempt failed in its purpose. Moreover, public opinion did not understand the elaborate safeguards against arbitrary action that existed. It is suggested that the methods embodied in the constitution of the Organisation should be simple and flexible. They should be extended and elaborated only as the result of experience.

6. It is believed also that, whatever procedure be adopted, it is only by setting up some definite security system such as is suggested in Memorandum C that reality will be given to the promises made and that the States of the world will come to believe that by accepting the rights and responsibilities given to them by the Organisation they will be spared such sufferings as they are now enduring.

ii. the pacific settlement of disputes

7. Disputes between States are divided into two main categories, those, often termed “justiciable,” that can be settled by a legal tribunal, and those in which other considerations are predominant.

8. It is the second class which produces the most intractable and dangerous disputes, including those in which the legal position is entirely clear. In the past, States have promised not to attempt settlement of their disputes by violent means, but they have not promised to settle their disputes. It is suggested that it might be well if they now promised to “settle” their disputes in the sense that they will not allow them to endanger peace and security.

9. Justiciable Disputes—It would seem that there is likely to be general agreement that justiciable disputes should be generally settled by a Permanent Court of International Justice. The Informal Inter-Allied Committee suggested in its recent report that the Court be open to all States, whether they accept compulsory jurisdiction or not. It would be possible for the International Organisation to make the acceptance of such an obligation a condition of membership, but in such a case it would be necessary to allow States to make certain reservations.

10. The difference between accepting compulsory jurisdiction with reservations and retaining full freedom of action is likely to have more psychological than practical effect, especially if the World Council can obtain Advisory Opinions from the Court on some point in a dispute, which has been submitted to it.

11. Other Disputes—Reference to the World Council is the obvious method of dealing with other disputes. Though other elaborate methods of conciliation have been set up they have hardly ever been used and they have the disadvantage of placing the case in the hands of persons who are not responsible for the consequences of failure to preserve peace. It is only in the World Council itself that a body of rules and a technique of procedure can be gradually established as the result of accumulated experience.

12. It should be for the World Council to decide what method should be used for dealing with the dispute. Any decision of this nature should be regarded as a decision of procedure and consequently be adopted by a majority vote.

13. Even on questions of principle (as opposed to questions of procedure) decisions might be taken by (say) a two-thirds majority of the Council rather than by unanimity. In all such cases all Four Powers should, of course, be included in the majority. In any event, the votes of the parties to the dispute should not be taken into account.

14. States are not likely to bind themselves to accept the decision of the Council in all cases. Nor will it be likely that they would undertake the obligation to enforce it on other States in all cases. But it would still be the function of the World Council and particularly the Great Powers on it, to see that disputes did not threaten peace and security, and for the other States to cooperate with it to the utmost of their power for that purpose, so that there would still be large opportunities for action to deal with even the most difficult disputes.

15. For, as has been indicated, if peace and security are to be maintained, some method must be devised for the setttlement of all disputes between States. “Settlement” in this sense may, as is often the case in domestic disputes, show that no remedy exists for a legitimate grievance. But, if States promise to “settle” their disputes in the sense defined in paragraph 8 above, the balance is thrown more in the direction of change. The status quo is sufficiently safeguarded by the mere existence of a universal system for the maintenance of peace and security. Should the dispute be such as to threaten peace and security, it will be for the World Council (and in such cases action will depend largely on the Great Powers) to decide what action should be taken to deal with it.

16. If the dispute involves the Great Powers themselves the machinery for decision may prove inadequate; but there is hope that the habit of cooperative leadership in the settlement of other disputes and the restraints imposed by their own promises to one another and to other States may suffice to achieve a settlement, even where the machinery seems to be inadequate to do so. Much will depend on whether a sufficient number of States, great and small, come to attach so much importance to the preservation of the system that they are prepared to run risks and make sacrifices to support and preserve it.

17. There was considerable agreement in the period between the two wars that the vague words of Article XIX of the Covenant of the League of Nations31 were hardly a sufficient recognition of the fact that there must be a change in the world. When, in the thirties, it was perceived that there was no great desire in some countries to go to war to defend some of the frontiers erected by the Peace Treaties, there was much discussion of a process which became known as “peaceful Change”. Examination of this concept shows that it cannot be obtained by a clause in a Covenant, but can only be a continual process achieved through discussion and compromise between the Great Powers and, in their due place, the smaller States concerned. But it is essential that such a process be guided by principle and subject to an ordered procedure, and it is necessary, therefore, that it should take place within an international organisation.

18. It may be hoped that the international functional organisations which are being brought into existence will contribute to furthering the process of peaceful change in an orderly manner.

iii. the question of guarantees

19. In considering this question the history of the guarantees given in the Covenant of the League of Nations must be taken into account, since it throws great light on the nature of the problem. For by Article X the Members of the League “undertook to respect and preserve as against external aggression the territorial integrity and existing political independence of all Members”. The formula had first been devised by President Wilson32 for the Western Hemisphere33 and it was at his instance that it was applied universally. No method was laid down as to how the obligation should be carried out except that the Council should “advise” upon that question.

20. Territorial Integrity—There was much opposition to the proposed Article, attention being concentrated on the question of “territorial integrity”. Lord Cecil34 suggested that the guarantee should be withdrawn if the State concerned refused to accept a modification of frontier desired by a large majority of the members of the League of Nations. The vague phraseology of Article XIX of the Covenant was all that resulted from this proposal. Mr. Lansing35 and Dr. Miller36 were also opposed to inserting Article X, though the latter came to believe that it made little difference. Sir Robert Borden37 tried to abolish it before the Covenant was signed, and the Canadian Delegation renewed the attempt of the First Assembly. In 1923 an interpretative resolution was adopted by the Assembly38 (though as Persia dissented it had no legal force) which laid down that it was for each State to decide how it should carry out its obligations under this head, while the Council was to take into account, in any advice that it might give, the geographical situation and special conditions of each State.

21. In fact, Article X was hardly ever used in the disputes which came before the League of Nations. But it was constantly referred to when some State wished to remind others that its existing frontiers were guaranteed by them. It was also constantly used by critics of the League of Nations to show that its members had guaranteed for all time frontiers which they possessed no legal means of changing without the consent of the State concerned.

22. Much smaller attention has been paid to this subject in recent discussions, though there may, of course, be a shift of interest when the treaties that register any changes of frontier which may be made come into existence. There is, however, reason to think that many States will be more interested in the establishment of some concrete security system ready for immediate action than in guarantees of frontiers which in themselves do little to prevent the invasion and occupation of territory by the armed forces of another State.

23. Many other States would be likely to refuse to accept an Organisation which committed them to a guarantee of the territorial integrity of all States.

24. It is suggested, therefore, that no such guarantee be included in the obligations undertaken by members of the Organisation.

25. Political Independence—The question of “Political independence” raises issues of a rather different character. The Moscow Declaration has already based the Organisation on the “sovereign equality” of all States, which implies that the Members of the Organisation will retain legal control over their own actions except in so far as they agree by treaty to limit it. All States naturally attach the highest value to their political independence, and the principal statesmen have made repeated declarations that they intend to respect the independence of other States.

26. But an undertaking to respect the political independence of other States does not necessarily involve a commitment to guarantee it. It is, moreover, not easy to define exactly what political independence is. One State may control the actions of another State by indirect means. It is impossible to distinguish the line which divides such actions from what is generally regarded as the legitimate influence which one State may exercise on the actions of another. The objection to any guarantee of “political independence”, therefore is that it could only extend to external and legal forms. It could not take into account more indirect methods.

27. For this reason the inclusion of a guarantee of political independence in the obligations of the Organisation seems undesirable. But it should be recognized that mutual respect for the political independence of its members is one of the essential principles of the Organisation as already pointed out in Part I of Memorandum A.

28. The Maintenance of International Peace and Security—By the Covenant of the League, States undertook to inflict sanctions on another State which broke its promises to submit a dispute to pacific settlement and resorted to war. It was for each State to determine its own actions after the Council (or Assembly) had declared that the occasion for action had arisen. Doubt was constantly expressed as to the sufficiency of this promise, though, so far as words can guarantee action, a definite promise was made. But the duty of enforcing action to be taken was laid on the members.

29. Also by Article XI of the Covenant the duty of safeguarding the “peace of nations” was laid on the League, but no specific obligations as regards the action to be taken were laid on the members.

30. The Four Powers have already, by Article 4 of the Moscow Declaration, laid down that the main purpose of the international organisation is the “maintenance of international peace and security,” and have asserted by Article 5 that “they will consult with one another and, as occasion requires, with other members of the United Nations, with a view to joint action on behalf of the community of nations” for this purpose until a system of general security is inaugurated. It would seem that it is along these lines that any guarantee should be given.

31. The duty of cooperating to the utmost of their power in the maintenance of international peace and security should be undertaken by all members of the Organisation. The degree of such cooperation must obviously depend on the geographical situation of States, the amount of their resources, their own internal situation and possibly other factors which cannot be accurately weighed in advance. But the duty of cooperating to the utmost of their power in an Organisation which is essential to the peace and security of all should be laid upon all members.

32. The duty of maintaining international peace and security should be laid in the first instance on the World Council acting on behalf of the other members of the Organisation. It will be for the World Council to take the initiative to give effect to the undertaking to maintain international peace and security. The Head of the Secretariat should, however, as suggested in paragraph 38 of Memorandum A be given the right to bring before the Council any matter which in his opinion threatened international peace and security.

33. It is for consideration whether any special obligations for the maintenance of international peace and security should be explicitly assumed within the permanent Organisation by the Four Powers who have undertaken such a responsibility pending the establishment of a general system.

34. If regional organisations are set up for security purposes, part of the responsibility in the first instance might fall on them, but, as is suggested in Memorandum A, paragraph 18, not in such a manner as to conflict with the final responsibility of the World Council for the maintenance of peace and security.

iv. the conditions in which action should be taken for the maintenance of peace and security

35. It is generally recognised that there must be some statement in the constitution of the Organisation as to the conditions in which action is taken to maintain international peace and security. In the Covenant of the League of Nations and in the attempts to elaborate the Covenant great attention was given to this question.

36. In the Covenant the sanctions of Article XVI came into force only if there was resort to war after a Member had broken the promises made in Articles XII–XIV. Even then each State necessarily determined for itself whether the casus foederis had arisen.

37. In Article X the guarantees were against “external aggression” only. It was by this article that the unfortunate word “aggression” was introduced into the Covenant and became the subject of so many debates at Geneva. But the more the word was discussed the more difficult it became to define exactly what it meant. The definition of aggression was considered important because it was thought that it might affect the right of the Council to advise that sanctions be employed. The most notable contribution to the debate was the suggestion that aggression should be determined by the acceptance or refusal of arbitration or some other peaceful method of settling disputes. But this did not cover the preparations for aggression, nor did it take the time element sufficiently into account. Moreover, the discussion and analysis of aggression enabled States to use a procedure calculated to defeat the objects of the Covenant. Illustration of this fact was given by the Japanese attack on China in Manchuria.39

38. In Article XI sanctions were not mentioned, and the obligations of the Council were stated in the most general terms. These obligations could be interpreted as giving the right to take drastic action, but in the light of other articles it was difficult to find in them any right to use force against a State. In actual practice a number of dangerous situations that arose between small States were dealt with successfully under Article XI, and a technique which involved such matters as the setting up of commissions of enquiry and the establishment of neutral zones was gradually developed.

39. In the Protocol of 192440 an attempt was made to make the sanctions “automatic” by setting up an elaborate set of rules. But the discussions showed that such a course was impossible. Sanctions depend upon the will of Governments and peoples and cannot be automatically brought into existence.

40. As has been noted above, one test of aggression is the acceptance or refusal of some method of settling the dispute. But the acceptance may be merely a method of delay while preparations for aggression are being made (as in the case of Italy’s attack on Abyssinia41 ) or actual force is used (as in Japan’s attack on China). It can be argued that in both these cases the lack of effective action was due not to any defect in the Articles of the Covenant but to the lack of will on the part of the other States, and notably of the Great Powers involved, to go to war with the recalcitrant State. But it was also true that Japan was able to use her right to veto under Article XI to place obstacles in the way of the necessary enquiry, and that preventive action against Italy, before she attacked, was difficult to take legally under the Covenant. Under the Locarno Treaties42 the signatory States could act without League authority in the case of “flagrant aggression,” but not preventively. If the question of Germany’s rearmament had been brought before the Council it is not easy to see what sanctions could have been taken against her under the Covenant.

41. In actual fact there was never any doubt, in the cases in which the League of Nations was concerned, as to the identity of the aggressor, though sometimes as to the character of the provocation to aggression. States, it is true, adapted their actions and procedure to the language and resolutions [of the Assembly of the League of Nations] adopted at Geneva and later to the Pact of Paris.43 But in no case were the real intentions and motives of the aggressive States concealed from the Governments of the other members of the League or from public opinion. The discussions at the Council and the Assembly made them sufficiently clear.

42. This experience suggests that too rigid a definition of the occasion for action is as likely to hinder as to facilitate the maintenance of peace and security. If the World Council is given power to act for this purpose it will be able to work out for itself the necessary procedure in the light of experience. It will be easier also in such circumstances to refer matters to regional associations if any such come into existence which can be used for that purpose.

43. At the same time the principles and objects governing the actions of Members will have been laid down in the Preamble to the document bringing the Organisation into existence. These, as suggested in Part I of Memorandum A, should include not only the maintenance of peace and security but also respect for the “sovereign equality” and “political independence” of its Members. If, therefore, it is laid down that the World Council shall only take action in accordance with these principles and objects, action for other purposes will be excluded. It is suggested that States will be protected from arbitrary action by the World Council as much by this safeguard as by elaborate definition, while the World Council will be more free to act to protect States from violence.

v. conclusions

44. As to the Pacific Settlement of Disputes: (i) That all States should promise to settle their disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security are not endangered.

(ii) That justiciable disputes should generally be decided by a Permanent Court of International Justice.

(iii) That other disputes should be subjected to a process of discussion and conciliation in the World Council, which should have power to determine the procedure to be followed without the consent of the parties to the dispute.

45. As to Guarantees: (i) That all Members should undertake to co-operate to the utmost of their power in the maintenance of international peace and security, and that the World Council should be required to take the initiative for this purpose.

(ii) That no guarantees should be given of the territorial integrity of Members.

(iii) That no guarantee should be given of the political independence of Members, but that respect for it should be recognized as one of the principles of the organization.

46. As to the conditions in which action should be taken for the maintenance of peace and security:

That there should be no attempt to lay down in advance any rigid definition of the occasions on which such action should be taken, but that the Members of the Organisation and the World Council should only be empowered to take action in accordance with the principles and objects of the Organisation.

Memorandum C: Security

The Military Aspect of any Post-War Security Organisation

introduction

1. The Moscow Declaration on General Security contemplates the creation, at the earliest possible date, of an international organisation charged with the maintenance of world peace and security. This organisation is to be founded on the principle of the sovereign equality of all peace-loving States, and all such States are to be eligible for membership.

2. An attempt is made in the present paper to sketch out the general lines on which the organisation of International Security might be attempted after the conclusion of the present war. The proposals deal, however, with the form which the Permanent Security Organisation might eventually take and do not relate to the intervening period. During this last period it is evident that some temporary arrangements will have to be made, but these will be obviously affected if there is some previous general agreement as to the form which the permanent organisation might assume.

general considerations

Nature of the Organisation.

3. The proposed world organisation, whatever its form, is bound to fail unless:— (a) The U.K., U.S.A., U.S.S.R., and China continue to cooperate wholeheartedly in its support.

(b) The Governments and peoples of those Powers at least retain the will to enforce peace.

(c) The organisation is simple, its objects are clear-cut, and the machinery is of a kind to which member States are already accustomed.

The Objects.

4. The objects should be:— (a) to disarm Germany and Japan;

(b) to keep them disarmed, and

(c) to prevent them or any other aggressor from again upsetting the peace of the world.

The Means.

5. The proposed organisation will have to rely, in the main, on the combined military forces of the United Nations and, in particular, of the Four Powers, working together to a common end. Most of the States concerned are already accustomed to such a system.

6. Economic measures, also, may operate to deter potential aggressors, but unless backed by force or the effective threat of it are unlikely to prove an adequate check on a State which is, itself, ready to resort to force.

The Idea of an “International Police Force”.

7. In some quarters it is contended that the coordination of military forces could best be expressed in a completely international “Police Force”. Whatever its theoretical merits, this postulates a greater advance in international co-operation than States are yet prepared to make, as it implies the existence of a world State. Practical questions of size, composition, maintenance, location and command would give rise to controversies on which international agreement would almost certainly be unobtainable.

8. We conclude that the time has not yet come for the creation of such an international force.

proposals

Higher Military Organisation.

9. The proposed world organisation implies the existence of some sort of World Council. This Council will need military advice and this advice will have to be given by States, not individually but in concert. Apart from the “strategic” side of the work, e.g., the preparation of plans to resist potential aggression, there are a number of general questions such as the regulation of armaments on which combined military advice will be required.

10. If the Higher Military Organisation is to advise the World Council and provide machinery whereby plans can be made in advance and the efforts of the forces of member States co-ordinated, it follows that it must form part of, and receive directions from, the World Council.

11. It thus becomes clear that there will have to be Military Staff Committee serving the World Council.

composition of the military staff committee

12. Since for many years to come the Four Powers will have to play the predominant part in safeguarding world peace, the permanent members of this Committee should be the military representatives of those Powers. The co-operation of States other than the Four Powers will, however, be essential in providing forces and making available bases, shipping and other facilities, and these States will expect to be given a voice corresponding to their obligations. These States should, therefore, be associated in some form or other with the work of the Military Staff Committee. The form which this association should take raises difficult problems, and must depend to a considerable extent on the form which the World Council itself takes. As a beginning, the Committee might be strengthened, when dealing with particular security problems, by the addition of military representatives of States having special concern with the question under discussion.

13. It is important that the members of the World Council should not receive military advice from more than one source. It is, therefore, essential that the members of the Military Staff Committee should be the supreme military authorities in their own countries, or their representatives.

Functions of the Military Staff Committee.

14. The primary duty of the Committee would be to prepare and keep up to date plans for the prevention of any renewed aggression by Germany or Japan, or by any other State which might at any time give signs of becoming an aggressor. The Committee would also be responsible for any necessary co-ordination of the national forces of the member States.

Force at the Disposal of the World Council.

15. For the purpose of dealing with major aggression, it is contemplated that, when necessary, the full resources of all member States would be made available. To deal with minor emergencies, part of the obligation to be assumed by member States would be the earmarking of a quota of their national forces or other resources to be at the disposal of the Council. It would be for the World Council to decide, on the advice of the Military Staff Committee:— (i) What the size and composition of the quotas of individual States should be.

(ii) In the event of an emergency arising, what particular forces should be called upon to deal with it.

16. The mere existence of national forces and their availability in emergency would not, however, by itself, suffice to ensure the maintenance of security, even if plans for their employment were made in advance by the Military Staff Committee. It would be essential that these forces should have worked together in time of peace if their co-operation were to be smooth and efficient in time of emergency. In this connexion it is difficult to exaggerate the psychological effect of constant co-operation.

Co-operation Between Forces of Different States.

17. In time of peace co-operation could best be fostered:— (a) By the joint garrisoning or occupation of certain areas; and

(b) By means of joint cruises and flights, and other joint exercises.

The method by which these objects should be achieved would require detailed study, and the necessary rights and facilities for joint garrisoning or occupation, joint exercise and joint access to ports and airfields, would have to be secured by agreement between member States and, where necessary, by expressed provisions in the peace treaties with ex-enemy States.

regions

18. There is considerable support for the suggestion that, for purposes of an international security system, the world should be divided into fixed regions, each containing forces which, under the supreme control of a World Council, would be responsible for preventing aggression in that region. It has been argued that such an arrangement would limit the military commitments of the smaller States and increase efficiency and rapidity of action.

19. From a military point of view, there are certain objections to a world organisation constructed on a basis of separate regions. These objections may be stated as follows:— (a) It is impossible to draw a boundary of a region so as to confine within it all military operations which the member States in that region might have to undertake.

(b) If an attempt were made to fix the operational boundary of a region, States on the perimeter would necessarily form part of the neighbouring geographical region. Thus neighbouring regions would overlap extensively.

(c) The defence arrangements of some Powers are based primarily on sea and air power, which do not lend themselves to regionalisation.

The advantages of regional organisation may be summarised as follows:— (a) The main attraction of a regional political organisation is that it would give the smaller nations a more direct concern in security problems, and so encourage their cooperation in security measures, thus reducing the burden on the Four Powers.

(b) Regional organisation might increase the efficiency and rapidity of both political and military action by member States of the region.

(c) A regional organisation, through its attached military staff, would facilitate military co-operation between the States concerned.

20. An argument in favour of the proposals contained in this paper is that the suggested military organisation is not dependent on the existence of regional political councils, yet could be adapted to a regional system if the latter proved desirable on political grounds. In such a case the Military Staff Committee would serve to co-ordinate the activities of the military staffs attached to the regional organisations.

conclusions

21. Our conclusions, therefore, are as follows:— (a) Any complete international “Police Force” is impracticable in present circumstances.

(b) The success of any world security organisation depends on the whole-hearted co-operation of the principal member States and on their resolution to use force to prevent aggression.

(c) The object, in the first instance, of any world security organisation should be the prevention of renewed aggression by Germany and Japan.

(d) Forces to support the World Council would have to be placed by member States at its disposal in the manner contemplated in paragraph 15.

(e) Military advice and direction would be afforded to such World Council as may be set up by a military staff composed of the supreme military authorities of appropriate Member States or their representatives.

(f) National forces associated for the above purpose should train and work together in peace to the greatest possible extent.

(g) There would be some military difficulty in the division of the world for security purposes into fixed geographical regions, but, if Regional Political Councils were set up as part of some world organisation, it would follow that they should have Military Advisory Staffs, and this might facilitate local co-operation.

Note—It will be noticed that the system proposed above differs from the system which existed prior to the war in the following three main points:— (a) The establishment of an effective Military Staff Committee of the World Council with power to formulate plans and to co-ordinate the action of national forces prior to any emergency which may necessitate their action.

(b) The joint garrisoning of certain areas by combined detachments of national forces.

(c) The training and exercising together of national forces in peacetime, making use of certain specified seaports and airfields.

Memorandum D: Co-ordination of Political and Economic International Machinery

1. There will inevitably be set up, as part of the permanent international system, a number of specialised international bodies dealing with economic and social questions. Some of these bodies have already been considered in considerable detail, e.g. the Permanent Organisation for Food and Agriculture. Others are in earlier stages of development. There are already in existence the technical organisations attached to the League of Nations, such as those which deal with Health, the abolition of the Drug Traffic, Transport, etc.

2. It will be necessary to make provision— (a) to co-ordinate the activities of these bodies on their technical side;

(b) to bring them into relation with the World Organisation.

3. The obvious methods by which these objects can be achieved are by means of discussions both between the specialised organisations themselves and in the World Organisation, and by means of an economic and social secretariat attached to the World Council.

4. No doubt some form of consultation will be arranged between the specialised bodies themselves so that their activities may be directed towards a common end. This co-ordination will be assisted by the existence of an economic and social secretariat attached to the World Council. The specialised international bodies should also have the obligation of sending reports to the World Organisation as well as to their constituent members. These reports can be considered and discussed in the World Organisation, so far as it is desirable to do so, in order to facilitate co-operation between the specialised bodies and the maintenance of international peace and security.

5. These discussions will be assisted by the existence of an economic and social secretariat attached to the World Council, and there may thus come into being for economic and social questions an equivalent to the machinery which (see Memorandum A, paragraph 38) will, it is hoped, be in existence for political questions.

Memorandum E: Method and Procedure for Establishing a World Organisation

1. It may be hoped that the exchange of memoranda and preliminary discussions between the four Powers will result in a considerable measure of agreement. The question thus arises how such agreement shall be recorded, in what form it shall be submitted to the four Governments for their approval, and how and when the views of the other United Nations shall be obtained.

2. In Article 4 of the Moscow Declaration the Four Powers recognised the necessity of establishing an international organisation “at the earliest practicable date,” and an obligation lies on them to make every effort to fulfil this promise.

3. Moreover, if agreement can be obtained between the United Nations on a definite scheme to maintain international peace and security a new hope will arise in the world which may do much to render less difficult the painful process of reconstruction. The reception of the Moscow Declaration by public opinion shows how anxious the world is to receive some assurance that such a scheme is ready for adoption.

4. There appear to be considerable advantages in obtaining at the earliest possible moment agreement on the essentials of the permanent International Organisation, leaving the more detailed working out of its several parts to a later stage.

5. If it is decided to set up any regional associations in any part of the world it will be much easier to fashion them in accordance with a general plan after the outline of the World Organisation has been determined.

6. Moreover, the existence of such an agreement will facilitate negotiation for the establishment of specialised and technical bodies. It will also make possible the adaptation of such parts of the temporary machinery set up immediately after the war as it is desired to incorporate in the permanent Organisation.

7. In the Moscow Declaration the Four Powers have assumed a responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security pending the establishment of a general system of security. This duty is likely to be less onerous if the other United Nations, and possibly States now neutral, are associated with the Four Powers for that purpose at the earliest possible date. In this way the new permanent Organisation will more quickly become a reality and take its proper position in the new world community.

8. Moreover, the Treaties of Peace will be more easily made if the form and character of the new permanent organisation are already known. Solutions of difficult problems will be more easily found and there is less likelihood of decisions being made which are incompatible with the terms of the permanent organisation.

9. It is suggested, therefore, that the aim of the preliminary talks at Washington should be to reach such agreement as can be referred to the four Governments in the form of a Draft Declaration, similar to that signed at Moscow but containing in its several clauses a more extended survey of the objects and principles of the permanent International Organisation and an outline of the machinery which it is proposed to set up to obtain them.

10. It may be necessary to omit from the draft Declaration many important particulars, e.g., the exact methods by which the members of the World Council are chosen and their number. Some of these points may perhaps be left to the new organisation itself to determine. But it may be hoped that agreement may be obtained on what political bodies shall be set up e.g., a World Assembly, a World Council and a World Court; on the principles on which action will be taken for the pacific settlement of disputes and the maintenance of international peace and security; on the necessity for agreeing some permanent method by which the military forces necessary to maintain international peace and security can be co-ordinated; and on the principles which shall govern the relations of the specialised organisations with one another and with the World Council and World Assembly.

11. It will then be for the Governments of the four Powers to determine how far they can approve the draft Declaration and it may be necessary to have a more formal exchange of views between them for this purpose.

12. If agreement is thus obtained it will be necessary to communicate it to the other United Nations for consideration, and immediately thereafter to publish it. After a suitable interval the United Nations would be invited to attend a Conference at which the Declaration, with such amendments as had been found desirable, would be definitely adopted.

13. It should then be possible to set up a body to work out a more detailed instrument in the form of a Convention or Treaty on the lines of the Declaration. It would be the coming into force of this instrument, after the ordinary procedure required for ratification, which would bring the Permanent Organisation into existence. The exact date on which it was put into force might well be left to be determined by the Four Powers who are specially responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security in the interim period.

14. This method would have the advantage that, while the Permanent Organisation can, of course, only be brought into existence with the full consent of the Governments concerned after they have consulted the peoples which they represent, its form and character will have been to a large extent decided in consequence of the adoption of the Declaration. Many of the Governments of the United Nations might find it impossible to sign a treaty at that stage. Some of them may not survive the transition from war to peace. But many of them could record their agreement to a Declaration of the kind described and so prepare the way for themselves or their successors to take part in the preparation and signature of the final instrument.

26 Copy transmitted by the British Embassy to the Department of State on July 22, 1944.

27 Declaration of Four Nations on General Security, October 30, 1943; for text, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 755.

28  Aide-mémoire of July 1, 1943, handed to the American and Soviet Ambassadors in the United Kingdom on July 2, 1943, not printed; but see aide-mémoire of July 14, 1943, which Mr. Eden communicated to the American Ambassador in London on July 16 for transmission to the Secretary of State, entitled “Suggested Principles Which Would Govern the Conclusion of Hostilities With the European Members of the Axis”, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 708.

29 International Labor Organization.

30 British Cmd. 6531, Misc. No. 2 (1944): Report of the Inter-Allied Committee on the Future of the Permanent Court of International Justice, 10 February 1944.

31 For the Covenant of the League of Nations (part I of the Treaty of Peace between the Allied and Associated Powers and Germany, signed at Versailles, June 28, 1919), see Foreign Relations, The Paris Peace Conference, 1919, vol. xiii, p. 69.

32 President Woodrow Wilson, head of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace, Paris Peace Conference, 1919–1920.

33 See proposal of January 24, 1916, for a convention between the American Republics, Foreign Relations, 1916, p. 3, and address by President Wilson, June 7, 1918, ibid., 1918, p. 577.

34 Robert Cecil, British Assistant Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, member of British Delegation, Paris Peace Conference.

35 Robert Lansing, Secretary of State, 1915–1920, member of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace.

36 David Hunter Miller, Technical Adviser (International Law), American Commission to Negotiate Peace.

37 Prime Minister of Canada, member of Canadian Delegation, Paris Peace Conference.

38 Resolution No. XIII, vote taken at the Assembly on September 25, 1923, upon a draft resolution interpreting article 10 of the Covenant; for text, see p. 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24] of Resolutions and Recommendations adopted by the Assembly during its Fourth Session (September 3d to 29th, 1923), in League of Nations, Records of the Fourth Session of the Assembly, 1923.

39 See Foreign Relations, 1931, vol. iii, pp. 1 ff., and ibid., Japan, 1931–1941, vol. i, pp. 1 ff.

40 Protocol for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes (“Geneva Protocol”) adopted by the Fifth Assembly at Geneva, October 2, 1924 (not in force); for text, see League of Nations, Official Journal, Special Supplement No. 23: Records of the Fifth Assembly, Text of the Debates (Geneva, 1924), p. 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270].

41 For correspondence concerning the Italian invasion of Ethiopia (Abyssinia) and the efforts of the League of Nations and of France and the United Kingdom to end hostilities, October–December 1935, see Foreign Relations, 1935, vol. i, pp. 662 ff.

42 For text of treaty of mutual guaranty between Germany, Belgium, France, Great Britain, and Italy, signed at Locarno, October 16, 1925, see Foreign Relations, The Paris Peace Conference, 1919, vol. xiii, p. 841. For other treaties concluded at the same Conference, see League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. liv, pp. 303–363.

43 For text of treaty between the United States and other Powers, signed at Paris, August 27, 1928, see Foreign Relations, 1928, vol. i, p. 153.

The Department of State to the Soviet Embassy 500.CC/7–1544

[Document 405]

The Department of State to the Soviet Embassy

Aide-Mémoire

The Government of the United States has taken note of the aide-mémoire of July 20, 1944 from the Embassy of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics relative to the forthcoming informal discussions on the establishment of a world security organization.

In regard to the suggestion contained in the Embassy’s aide-mémoire that the Soviet Government would prefer the discussions to start approximately on August 10, 1944, the United States Government, subject to obtaining the approval of the British Government, is agreeable to opening the discussions on that date.

With reference to the further suggestion of the Soviet Government that the discussions be carried on in two separate cycles, the United States Government is agreeable, subject to the approval of the British Government, and also agrees that the discussions with the Chinese shall take place, the British and Chinese Governments concurring, as soon as possible following the discussions between the American, Soviet and British representatives.44

The Government of the United States regards these discussions as being of the greatest importance and, on its part, is prepared at this time to carry on full preliminary discussions on the basis of any or all parts of the tentative draft proposals dated July 18, 1944 which were submitted by us to the Governments of the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom.

It would be appreciated if the Soviet Government would make available to the Government of the United States as soon as practicable the full list of the Soviet representatives at these discussions.

Washington , July 22, 1944.

44 Telegram 1773, July 26, 2 p.m., instructed the Ambassador in the Soviet Union to inform the Soviet Government that the British had acceded to the delay of talks with the Chinese until after the first cycle and also agreed to accept the latest proposed opening date of August 10 (500.CC/7–2644). Later, however, the British indicated that they would find it inconvenient to have their representatives reach Washington by that date; consequently, the United States informed the Ambassadors in the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union of plans to start the conversations on August 14 (500.CC/7–2844; 7–2244); the concurrence of the Soviet Government wag indicated in telegram 2804, July 29, 6 p.m., from Moscow (500.CC/7–2944).

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/7–2444: Telegram

[Document 406]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, July 24, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received July 25—12:30 a.m.]

2729. This telegram is of high importance with respect to the forthcoming conversations on an international security organization.

Some three weeks ago, Litvinov45 mentioned to Hamilton46 that a Soviet publication called Zvezda would shortly carry an article concerning the question of an international security organization and that this article would be worth attention. This article has now appeared in the Leningrad literary magazine of that name. The article is signed by N. Malinin which is evidently a pseudonym. A number of articles in War and the Working Class have been signed by this pseudonym. In the present instance, we think it highly probable that the article was written or inspired by Litvinov himself who is known to be concerned with matters of post-war security. In any case, it is hardly conceivable that an article on this subject would have been allowed to appear unless its contents had been carefully considered and approved by the highest Soviet authorities. For this reason, I consider that it may safely be taken as an authoritative statement of the preliminary line of thought on the subject of an international security organization.

The article is definite and businesslike in tone and in view of the high importance which obviously attaches to it, I propose to wire the entire text despite its length as soon as a careful translation has been completed. I hope that this text will go forward within the next day or two.47 Meanwhile, the Department may wish to have the following high spots: The key note of the article is the emphasis placed on the necessity for a predominant position in the proposed organization of those great powers who have proved themselves in the present war to have real [military power]. After discussing the faults of the old League,48 the article points out that even countries which are prepared to fulfill engagements entered into directly with one, two or even a small group of other powers look differently on general international engagements such as the League Covenant and the Kellogg Pact49 and are less inclined to observe them. It points out the need for speed of decision and for military and industrial power to back up decisions in matters affecting international security. The Great Powers must agree to resist aggression through their own forces, and their obligations in this respect must be documented not only in general engagements but in direct bilateral agreements or agreements between smaller groups. In these agreements, the role of each power in putting out conflagrations in this or that breeding place of aggression would be defined. These roles would vary according to circumstances but the principles of mutual assistance would be adhered to.

The organization should have a directive body composed of the great powers. This body would act only on unanimous decision.

This would not mean that small States would have no useful role to play. The Great Powers would need their help in various ways, as for example bases on their territory, the right of passage, and sometimes the participation of their armed forces. In individual instances groups of small powers might be asked to bear the main burden of military action. Small States might also be asked to participate in economic sanctions, the value of which is not rejected.

The plan for an international police force is rejected as Utopian and unnecessary, but it is admitted that an international air police force might have value.

It is agreed that almost all questions connected with the activity of the organization should pass through the general assembly; but decision should have to be approved in advance or subsequently confirmed by the directing body. The latter on the other hand would make independent decisions as a rule only in urgent matters of a military character. Decisions in the general assembly should be neither unanimous nor by simple majority, but be something between, as for example a two-thirds majority.

The organization should not be encumbered, as was the League, with a series of technical functions and suborganizations not directly concerned with the peaceful settlement of international disputes and the preservation of peace and security. The value of these technical services is not disputed but it is argued that they should be allotted to some general international organization created for the purpose or to individual organizations for each separate field. This would apply it is specifically stated, to the ILO.

It is considered that the constitution of the organization should be worked out by the four Great Powers and should then be submitted to a conference of the United Nations who would become original members. Neutrals could later be requested to join, and at a still later date ex-enemies. It would be possible however at any time to exclude states showing Fascist tendencies.

It is stated that the Russians do not have any finished and complete project for such an organization. Hope is expressed that the article which is put forward for purpose of discussion will stimulate counter proposals. Article ends with reaffirmation of the conviction that in the absence of firm leadership of a union of the Great Powers no international organization could exist without courting the fate of the League of Nations.

Harriman

45 Maxim Maximovich Litvinov, Assistant People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union.

46 Maxwell M. Hamilton, Counselor of Embassy.

47 Despatch 719, July 25, 1944, not printed.

48 League of Nations.

49 For the “Kellogg-Briand Peace Pact”, a treaty providing for the renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy, signed at Paris on August 27, 1928, by the United States and other Powers, see Foreign Relations, 1928, vol. i, p. 153.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Far Eastern Affairs (Grew) 500.CC/7–2444

[Document 407]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Far Eastern Affairs (Grew)

[Washington,] July 24, 1944.

Mr. Liu Chieh, Minister-Counselor of the Chinese Embassy, having called today at my request, I referred to our conversation on July 1350 and told him that according to present plans we expected to commence the informal conversations with representatives of Great Britain and the Soviet Union on the general subject of an international security organization on August 10, and that as soon as these talks were completed we would be glad to conduct similar conversations with representatives of Great Britain and China. In the meantime, however, we proposed to keep the Chinese representatives informed of developments in our discussions with the British and Russians and by following this method we felt that our later conversations with the British and the Chinese would proceed rapidly. On the basis of such statements as had been made by the Chinese Government concerning the general subject of an international organization for the maintenance of peace and security, we believed that our respective views were not far apart and we therefore were hopeful that an accord could be reached without great delay. I also said that these arrangements with regard to the choice of August 10 as the opening date and the decision to hold the conversations in two separate cycles probably would be announced in due course by Mr. Hull and I assumed that the Chinese Government, which we wished to consult in connection with every step, would find no objection to this procedure.

The Minister in reply said that his Government would have no objection to the proposed announcement by Mr. Hull and Mr. Liu Chieh gave no indication of disapproval of the decision to hold the conversations in two separate cycles.

The Minister said that the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Victor Hoo, would probably be one of their delegates and that Dr. Kung51 might also be a member of the delegation if he was able to get out of hospital in time. He asked me if I could tell him the make-up of our own delegation to which I replied that I would make a point of letting him know the names of our group in due course.

Joseph C. Grew

50 Memorandum of conversation not printed; it concerned a proposed press statement to be made by the Secretary of State on the forthcoming conversations. For press releases of July 17 and 19, see Department of State Bulletin, July 23, 1944, p. 84.

51 H. H. Kung, Chinese Vice Premier and Vice President of Executive Yuan, was in Washington during the conversations but did not participate as an official representative.

The British Chargé (Campbell) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/8–144

[Document 408]

The British Chargé (Campbell) to the Secretary of State

No. 473 Washington, August 1, 1944.

Sir: I have the honour to inform you under instructions from His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, that The Honourable Sir Alexander Cadogan, G.C.M.G., K.C.B., Permanent Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, has been appointed to lead the United Kingdom Delegation to the Conference at Dumbarton Oaks.

The principal members of the Delegation in addition to Sir Alexander Cadogan will be: Sir W. Malkin,52 G.C.M.G., C.B., K.C. (the Legal Adviser, Foreign Office);

Admiral Sir Percy Noble,53

Lieutenant General G. N. Macready,54

Air Marshal Sir William Welch,55

Mr. Gladwyn Jebb, C.M.G., (Foreign Office Secretary-General)56

Mr. A. H. Poynton, (Colonial Office)

Colonel Capel Dunn, (War Cabinet Offices)57

Mr. Peter Loxley, (Private Secretary to Sir A. Cadogan)

Professor Webster, (Foreign Office)58

Mr. Paul Falla, (Foreign Office).59

The secretariat accompanying the Delegation will be composed of Miss Cole-Hamilton, Miss Thomas and Miss Collard.

It is expected that the Delegation will arrive in the United States, by sea, at New York on or about August 11th. Any further particulars which may be received about the Delegation will be communicated to the Department as soon as they are received. It is possible that additions may still be made to the personnel of the Delegation.60

I have [etc.]

Ronald I. Campbell

52 Sir William Malkin.

53 Head of British Naval Delegation in Washington since 1942.

54 Maj. Gen. Gordon N. Macready, Chief of British Army Staff in Washington since 1942; his assistant was Maj. Gen. M. F. Grove-White.

55 Head of Royal Air Force Delegation in Washington since 1943.

56 Gladwyn Jebb, Councillor, Foreign Office, Secretary General of the British Delegation.

57 Military Assistant Secretary of the War Cabinet.

58 Charles K. Webster, Research Department of the Foreign Office; professor of international history, London School of Economics since 1932.

59 Economic and Reconstruction Department of the Foreign Office.

60 Two additional members listed in Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation were: Paul Gore-Booth, First Secretary, British Embassy, and A. R. K. Mackenzie, Press Officer.

Announcement to the Press by the Acting Secretary of State, August 1, 1944 500.CC/8–144

[Document 409]

Announcement to the Press by the Acting Secretary of State, August 1, 1944

August 1, 1944

The informal conversations on international organization for peace and security between representatives of this Government, representatives of the United Kingdom, and representatives of the Soviet Union will begin on the morning of August 14 at Dumbarton Oaks, After the conclusion of these conversations representatives of this Government, representatives of the United Kingdom and representatives of China will conduct similar conversations on the same subject at the same place.

As has already been indicated in prior announcements, the forthcoming conversations will be exploratory and informal in nature. Those who will from time to time participate with me in different phases of these conversations will be drawn from the following list of persons who have been assisting the Secretary of State on the subject of international organization and security: Isaiah Bowman,

Benjamin V. Cohen,

James Clement Dunn,

Henry P. Fletcher,61

Joseph C. Grew,

Green H. Hackworth,

Stanley K. Hornbeck,

Breckinridge Long,

Leo Pasvolsky,

Edwin C. Wilson,

Lieutenant General Stanley D. Embick,

Major General George V. Strong,

Major General Muir S. Fairchild,

Admiral Arthur J. Hepburn,

Vice Admiral Russell Willson,

Rear Admiral Harold C. Train.

This Government will furnish whatever secretariat may be needed for the efficient conduct of the conversations.62

61 Special Adviser to the Secretary of State for postwar problems and plans.

62  The general adviser to the American Group was Harley A. Notter. The geographic advisers were: for Europe, Charles E. Bohlen, Chief of the Division of Eastern European Affairs, and John D. Hickerson, Chief of the Division of British Commonwealth Affairs; for the Far East, Joseph W. Ballantine, Deputy Director of the Office of Far Eastern Affairs; for the Near and Middle East, Paul H. Ailing, Deputy Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs, with Raymond A. Hare, recently First Secretary in the United Kingdom, as alternate; and for Latin America, John M. Cabot, Chief of the Division of Caribbean and Central American Affairs. Michael J. McDermott was Press Relations Officer. The executive secretariat was composed of the executive secretary, Alger Hiss, Special Assistant to the Director of the Office of Special Political Affairs (Wilson), and the assistant executive secretary, C. Easton Rothwell, Assistant Chief, Division of International Security and Organization.

There were no changes among the representatives during the conversations. The only change among the advisers to the American group was that Joseph E. Johnson, Division of American Republics Analysis and Liaison, succeeded Mr. Cabot for the Latin American area in the closing week of the Soviet phase of the conversations.

General George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff of the United States Army, to the Secretary of State 500.CC/8–344

[Document 410]

General George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff of the United States Army, to the Secretary of State

Washington, 3 August, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: It is quite possible that in the coming discussions with the other principal United Nations, concerning the proposed General International Organization, questions will arise directly or indirectly related to the subject of post-war territorial settlements, as for example the question of “Territorial Trusteeships.”

It is noted that the Table of Contents of the United States Tentative Proposals for a General International Organization dated 18 July 1944, (which have been furnished the other governments concerned), indicates that Section IX63 deals with “Arrangements for Territorial Trusteeships” and that the “documents on this subject will be available later.”

It appears to the Joint Chiefs of Staff64 after examining the 6th July draft of Section IX, that this subject of Territorial Trusteeships is closely related to the broader subject of territorial settlements and that the question as to whether either subject should be discussed at this time is directly related to two basic military considerations. These military considerations are: a. The incalculable importance to the United States of the early entry of Russia into the war against Japan, and

b. The very profound changes that will be found in the relative military strengths of the major powers of the world upon the conclusion of the present war.

In order that our representatives at forthcoming discussions may be informed of the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff concerning these military considerations, the accompanying memorandum expressive of these views is enclosed.

Sincerely yours,

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
G. C. Marshall

[Enclosure]

Memorandum by the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of State

Subject: Fundamental Military Factors in Relation to Discussions Concerning Territorial Trusteeships and Settlements.

1. Discussions are to be held in the near future with representatives of the three other principal United Nations concerning the proposed future international organization. While these discussions are intended to be exploratory only, it is possible that directly or indirectly, questions concerning territorial settlements may arise. Should this be the case, it appears certain that on some questions of this nature, Russian aspirations will be found in conflict with those of the British on the one hand, and with those of China on the other. The interests of the United States would undoubtedly be involved, particularly as to the future status of the Japanese Mandated Islands,65 and British and Chinese interests could be expected to come in conflict, especially as to Hong Kong.

2. The question of whether the subject of territorial settlements should be discussed during these conversations—either specifically as to certain areas, or in general terms as to the trusteeship or other status of such areas under the General International Organization—is an important matter of policy which should be determined only after thorough examination of all factors involved. Among the basic factors which must be given full weight in determining the United States policy in this regard is the over-all military situation as it can be foreseen both before and after the defeat of Japan.

3. While the war with Germany is well advanced toward a final conclusion, the defeat of Japan is not yet in sight. The defeat of Germany will leave Russia in a position of assured military dominance in eastern Europe and in the Middle East. While it is true that on the fall of Germany the United States and Britain will occupy and control western Europe, their strength in that area will thereafter progressively decline with the withdrawal of all but their occupational and enforcement forces, for employment against Japan, or for demobilization.

4. At present, the war against Japan is being carried on almost entirely by the United States. Notwithstanding British commitments, this will continue to be substantially true after the defeat of Germany, unless Russia effectively enters the war against Japan. In this connection it must be borne in mind that whether or not Russia enters the war, the fall of Japan will leave Russia in a dominant position on continental Northeast Asia in so far as military power is concerned.

5. The land forces of Russia can provide a major contribution by being brought to bear directly against the most powerful element of Japanese military strength—her Army. The air forces of Russia or of the United States, operating from Siberian or Korean bases, would provide the most effective short range land-based air attack against the heart of Japan. Should Russia promptly and effectively enter the war after the fall of Germany, she would bring her great land and air forces into action directly against Japan, thereby materially shortening the war and effecting vast savings in American lives and treasure. Should Russia abstain from such action, due to our untimely pressing the subject of territorial settlement—or any other avoidable cause—we must be prepared to accept responsibility for a longer war. In other words, it should be clearly recognized by those guiding these prospective discussions that there is an important connection between the timeliness of discussing territorial trusteeships or other forms of territorial settlements and the earliest and least costly defeat of Japan and therefore that discussion of these controversial subjects should be delayed until that end is achieved.

6. In all discussions of post-war international arrangements it will be of great importance that our representatives keep clearly in mind the essential facts of the future world-wide military situation, which, in the last analysis, not only will largely determine the eventual territorial settlements, but which must be recognized and accepted if we are to create a post-war world structure on the basis of that reality without which it can not be expected to endure. When Germany and Japan are defeated and disarmed, and assuming they are prevented from re-building their military power, the facts of the post-war military situation will be those briefly stated in the following paragraphs.

7. The successful termination of the war against our present enemies will find a world profoundly changed in respect of relative national military strengths, a change more comparable indeed with that occasioned by the fall of Rome than with any other change occurring during the succeeding fifteen hundred years. This is a fact of fundamental importance in its bearing upon future international political settlements and all discussions leading thereto. Aside from the elimination of Germany and Japan as military powers, and developments in the relative economic power of principal nations, there are technical and material factors which have contributed greatly to this change. Among these are the development of aviation, the general mechanization of warfare and the marked shift in the munitioning potentials of the great powers.

8. After the defeat of Japan, the United States and Russia will be the strongest military powers in the world. This is due in each case primarily to a combination of geographical position and extent, manpower, and vast munitioning potential. While the United States can project its military power into many areas overseas, it is nevertheless true that the relative strength and geographic positions of these two powers are such as to preclude the military defeat of one of these powers by the other, even if that power were allied with the British Empire.

9. As a military power, the British Empire in the post-war era will be in a lower category than the United States and Russia. The primacy of the British Empire in the century before World War I, and her second-to-none position until World War II, have built up a traditional concept of British military power. It is important that, as regards British military power, we clearly recognize the substantial change that has taken place. Except for the elimination of Germany as a threat and rival, nearly all the essential factors of national power in the post-war era will have altered, to the disadvantage of the British Empire. Both in an absolute sense and relative to the United States and Russia, the British Empire will emerge from the war having lost ground both economically and militarily. In addition to the broad effect of such losses on the military power of the Empire, there are two factors which directly depreciate the military power of the United Kingdom. These are the inroads of aviation and submarine developments on the former security of her sea lanes, and the relative decline in her munitioning capacity during the past seventy years, from about fifty per cent to approximately eight per cent of world totals. A future world conflict may be expected to find British military resources so strained in the defense of her essential sea lanes, so involved in maintaining the integrity of her Empire, that little, if any, of these resources will be available for offensive action against a land power.

10. Notwithstanding her vast population and area, China possesses at present but little military strength. This condition will not be improved prior to her extensive industrialization, which in turn is dependent on the firm establishment of political unity and a stable government. Her ultimate munitioning potential, while it may be considerable, will not be developed for a long time and can not be expected to be of the order of magnitude of either Russia or the United States because of the smaller size of her reserves of iron ore.

11. As a military power, France will be found in a category below the British Empire. Nevertheless, France after her recovery will be in a position to exert a greater effort than Britain in land operations on the European continent, because of her high degree of economic self-sufficiency and the very considerable munitioning capacity she will eventually possess after the re-acquisition of the Lorraine ore fields and the reconstruction of her industry.

12. In spite of her resources in manpower, Italy, because of her very notable deficiencies in essential mineral reserves, must remain a relatively minor military power, largely dependent upon others for her munitioning needs.

13. To summarize: a. From the military point of view, it is highly desirable that discussions concerning the related subjects of territorial trusteeship and territorial settlements, particularly as they may adversely affect our relations with Russia, be delayed until after the defeat of Japan.

b. Concerning the post-war era, such discussions should give due weight to the facts that: (1) As regards their military power, the United States and Russia are dominant in their respective areas.

(2) The relative strength and geographic positions of the United States and Russia are such as to preclude the military defeat of one of these powers by the other, even if that power were allied with the British Empire.

(3) The relative military power of the British Empire has declined and will continue to be considerably less than that of Russia or the United States, but superior to that of any nation other than those two powers.

(4) The military power of China at present and for many years to come will be very small.

(5) Assuming the effective disarmament of Germany and Japan, nations other than United States, Russia, and the British Empire, may be potential sources of breaches of the international peace and security, as conceived by the General International Organization, but even collectively they will not possess sufficient military power to involve the world in a global war against the concerted will of the three great powers.

63 For text of Section IX, Arrangements for Territorial Trusteeships, see p. 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 402].

64 Adm. William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy; Adm. Ernest J. King, Commander in Chief, U.S. Fleet, and Chief of Naval Operations; Gen. Henry H. Arnold, Commanding General, Army Air Forces; and Gen. George C. Marshall.

65 In a memorandum of July 10, 1944, not printed, President Roosevelt reminded the Joint Chiefs of Staff that “we have agreed that we are seeking no additional territory as a result of the war.” He added, however, that he was working on the idea that the United Nations would ask the United States to act as Trustee for the Japanese Mandated Islands; he assumed that with this authority would also go the military authority to protect or fortify them. (Doc. P/3, February 13, 1945.)

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/8–444: Telegram

[Document 411]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 4, 1944—midnight.
[Received August 5—6:35 a.m.]

2864. For the Secretary and Under Secretary. I was called over to the Foreign Office to see Vyshinski66 late this evening. He informed me that the Soviet Government requested that the conversations on international security organization be postponed one week until August 21. He explained that the Soviet Government would not have sufficient time by August 14 to study the American tentative proposals67 in order to instruct their delegation on the questions raised. The Embassy delivered the document referred to in Department’s 1797, July 27, 12 p.m.68 to the Foreign Office on August 2 upon its receipt and, as a member of the Embassy was consulted regarding the translation by the Foreign Office on the evening of the 3d it is likely that the Russian text was not available for examination until today August 4. Vyshinski said that they were very much interested in the document and asked me to explain to you that they needed time to study it and be in a position to give their delegates directives as to Soviet point of view.

I told Vyshinski that I would cable you at once but I knew his request for postponement would come as a disappointment. He then explained further that the subject was of such far reaching importance that the Soviet People’s Commissars needed time to formulate their views.

I argued that I understood the Soviet Government had previously indicated it was not necessary to exchange proposals, to which Vyshinski replied that that was correct but since they had received the American proposals it was necessary to give them real study.

It seems evident that Soviets expected more general conversations and were taken by surprise when they were faced with our comprehensive proposals.

Harriman

66 Andrei Yanuaryevich Vyshinsky, People’s Vice Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union.

67 For text of July 18 draft of American tentative proposals for an international security organization, see p. 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 402].

68 Not printed; it indicated that the tentative proposals had been transmitted to Moscow by courier (500.CC/7–2644).

The Acting Secretary of State to General George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff of the United States Army 500.CC/8–344

[Document 412]

The Acting Secretary of State to General George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff of the United States Army

Washington, August 5, 1944.

Dear General Marshall: I wish to thank you for your secret letter of August 3, 1944, and its enclosures, on the subject of whether or not post-war territorial settlements, including the question of “Territorial Trusteeships”, should be discussed at the forthcoming four-power discussions on the subject of international organization and security.

As you have undoubtedly been informed, this matter has been fully discussed in general meetings of the members of the American group designated by the President to participate in the conversations under reference.69 The Army and Navy officers, who are members of the American group,70 have been good enough to give us from time to time an exposition of the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on this matter. I can assure you that there has been full agreement on the part of all members of the American group on this subject.

The Department is grateful to you for having made available, by means of the letter under reference and its enclosures, a full exposition of the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on this important matter.

Sincerely yours,

Edward R. Stettinius, Jr.

69 For data on these discussions, see Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, pp. 253–254.

70 For list of names, see p. 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 500.CC/8–444: Telegram

[Document 413]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, August 7, 1944—noon.

1875. Personal for the Ambassador. Please advise the Soviet Foreign Office that in conformity with the request referred to in your number 2864 of August 4 we are making arrangements to postpone the opening of the international security organization conversations until August 21. In this connection you may wish to know that the British delegation is already on the way. We have informed the British of the Russian request and of our willingness to agree to it and we assume that the Russians are likewise informing the British of the delay.71

Stettinius

71 Information regarding the postponement was also conveyed to the Chinese Embassy by Mr. Grew in a telephone conversation of August 7, and telegram 1048 of the same date to Chungking transmitted the text of a press statement by Acting Secretary Stettinius for the information of the Chinese Foreign Office.

The Soviet Chargé (Kapustin) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/8–1144

[Document 414]

The Soviet Chargé (Kapustin) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 11, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: Referring to my letter of July 2472 I have the honor to inform you additionally of the full composition of the delegation of the U.S.S.R., appointed by the Government of the U.S.S.R. for participation in the forthcoming informal discussions on the questions of establishment of an international organization of security.

Chairman of the Delegation, Andrei Andreyevich Gromyko73

Deputy-Chairman, Arkadi Alexandrovich Sobolev74

Members of the Delegation: Semen Konstantinovich Zarapkin75

Maj. General Nikolai Vassilievich Slavin76

Rear Admiral Konstantin Konstantinovich Rodionov77

Professor Sergei Alexandrovich Golunsky

Professor Sergei Borisovich Krylov78

Grigori Georgievich Dolbin79

Secretary of the Delegation, Mikhail Mikhailovich Yunin

Secretary-interpreter, Valentin Mikhailovich Berezhkov80

Sincerely yours,

A. Kapustin

72 Not printed.

73 Ambassador in the United States.

74 Minister Counselor of Embassy in the United Kingdom.

75 Chief of the American section of the Soviet Foreign Office.

76 Member of the Soviet General Staff.

77 Chief of the Administrative Division of the Navy Commissariat.

78 Member of the Foreign Office.

79 Professor of international law at Moscow University.

80 Counselor, Soviet Foreign Office. Press Officer Feodor T. Orekhov was also included in the personnel list in Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, p. 304.

Memorandum on an International Security Organization, by the Soviet Union Lot 60–D 224, Box 57: D.O./Conv.A/Doc. 2

[Document 415]

Memorandum on an International Security Organization, by the Soviet Union 81

[ August 12, 1944.]

The new international security organisation should be based on the principle, as expressed in the declaration of the Moscow Conference on general security, “of the sovereign equality of all peace-loving states”—on the principle which recognizes that the organisation must be “open to membership by all peace-loving states, large and small”.

The task of the new international security organisation should be the effecting of measures directed toward the prevention of aggression and preservation of peace and also toward the suppression of aggression. Such an international organisation can perform its task, if, when determining its constitution, powers, conditions and method of activity, the nations members of the organisation, and particularly those initiating its foundation, base themselves on the necessity of effective cooperation in measures capable of ensuring the security of peace-loving peoples.

The problem of creating a security organisation raises many diverse questions both of principle and of an organisational character. It does not, however, appear expedient during the first phase of negotiations between representatives of the U.S.S.R., the United States and Great Britain to embark on simultaneous discussion of all these questions, but rather to confine oneself to discussion of the most important questions and of the principles which should form the basis of the organisation.

Such questions should include the following points: A. Aims and Tasks of the Organisation;

B. Composition of the Organisation;

C. Principal Organs—General Assembly, Council, International Court, Secretariat General (their competency, functions and duties);

D. Means of Prevention of Aggression and Means of Suppression of Aggression.

The suggestions of the Soviet Government with regard to the above listed questions are stated in the present memorandum. After agreement has been reached on these fundamental questions it will be necessary to work out the actual constitution of the international security organisation.

The question of regional organisation is subject to further study.

The Soviet Government sees also great benefit in and attaches great importance to, cooperation between peoples in the economic, social, technical and other spheres.

For activities of this kind there might be formed, in the opinion of the Soviet Government, a separate international organisation not connected with the international security organisation, or several organisations, embracing various spheres of international cooperation. Such organisations might act separately from the international security organisation, which would devote itself wholly to the object of preserving the general peace and security of nations. The present memorandum therefore does not deal with questions outside the limits of international security and the preservation of peace. It will be possible to begin to discuss and work out such questions later, when this should appear necessary.

The International Security Organisation

I. Aims of the organisation.

The principal aims of the organisation are: 1). Maintenance of general peace and security and adoption for this purpose of collective measures for the prevention of aggression and organising the suppression of aggression which has already taken place.

2). The settlement and elimination by peaceful means of international conflicts which may lead to a breach of the peace.

3). The adoption of any other measures concerning the strengthening of universal peace and the development of friendly relations among nations.

Note: In addition it is considered desirable to establish a separate international organisation or organisations, not connected with the international security organisation, to promote international co-operation in the economic, commercial, financial, technical, social, and health spheres and other humanitarian activities.

II. Composition of the Organisation.

1). The initiators and founder-members of the organisation are the United Nations, i.e. those States which signed the declaration of January 1, 1942,82 or who have subsequently adhered to it.

2). The admission of other peace-loving States as members of the organisation shall take place individually after the statute of the organisation has been adopted and in accordance with the regulations laid down in the statute.

III. Principal Organs.

1) General Assembly

2) Council

3) International Court of Justice

4) Secretariat General.

IV. General Assembly.

1) The General Assembly shall consist of representatives of all states members of the organisation.

2) The General Assembly shall determine the general principles of international co-operation in matters of security and the maintenance of peace.

3) The General Assembly shall consider all questions concerning international security raised by the Council upon its own initiative or at the suggestion of members of the organisation. Such suggestions shall be referred to the Council for consideration if it is necessary to take measures falling within the latter’s competence.

4) The General Assembly shall consider questions concerning disarmament and reduction of armaments.

5) The General Assembly shall hear and consider yearly reports of the Council and express its opinion thereon.

6) The General Assembly shall decide questions concerning the admission and expulsion of members of the organisation on the recommendation of the Council.

7) The General Assembly shall examine questions of the modification or amendment of the statute of the organisation and of the expansion of its activities.

8) The General Assembly shall determine the allocation of expenses among the members and approve the yearly budgets of the organisation.

9) The General Assembly shall elect its chairman for each session and determine its working procedure.

10) Decisions of the General Assembly shall be taken by a two-thirds majority vote, with the exception of categories of questions for which a different principle of voting may be provided, e.g. decisions of an organisational character shall be taken by a simple majority vote.

V. The Council.

1) The Council shall consist of representatives of the Soviet Union, the United States of America, United Kingdom and China, and in the future also France, in the capacity of permanent members, and of a certain limited number of representatives of member-States, elected by the General Assembly for a term to be laid down in the statute.

2) The Council, in accordance with the powers conferred upon it and its ability to take urgent decisions, shall have primary responsibility for ensuring general peace and security of peoples.

Accordingly the Council shall be authorised to act when necessary on behalf of the whole international organisation, and decisions of the Council shall be binding upon all States members of the organisation.

3) The Council shall be entitled to take all necessary measures provided by the statute to settle any disputes and conflicts arising among States.

The Council shall determine the existence of a threat to peace and decide what measures should be taken or recommended for the maintenance or restoration of peace.

4) The Council shall in case of necessity provide for the application of armed force for the maintenance of peace and security, using for that purpose the armed forces placed at its disposal by States members of the organisation in accordance with a special agreement.

Plans for the application of armed force shall be made by the Council with the assistance of a military committee established for this purpose and composed of representatives of States members of the Council. The question of command over the armed forces in question should be worked out specially.

5) The Council shall subject to preliminary examination all questions pertaining to the preservation of universal peace and security which are subject to inclusion in the agenda of the general assemblies [sic].

6) Decisions of the Council on questions pertaining to the prevention or suppression of aggression shall be taken by a majority of votes including those of all permanent representatives on the Council.

Decisions of an organisational character shall be taken by a simple majority vote.

VI. International Court of Justice.

An international court of justice will be established and should function in accordance with a special statute.

VII. Secretariat-General.

The international security organisation shall possess a Secretariat-General, headed by a Secretary General who shall be elected by the General Assembly on the recommendation of the Council.

VIII. Methods of Preventing Aggression and Measures for the Suppression of Aggression.

1) The methods of preventing or combating aggression shall be as follows:— A) An appeal of the Council to the disputants calling for a pacific settlement of the dispute or conflict between them.

B) An appeal of the Council to the disputants with a warning regarding the possible use against them of other means of pressure provided by the statute.

C) Measures of economic pressure to be applied against the disputants by some or all States members of the organisation.

D) Severance by all members of the organisation of diplomatic relations with the aggressor.

E) Severance of commercial, financial and other economic relations with the aggressor, and also interruption of postal-telegraphic, rail and air communications.

F) The Provision, by member States not possessing sufficient armed forces, of territory for the organisation of bases in areas of strategic importance for conducting military operations against the aggressor.

G) Sea and land blockade.

H) Naval and air force demonstrations.

I) Air raids on particular military objectives of the aggressor state.

J) Military operations by members of the organisation against the aggressor.

2) The above methods of preventing and suppressing aggression shall be employed by some or all states members of the organisation.

3) To enable certain urgent military measures to be taken there shall be attached to the organisation international air force corps, the strength of which shall be determined by the Council with the assistance of a commission of military experts specially created for that purpose. Members of the organisation shall participate in this corps with their national air forces, the size of which shall be determined for each participant by the organisation.

81 The approved translation here printed is the British translation of August 22 of the Soviet memorandum (translation) which was transmitted to the Secretary of State by the Soviet Chargé in his letter of August 12 (not printed). In his Diary of August 24 Mr. Stettinius noted his announcement to the American Group “that the British-English translation of the Soviet plan, a more precise job than the Soviet translation, had been substituted for the other in all our books.”

82  Foreign Relations, 1942, vol. i, p. 25.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 500.CC/8–1444

[Document 416]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 83

[Washington,] August 14, 1944.

Subject: Meeting of Foreign Secretaries on Security Matters

After the British delegation to the security conversations had left my office following a courtesy call, the British Ambassador and Sir Alexander Cadogan, remained. I suggested that before the three Foreign Secretaries met on international matters and especially to decide on any formal agreement, possibly in September, it would be very important first to discuss steps toward conferring with the small nations.84 I said that if our four nations should go on until they turned out to the world a completed document and then undertook to send copies to the small nations in a “take it or leave it” manner, as the whole movement would be construed, it would be difficult to avoid serious attacks by demagogues, politicians, uninformed persons, et cetera. I said that Mr. Eden had first suggested this meeting of the three Secretaries.85 They said that they could see the importance of this suggestion and that they would take it up with Mr. Eden.86

C[ordell] H[ull]

83 Copy transmitted to London in instruction 4462, August 19, not printed.

84 For correspondence on concern of the United States over the attitude of nonparticipating governments toward the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations, see pp. 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 511] ff.

85 Mr. Eden’s proposal of “a further meeting of the Secretaries following the Moscow meeting to consolidate the three Governments’ views in relation to a postwar security organization” was conveyed in telegram 4919, June 20, 8 p.m. (500.CC/76), and telegram 6260, August 4, midnight (500.CC/8–444), from London; neither printed.

86 No such meeting of the Foreign Secretaries as envisaged in these communications took place.

The Chinese Ambassador (Wei) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/8–2144

[Document 417]

The Chinese Ambassador (Wei) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 21, 1944.

Sir: Referring to my note of August 14, 194487 giving a list of persons to participate at the informal conference on the International Organization for Peace and Security with the representatives of the United States and of the United Kingdom, I have the honor to inform you that the Chinese Government has appointed Dr. V. K. Wellington Koo, Ambassador to the United Kingdom; Dr. Wei Tao-Ming, Ambassador to the United States of America; Dr. Victor Chi-Tsai Hoo, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs; and General Shang Chen, Chief of the Military Mission to the United States as Delegates to attend the Conference and has designated Dr. Koo to be the Chairman of the Delegation.

The following persons have been appointed as Experts of the Delegation:88 Major-General P. T. Mow, Deputy Director of the Commission on Aeronautical Affairs and concurrently Director of the Washington Office of the Commission on Aeronautical Affairs

Rear Admiral Liu Ten-fu, Naval Attaché of the Chinese Embassy, Washington, D.C.;

Major-General Chu Shih-ming, Military Attaché of the Chinese Embassy, Washington, D.C.;

Mr. Pu Hsueh-Feng, Counselor of the Supreme Defense Council;

Dr. Chang Chung-fu, Director of the Department of American Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs;

Mr. T. L. Soong, Delegate to the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference;

Mr. Liu Chieh, Minister-Counselor, Chinese Embassy, Washington, D.C.;

Dr. Kan Lee, Commercial Counselor, Chinese Embassy, Washington, D.C.

Accept [etc.]

Wei Tao-Ming

87 Not printed.

88 In addition were advisers, Drs. S. H. Tan, C. L. Hsia, C. Y. Cheng, James Yu, Liang Yuen-li, and Chen Hung-chen; secretaries were Tswen-ling Tsui, F. Y. Chai, C. K. Hsieh, and Dr. Mon-sheng Lin, with Wellington Koo, Jr., assisting the Chairman.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/8–2144: Telegram

[Document 418]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, August 21, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received 11 p.m.]

3096. Reurtel 1954, August 16, 8 p.m.87 I shall transmit additional information on the delegation to the International Security talks if it becomes available. It would be a serious mistake, however, to assume that the statements and actions of the Soviet delegates at the talks might be influenced to any appreciable extent by the personalities or individual views of any of the members of the Soviet delegation. Soviet policy and tactics on these matters will be decided almost exclusively in Moscow and in these decisions no personalities are likely to be of importance except those of the party leaders in the Kremlin.

It is obvious that none of the civilian members of the delegation has any personal influence in the policy-making organs of the Soviet Union and that they will be able to do little more than expound the briefs given them and report back to Moscow the views expressed by the British and ourselves. The military members are no doubt in the same position. The delegation may be expected to endeavor to obtain the maximum information and concessions from us and to give a minimum in return.

[Here follows comment on individual members of the Soviet delegation.]

Harriman

87 Not printed.

II. Dumbarton Oaks Conversations:II. Dumbarton Oaks Conversations:89

89 Commencing on Monday morning, August 21, 1944, the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations lasted a total of 7 weeks, and were held in two phases: the first, (A), ending September 28, between representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics; the second, (B), beginning September 29 and ending October 7, between representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, and China.

Contents

A. Anglo-American-Soviet phase: August 21–September 28, 1944A. Anglo-American-Soviet phase: August 21–September 28, 1944

[419] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] August 21, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./1

[420] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 22, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./2

[421] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 23, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./3

[422] Tentative Chinese Proposals for a General International Organization

[Washington,] August 23, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 52: ISO 83

[423] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 24, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./4

[424] Extract From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Fourth Day, Thursday, August 24, 1944.

Lot File 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[425] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 25, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./5

[426] Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 5 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 11 a.m., August 25, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, August 25, 1944, 11 a.m.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 1–12

[427] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt

Washington, August 28, 1944.

[428] Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 6 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 11 a.m., August 28, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, August 28, 1944, 11 a.m.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 1–12

[429] Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Sixth Day, Monday, August 28, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[430] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 29, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./6

[431] Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Seventh Day, Tuesday, August 29, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[432] Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 7 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 3 p.m., August 29, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, August 29, 1944, 3 p.m.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 1–12

[433] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Washington, August 29, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 1–12

[434] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 30, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./7

[435] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 31, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./8

[436] Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 8 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 12:15 p.m., August 31, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, August 31, 1944, 12:15 p.m.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv. A/JSC Mins. 1–12

[437] Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Ninth Day, Thursday, August 31, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[438] President Roosevelt to the Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars of the Soviet Union (Stalin)

Washington, August 31, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 1–12

[439] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 31, 1944.

500.CC/8–3144

[440] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 1, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./9

[441] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 2, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./10

[442] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 3, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./11

[443] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 4, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./12

[444] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 5, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./13

[445] Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Fourteenth Day, Tuesday, September 5, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[446] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 6, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./14

[447] Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Fifteenth Day, Wednesday, September 6, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[448] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 7, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./PR-/15

[449] Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Sixteenth Day, Thursday, September 7, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[450] The Chairman of the Council of Peopled Commissars of the Soviet Union (Stalin) to President Roosevelt

Moscow, 7 September, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 1–12

[451] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 8, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./16

[452] Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Seventeenth Day, Friday, September 8, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[453] President Roosevelt to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, 8 September, 1944.

[454] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 9, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./17

[455] Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 12 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 3 p.m., September 9, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, September 9, 1944, 3 p.m.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 1–12

[456] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 11, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./18

[457] Extracts from the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Nineteenth Day, Monday, September 11, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[458] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 12, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./19

[459] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 13, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./20

[460] Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 14 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 10:30 a.m., September 13, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, September 13, 1944, 10:30 a.m.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 13–18

[461] Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Twenty-first Day, Wednesday, September 13, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[462] Compromise Proposal Drafted by the Formulation Group

[Washington,] September 13, 1944.

500.CC/9–1744

[463] The Chairman of the Council of Peopled Commissars of the Soviet Union (Stalin) to President Roosevelt

[ Moscow ,] September 14, 1944.

[464] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 14, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./21

[465] Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Twenty-second Day, Thursday, September 14, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[466] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 15, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./22

[467] The Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt

Washington, September 15, 1944.

[468] Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Twenty-third Day, Friday, September 15, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[469] President Roosevelt to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

[Quebec,] September 15, 1944.

[470] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 16, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./23

[471] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt

Washington, September 17, 1944.

500.CC/9–1744

[472] Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 15 of the Joint Steering Committee, Held at 4 p.m., September 17, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, September 17, 1944, 4 p.m.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 13–18

[473] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 18, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./25

[474] Extract From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Twenty-sixth Day, Monday, September 18, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[475] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 19, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./26

[476] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 19, 1944—1 p.m. [Received September 19—9:25 a.m.]

500.CC/9–1944: Telegram

[477] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 20, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./27

[478] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 21, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./28

[479] Extract from the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Twenty-ninth Day, Thursday, September 21, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[480] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt and the Secretary of State

Washington, September 21, 1944.

500.CC/9–2144

[481] The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt

[London,] September 25, 1944.

500.CC/9–3044

[482] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt

Washington, September 27, 1944.

500.CC/9–2744

[483] Extract From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Thirty-fourth Day, Wednesday, September 27, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[484] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 28, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./33

[485] Extract From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Thirty-fifth Day, Thursday, September 28, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[486] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 28, 1944.

500.CC/9–2844

[487] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Washington, September 28, 1944.

500.CC/9–2844

[488] President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill)

[Washington,] 28 September, 1944—1:25 p.m.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./1

[Document 419]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] August 21, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations90

Morning Meeting at Dumbarton Oaks

We met this morning, as scheduled, with Secretary Hull presiding.91 Secretary Hull, on your behalf, Ambassador Gromyko, and Sir Alexander Cadogan then delivered prepared statements which were released to the press.92 The entire proceedings were open to the press which attended in large numbers. In addition the entire morning’s proceedings were filmed for the newsreels and a number of press photographs were separately taken.

Meeting of Joint Steering Committee at Dumbarton Oaks at 3:00 p.m.

Ambassador Gromyko with two of his associates, Sir Alexander Cadogan with one of his associates, and I with Mr. Dunn and Mr. Pasvolsky, met as a Joint Steering Committee for the conversations to settle upon the necessary arrangements.93 Agreement was reached as follows:

(a) Language

Both the Russian and the English languages are to be regarded as of equal importance during the conversations although it is expected by all concerned that English will probably be used more frequently than Russian.

(b) Chairmanship

It was proposed by Sir Alexander Cadogan and seconded by Ambassador Gromyko that as chief representative of the host Government, I should be the permanent chairman for the conversations.

(c) Statements to Press—Generally

It was agreed that no statements would be made to the press except on the basis of agreement arrived at by the three chairmen.

(d) Initial Procedure

After considerable discussion it was agreed that the initial procedure of the conversations will be a presentation by the Soviet group of its views.94 In the course of this presentation the British and the American groups will make such comments as they desire.

(e) Press Announcements on August 22

The press will be informed tomorrow at noon95 that it has been decided that the conversations will proceed to the discussion of the general principles of international organization and that at the first meeting the Soviet group will present its ideas.

90 Arrangements were made (1) for the Under Secretary of State to report personally to President Roosevelt about 5 o’clock each afternoon, and (2) for a group composed of the Under Secretary, Mr. Hackworth, Mr. Dunn, and Mr. Pasvolsky to call on the Secretary of State about 6 o’clock each afternoon to report on the day’s activity. As a result, Mr. Stettinius had summary memoranda (progress reports) prepared of each day’s proceedings for the President and the Secretary of State, usually identical in text. Herein are included the reports to Secretary Hull except in several instances when the reports to President Roosevelt offer additional information.

91 For lists of the American, British, and Soviet representatives taking part in the conversations of the first phase, see pp. 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], and 706 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 48], respectively; see also Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, pp. 302–304.

92 Department of State Bulletin, August 27, 1944, pp. 198–202. Mr. Stettinius observed in his Diary on August 21: “Mr. Hull especially stressed the necessity of justice to all nations while Ambassador Gromyko placed especial emphasis on the greater responsibilities of the great powers in maintaining peace and security. Sir Alexander’s remarks followed a middle course between the views just mentioned.”

93 The Joint Steering Committee, constituted on August 21, held 18 meetings during the first phase. A record of its meetings was kept by the American Group in the form of brief informal minutes which were cleared by all three Groups or Delegations.

94 The tentative proposals of all three Governments were used initially as the basis of these discussions, but thereafter, though without decision, the basic frame of reference in building joint proposals was the American Tentative Proposals; for texts of the American, British, and Soviet papers, see pp. 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 402], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], and 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], respectively.

95 For press release, see Department of State Bulletin, August 27, 1944, p. 202.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./2

[Document 420]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 22, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Second Day

Morning Meeting at Dumbarton Oaks

We met this morning, as scheduled. All members of all three groups were present.96 In addition a number of advisers and members of the Secretariat97 were also in attendance. The matters covered fell under the following headings:

(a) Chairmanship

On the motion of Ambassador Gromyko, seconded by Sir Alexander Cadogan, I was chosen as the permanent chairman. (This had been agreed upon at the meeting of the Joint Steering Committee yesterday afternoon.)

(b) Announcements

I thereupon reported to the meeting on the arrangements which had been agreed upon at yesterday afternoon’s meeting of the Joint Steering Committee. (These points are set forth in the Progress Report of August 21 on the first day’s proceedings.)

(c) Presentation of Soviet Views

As had been agreed upon at the meeting of the Joint Steering Committee yesterday afternoon I called upon Ambassador Gromyko to present the views of the Soviet group on the general principles of international organization. Points of interest in the Ambassador’s statement and in the subsequent discussion may be listed as follows:

(1) Importance of Early Statement as to Major Principles

Ambassador Gromyko said that his Government believed that it would be desirable to attempt to reach agreement on major principles. Sir Alexander Cadogan expressed his agreement with this view, adding that he understood that this did not exclude subsequent discussion in the course of the conversations of other points. Ambassador Gromyko concurred in this statement.

(2) Regional Questions and Social and Economic Questions

There was general agreement that the questions of regional organization and of the relationship of the general organization to social and economic problems should be referred to a subcommittee for consideration.

(3) Use of the Word “Aggression”

Sir Alexander Cadogan expressed the view that in view of the uncertainty of the meaning of the word “aggression”, as shown by prior experience, it might be wise in any definition of the aims of the proposed organization to use broader and more inclusive language.

(4) Voting Procedure in the Council

Sir Alexander Cadogan stated that he had been instructed to propose that voting in the Council be on the basis of a two-thirds vote in all cases [including the unanimous votes of all permanent members]98 and further that states which are parties to disputes should not vote.

(5) International Court of Justice

It was agreed that this subject should be referred to the Legal Subcommittee99 for further discussion.

(6) Security Functions of the Organization

Sir Alexander Cadogan stated that the Soviet reference to a possible international air force required further study and that the British attitude on this would in large part depend upon matters of detail. There was general agreement that detailed security matters should also be referred to a subcommittee.

Meeting of Joint Steering Committee at Dumbarton Oaks at 12:00 Noon

The same persons who had met yesterday afternoon1 met again at noon to determine further questions of procedure. It was decided that the following subcommittees should be established: a drafting subcommittee, a legal subcommittee, a subcommittee on general questions of international organization, a subcommittee on technical security questions.2

Afternoon Meeting at Dumbarton Oaks

The afternoon [plenary] meeting was devoted to a presentation of the British point of view by Sir Alexander Cadogan and a presentation of the American point of view by me, Mr. Pasvolsky, Mr. Hackworth, and Mr. Dunn.

96 The morning and afternoon plenary sessions held on August 22 were the last plenary sessions held until the closing day of the first phase.

97 The Secretariat included Alger Hiss (American), Paul Falla (British), and M. M. Yunin (Soviet).

98 Conversations, Phase A, Plenary Notes 1, August 22, 1944.

99 This subcommittee held four meetings, August 24 and 31, and September 2 and 6, and prepared the initial draft of joint proposals on the international court of justice.

1 Ambassador Gromyko, Arkady Alexandrovich Sobolev, Valentin Mihailovich Berezhkov, of the Soviet Group; Sir Alexander Cadogan and Gladwyn Jebb, of the British Group; and Under Secretary Stettinius, Leo Pasvolsky, and James C. Dunn of the American Group; Alger Hiss was also present as secretary.

2 For a list of members of the four subcommittees, see Department of State Bulletin, August 27, 1944, p. 203; also, Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, pp. 306–307.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./3

[Document 421]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 23, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Third Day3

Meeting of the Subcommittee on Organization 4

We presented a tentative list of topics for discussion which was acceptable to the British, but as the Soviets expressed a desire to talk from their document, that course was followed.

(a) Aims of the International Organization

The aims stated in the Soviet memorandum5 were generally acceptable, but were thought by our group and by the British to require extension, by inclusion of basic principles and objects of the Organization.

(b)Economic and Social Cooperation

I suggested that the important question of economic and social cooperation be taken up in the Joint Steering Committee.

(c) Principal Organs

We agreed as to the principal organs and that the Organization should be empowered to create necessary subordinate agencies.

(d) General Assembly

After Ambassador Gromyko clarified the Soviet view that the Assembly would discuss and the Council would decide and act, both on security and peace and on arms limitation, we were in substantial agreement. It was understood that the Council would not have to take cognizance of matters referred by the Assembly.

(e) Admission and Expulsion of States

We and the British proposed that admission of states be left to the Assembly. We and the British proposed that there be no reference to withdrawal or expulsion. The Soviet group will consider these views.

(f) The Council

Ambassador Gromyko said his Government desired to have the five permanent members of the Council named in the Basic Instrument and not subject to election. Both the British and the Soviet groups felt that no provision should be made for increasing the number of permanent seats. I suggested that this matter be discussed in the Joint Steering Committee.

Meeting of the Subcommittee on Security 6

We discussed a tentative list of topics presented by our group. These were extended by reference to our proposals relating to security and to the British memorandum on the military aspects of security.7 Ambassador Gromyko and Sir Alexander agreed in principle to our proposals concerning (1) determination of the existence of threats to peace or breaches of peace, (2) action to be taken and obligations of member states, (3) measures for the enforcement of decisions, both those not involving the use of armed force and those requiring provision of armed forces and facilities. Both the British and the Russian groups requested that matters of detail be reserved for clarification in the drafting subcommittee.8

3  Mr. Stettinius noted in his Diary of this date that he introduced members of the three groups to President Roosevelt at the White House, and the President talked with them informally about five minutes. For text of his remarks, see Department of State Bulletin, August 27, 1944, p. 197.

In a private meeting with the President, after the large group had left, Mr. Stettinius indicated that he had given to President Roosevelt copies of each of the three plans and a summary memorandum of comparison for ready reference. He also gave to the President a memorandum outlining the seven points on which the American view was not settled: (1) compulsory settlement of disputes; (2) voting by great powers in the Council; (3) election of Council members; (4) number of permanent seats; (5) type of majority vote to be used in the Council; (6) withdrawal and suspension; and (7) ad hoc judges. (Diary, August 23, pp. 7–10.)

4 This subcommittee held four meetings, August 23, 24, and 30, and September 4.

5  Ante, p. 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415].

6 This subcommittee, the largest body, comprising 17 members, held two meetings, on August 23 and 31.

7 Memorandum B, p. 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 404].

8 This subcommittee, staffed primarily with legal experts, and designated essentially as an editorial body, held only one meeting, near the close of the first phase, to consider the editorial form of the agreed Proposals.

Tentative Chinese Proposals for a General International Organization Lot 60–D 224, Box 52: ISO 83

[Document 422]

Tentative Chinese Proposals for a General International Organization 9

[Washington,] August 23, 1944.

Essential Points in the Charter of an International Organization

i. general principles

1) The International Organization shall be universal in character, to include eventually all states.

2) The principle of equality of all states and all races shall be upheld.

3) The International Organization shall preserve and maintain peace, on the basis of international law and justice.

4) The use of force as an instrument of national policy shall be absolutely prohibited. Any dispute between states, irrespective of its nature or origin, shall be settled only by pacific means.

5) The member states shall promote economic cooperation, with a view to securing social stability and economic development of all nations.

6) The member states shall strive to advance social welfare, raise the standard of living of their people, promote cultural collaboration among nations, and effect a solution of population and demographic problems.

ii. membership of the international organization

1) All states, not original members of the International Organization, may be admitted into the International Organization upon resolution of the Assembly. However, the Axis states shall not be admitted until it has been proved that they are fully prepared to cooperate with other nations in the furtherance of peace and democracy.

2) All member states shall respect and maintain the territorial integrity and political independence of each other against external aggression.

3) A member state may withdraw from the International Organization upon the expiration of two years after the notification of withdrawal. But the withdrawal will not be effective until such member state has fulfilled all her obligations under the Charter, including such obligations as may arise from the settlement of a pending dispute.

iii. structure

1) The International Organization shall consist of an Assembly and an Executive Council, an International Court of Justice, and a Secretariat.

2) Under the Executive Council, there shall be established a Military Commission, an Economic Commission, a Commission on Territorial Trusteeship, an International Law Codification Commission, an International Labor Office, a Social Welfare Office, a Cultural Relations Office, and such other organs as the Council may deem necessary.

iv. assembly

1) The Assembly shall consist of the representatives of member states. Each member state may send three representatives.

2) The Assembly shall meet at least once a year, and at any time, in case of emergency.

3) The Assembly shall have power to deal with all matters within the competence of the International Organization or any matter relating to international peace.

4) Each member state shall have one vote in the Assembly.

v. executive council

1) The Executive Council shall consist of the four nations of the Moscow Declaration as permanent members, and a certain number of non-permanent members, not exceeding seven members, to be elected by the Assembly on the basis of geographic representation. In the election of non-permanent members, the principle of rotation shall be observed; and provision shall be made to avoid a complete change of membership at any one time.

2) The Council shall meet at least four times a year and may be convened at any time, in case of emergency. States members of the Council shall appoint representatives to be stationed permanently at the seat of the International Organization. When the Assembly is not in session, the Executive Council shall be the supreme organ of the International Organization, with powers to deal with all matters within the competence of the International Organization or relating to international peace.

3) States who are members of the Council shall each send one representative and shall each have one vote.

4) Where matters before the Council involve a member state not represented at the Council, such member state shall be requested to send a representative.

vi. method of voting

1) Decisions regarding the application of sanctions and other important matters concerning the maintenance of peace shall be made by a two-thirds majority of the members present at the meeting, including the concurrent votes of all the permanent member states of the Council.

2) Decisions in all other matters shall be by simple majority of the members present at the meeting; and in certain matters, such as elections, by secret ballot.

3) A party to a dispute, whether or not a permanent member of the Council, shall have no right to vote in any decision relating to the dispute.

4) A member abstaining from voting or casting a negative vote shall be bound by the decision of the majority.

vii. Secretariat

1) The Secretariat shall consist of a Secretary-General, six Deputy Secretaries-General, and a certain number of Secretaries, technical experts, and other functionaries. The Secretary-General shall be selected from amongst the nationals of member states other than the permanent members of the Council, and appointed by the Council with the approval of the majority of the Assembly.

2) The Deputy Secretaries-General shall be appointed by the Council, with the approval of the majority of the Assembly—four from amongst the nationals of the permanent member states of the Council and two from amongst the nationals of other member states of the International Organization, of which the Secretary-General is not a national.

3) The Secretary-General shall act as the Secretary-General of the Council and the Assembly.

4) The Secretariat shall constitute an impartial, competent, and independent international civil service and shall be so selected as to reflect a fair representation of various nationalities.

viii. military commission

1) There shall be established a Military Commission, the functions of which shall be as follows: A. To draft a disarmament convention and supervise its execution.

B. To draft and execute plans for military sanctions.

C. To organize and direct an international police force.

2) The Military Commission shall consist of the representatives of the permanent members of the Council, and a certain number of representatives of other member states of the International Organization, to be determined by the Council.

3) There shall be established, under the Military Commission, an International General Staff, the organization of which shall be determined by the Council.

ix. economic commission

1) There shall be established an Economic Commission, the functions of which shall be as follows: A. To draft international conventions relating to economic cooperation and supervise their execution.

B. To formulate and execute plans for economic sanctions.

C. To study and compile statistics and reports on world economic conditions.

2) The Commission shall consist of representatives of the permanent members of the Council, and a certain number of other member states of the International Organization, to be determined by the Council.

3) The conventions relating to economic cooperation, drafted by the Economic Commission, shall be put into effect after their adoption by international economic conferences to be convened from time to time by the Council.

x. international territorial trusteeship commission

There shall be established an International Territorial Administration Commission, the functions of which shall be as follows: 1) To administer or supervise the administration of such territories as will be placed under the trusteeship of the International Organization.

2) To administer territories that shall have been internationalized on account of strategic or other reasons, and placed under the jurisdiction of the International Organization.

3) The Commission shall, with regard to the administration of the territories under trusteeship, introduce the necessary measures for the protection and welfare of the local populations; and the promotion of education with a view to enabling such territories to become self-governing and independent.

4) The Commission shall submit an annual report to the Council regarding the conditions of the territories under the administration of the International Organization.

5) The organization of the Commission shall be determined by the Council, and provision shall be made for representation on the Commission of the local populations of the territories concerned.

xi. international law codification commission

1) There shall be established an International Law Codification Commission, the functions of which shall be as follows: A. To study problems of international law, and to propose conventions relating thereto.

B. To codify existing international law.

2) The regulations governing the organization of the International Law Codification Commission shall be determined by the Council.

3) Conventions relating to international law, drafted by the International Law Codification Commission, shall be effective after their adoption by international codification conferences, to be convened from time to time by the Council, and ratification by two-thirds of the governments of the participating states.

xii. international labor office

The present International Labor Office shall be maintained as part of the International Organization, for the advancement of the welfare of all workers, and the promotion of cooperation between labor and capital.

xiii. international social welfare office

1) There shall be established an International Social Welfare Office, the functions of which shall be as follows: A. To formulate various projects relating to international social welfare.

B. To supervise the execution of the above-mentioned projects.

2) Projects relating to international social welfare shall include the following matters: A. To regulate the production, manufacture, and sale of opium and other dangerous drugs.

B. To suppress traffic in women and children.

C. To prevent and suppress the spread of disease between states.

D. To introduce measures of social relief and social insurance.

3) Regulations governing the organization of the International Social Welfare Office shall be determined by the Council.

4) The projects relating to international social welfare, formulated by the Social Welfare Office and adopted by the Council, shall be put into effect by the Office, or recommended to the governments of member states.

xiv. international cultural relations office

1) There shall be established an International Cultural Relations Office, the functions of which shall be as follows: A. To formulate projects relating to international cultural cooperation.

B. To supervise the execution of the above-mentioned projects.

2) The above-mentioned projects relating to international cultural cooperation shall include the following matters: A. To establish the concept of international peace. a) Preparation of publications and school textbooks calculated to promote international understanding and friendship.

b) Encouragement of international peace movements.

c) Removal of possible causes of international ill-feeling in the fields of radio broadcasts, films, theaters, press, and literature.

B. To effect cultural exchanges. a) Convening at regular periods international educational and academic conferences.

b) Exchange of professors and students.

c) Promotion of cultural and academic organizations of an international character.

d) Setting up international research institutes and libraries.

e) Encouraging scientific discoveries and assisting scientific and technical collaboration.

3) The regulations governing the organization of the International Cultural Relations Office shall be determined by the Council.

4) The projects relating to international cultural cooperation, formulated by the International Cultural Relations Office, and adopted by the Council, shall be put into effect by the Office or recommended to the governments of the member states.

xv. international court of justice

1) There shall be established an International Court of Justice, for the judicial settlement of international disputes.

2) The protocol governing the International Court of Justice shall be put into effect after its adoption by the Assembly and ratification by three-fourths of the states members of the International Organization.

3) The Court shall have competence to deal with any justiciable dispute, at the request of the Council or of a party to the dispute.

4) In the case of non-justiciable disputes, where both parties are agreeable to a judicial settlement, the International Court of Justice may deal with the case “ex aequo et bono.”10

5) The International Court of Justice may deliver an opinion on matters referred to it by the Assembly or the Council.

6) The Court may set up a Commission of Factual Investigation, where this is necessary for the adjudication of cases.

7. All decisions by the International Court of Justice shall be compulsorily enforced.

xvi. pacific settlement of international disputes

1) No state shall be permitted to resort to the use of force for the settlement of disputes.

2) Where a dispute between member states has been settled by arbitration, or judicial or other pacific means, parties to the dispute shall have the obligation of faithfully carrying out the decisions of such settlement.

Where a dispute between member states is not settled by pacific means, the Council or the Assembly shall, at the request of either party to the dispute, have power to deal with the case. Where a party to the dispute is not represented in the Council, the Council shall invite such party to send a representative.

When a dispute is the subject of voting in the Assembly or in the Council, the parties to the dispute shall have no right to vote and, for the purpose of voting, shall not be counted as among those states present.

3) The council may, at any time, on its own initiative, transfer a case of dispute to the Assembly. Where it is so requested by either party to the dispute, the Council shall transfer the case to the Assembly; but such request for transfer shall be presented within a specified period after the dispute has first been brought before the Council. Similarly, the Assembly may refer cases of dispute to the Council.

4) Any use of force, or any threat to use force, whether immediately affecting any member state or not, shall be deemed a matter involving the peace of the world. In such cases, the Secretary-General may, on his own initiative or at the request of any member state, immediately convene the Council to take effective measures to safeguard peace. A member state shall not give any support or assistance, or accord any de facto or de jure recognition, to any situation that is created by force in contradiction to the principles of the Charter.

xvii. aggression and sanctions

1) Any party to a dispute shall be considered the aggressor, who shall have been first to commit any of the following acts: A. Declaration of war against another state.

B. The invasion by armed forces of the territory of another state.

C. The use of land, naval, or air forces to bombard the territory of another state or attack the land, naval, or air forces of another state.

D. The establishment of a blockade of the coast or ports of another state.

E. Provision of support to armed groups, formed within its territory, which have invaded the territory of another state; or refusal, notwithstanding the request of the invaded state, to take in its own territory all the measures in its power to deprive such groups of all assistance or protection.

F. The landing in, or introduction within the frontiers of another state, of land, naval, or air forces, without the permission of the government of such state; or the infringement of the conditions of such permission, particularly as regards the duration of sojourn or extension of area.

G. Provision of arms and munitions, or financial or technical assistance to the nationals of another state, calculated to create civil commotion or to overthrow the government of such state.

2) Sanctions shall consist of three kinds: A. Diplomatic sanctions

B. Economic sanctions

C. Military sanctions

3) Concrete plans for the application of sanctions shall be formulated by the Council, in consultation with the Military and Economic Commissions, so that they may at any time be put into immediate application. With a view to the effective application of sanctions, such plans shall also include comprehensive provisions for aid to the victim of aggression and for mutual assistance among member states applying sanctions.

4) There shall be established an international police force (which may exclusively consist of air force), which shall act under the Executive Council for the application of military sanctions. The organization of the International Police Force shall be determined by the Council. The expenses of the International Police Force shall be borne by the International Organization. In addition to the International Police Force, member states shall contribute armed forces in accordance with plans formulated by the Council.

5) As soon as the aggressor is determined, there shall, in addition to the immediate application of diplomatic and economic sanctions, be set in motion the necessary preparations for military sanctions to be enforced by the decision of the Council, against such aggressor.

6) Where there is a threat of the use of force, the Council shall, on its own initiative or at the request of a party to a dispute, immediately adopt emergency measures for the prevention of actual conflict of arms. If either party refuses to comply with such emergency measures, the Council shall take the necessary steps with a view to the application of sanctions.

7) Upon the outbreak of an international conflict, the Council shall, on its own initiative or at the request of either party, be immediately convened to determine the aggressor. Pending determination of the aggressor, the Council may decide upon emergency measures for the suspension of hostilities; and either party to the dispute who acts against such measures shall be deemed the aggressor.

8) The Council may also apply sanctions in the following cases: A. To a member state which refuses to submit a dispute to pacific settlement.

B. To a member state which refuses to carry out the terms of a pacific settlement.

9) All decisions relating to aggression and sanctions shall rest with the Council.

xviii. peaceable changes

1) Where a treaty has become inapplicable on account of change of circumstances or where there exists an international situation, the continuance of which may endanger world peace, and the parties concerned have failed to achieve results by direct negotiation, the Assembly may, at the request of either party, make recommendations for a satisfactory solution.

2) Such recommendations must have been passed by a two-thirds majority of member states present in the Assembly.

3) If either party fails to comply with the recommendation of the Assembly, the Council may, at the request of the other party, take effective measures for their enforcement and may, if necessary, apply sanctions.

xix. regional organizations

1) Member States within the same geographic area may voluntarily establish regional organizations to promote cooperation and peaceful relations.

2) The purpose of a regional organization shall be supplementary to the International Organization and shall not, in any case, be contrary to the provisions of the Charter of the International Organization.

3) A regional organization shall be subject to the control of the International Organization and shall submit an annual report of its work to the Assembly of the International Organization.

4) International matters of regional character may be dealt with by the regional organization; but any member state concerned which is not satisfied by the action taken by the regional organization may submit the case to the Council or the Assembly for reconsideration.

5) A regional organization shall have no right to decide on questions relating to aggression and sanctions. The structure and constitution of a regional organization shall be formulated by the states concerned, in accordance with regional conditions, subject to the approval of the Assembly of the International Organization.

xx. treaty obligations

1) All treaties and international agreements hereafter entered into by member states should be registered with and published by the Secretariat of the International Organization. Such treaties or international agreements shall not be considered effective prior to registration.

2) Member states shall mutually agree that all obligations or understandings existing among them and contrary to the provisions of the Charter should be abrogated by virtue of the Charter; and they shall undertake henceforth not to enter into any obligations contrary to the provisions of the Charter.

3) Any member state which has, prior to admission to the International Organization, undertaken obligations contrary to the provisions of the Charter, shall immediately take the necessary steps to divest itself of such obligations.

xxi. relations between the international organization and non-members

1) In cases of dispute between a member state and a non-member state, or between non-member states, the Council shall invite such non-member [state] or states, to accept, provisionally, the obligations of member state, under such conditions as are deemed appropriate by the Council, with a view to a settlement of the dispute. Where such invitation is accepted by a non-member, the provisions of the Charter relating to pacific settlement, aggression, sanctions, and other relevant provisions, shall all be applicable.

2) After such invitation is offered to a non-member, the Council shall immediately investigate the circumstances of the dispute and make recommendations of such measures as it shall deem most appropriate and effective.

3) If one party so invited declines to accept the obligations of a member state for the settlement of a dispute, but resorts to the use of force against the other party, such party shall be subject to sanctions.

4) If both parties to a dispute decline, upon invitation, to accept the obligations of a member state for the settlement of a dispute, the Council shall take the appropriate steps and make recommendations with a view to preventing hostilities and solving the conflict.

5) In matters relating to disarmament, economic collaboration, international law codification, social welfare, and cultural relations, the International Organization shall take steps to make possible participation by non-member states.

xxii. budget

1) The budget of the International Organization shall be determined by the Assembly.

2) The expenses of the International Organization shall be borne by the member states, according to a scale adopted by the Assembly on the basis of the respective national incomes of the member states.

9 Copy transmitted to the Department by Chinese Vice Premier Kung, August 23.

10 “According to what is just and good.”

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./4

[Document 423]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 24, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Fourth Day

Meeting of the Subcommittee on Organization

(a) Soviet Views Concerning the Council

(1) Settlement of Disputes.—We agreed in principle that the Council should be empowered to consider the settlement of disputes in accordance with the Statute. The British and ourselves felt the power to impose settlement should apply only when a breach of peace is involved. The Soviet group seemed to agree, but the matter is to be studied further.

(2) Provision of Forces.—We agreed, subject to further study, that forces should be provided on the basis of a separate general agreement, subject to the constitutional processes of each state.

(3) Consideration of Matters Pertaining to Peace and Security.—Ambassador Gromyko clarified the Soviet view that the Council should examine all questions relating to peace and security before they are discussed in the Assembly.

(4) Voting.—We and the Soviet group proposed that questions of peace and security be decided by a simple majority including all permanent members, but agreed to consider the British preference for a two-thirds majority.11

The British favored excluding from voting a state party to a dispute, on grounds that the veto power of a permanent member might prove difficult for smaller countries to accept. We called attention to our interest in this matter. The Russians are studying the subject.

(b) American Views on the Organization

(1) General Assembly.—We proposed and the British agreed that the Assembly might examine representations and reports on matters of concern to the Organization, and act on matters not allocated to other organs. The Soviet group felt that matters relating to security should be brought to the Assembly by the Council, and they reserved judgment on our proposal that the Assembly make recommendations for peaceful adjustment of questions affecting general welfare.

(2) Amendment.—Our view was accepted in principle that amendments should be proposed by a simple majority of the Assembly and ratified by two-thirds of the states, including the permanent members of the Council. The British felt that imposition of an amendment on the remaining one-third might offer difficulties.

(3) Voting.—The differences between our proposal and the Soviet view on voting in the Assembly appeared to be a matter of drafting. Both views were generally acceptable to the British.

(4) The Council.—We suggested that non-permanent members be elected for one year but agreed to consider the British proposal of three years with rotating retirement, and the Soviet view of one or two years. It was agreed in principle that states not on the Council should attend and be heard on matters affecting them. The British suggested that such states might be given the right to vote on matters not affecting peace and security. Our view was that such matters would not ordinarily be a concern of the Council.

Meeting of the Legal Subcommittee

The subcommittee discussed the American views on the International Court.12 The British commented but the Soviet group reserved comment until later except to agree the Court should be part of the Organization.

Meeting of the Special Military Subcommittee 13

Military representatives discussed the provision of forces, particularly the Soviet view that an international air force corps should be integrated and under the direct control of the Council.

11 Sir Alexander explained his Government’s preference that decisions of a procedural nature should be taken by a majority vote, including the vote of all permanent members of the Council, while holding to the preference that in other questions a two-thirds majority should be required in order to avoid the appearance of trampling on the rights of the smaller states; it was the feeling among his Government that it would be more just to give the smaller states a larger voice and that this would facilitate their consent to the organization. (Conversations, Phase A, General Organization Notes 2, August 24, 1944.)

12 The tentative views of the American Group were presented in a document distributed at the August 24 meeting of the Legal Subcommittee for consideration by the British and Soviet Groups: “Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice with the Revisions Proposed”; for text of this document, see Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, p. 666.

13 The establishment of this subcommittee, whose name was later changed to “Special Informal Military Group,” grew out of desires expressed in the meeting of the Subcommittee on Security Questions on August 23 for study of the technical aspects of a general proposal for an international air force corps advanced in the Soviet memorandum. The members talked together informally throughout the first phase, but the only formal meetings of the Military Group, over which Vice Adm. Russell Willson presided, were held on August 24 and 30.

Extract From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot File 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[Document 424]

Extract From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)14

Fourth Day, Thursday, August 24, 1944.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12:30 Meeting at the White House.

Messrs. Hackworth, Dunn, Pasvolsky and Bowman accompanied me. We started our discussion with the President at 12:45 and left at 1:10. The memorandum on the seven open points15 which I had left with the President the day before was on his desk, when we entered. We gathered around his desk but did not take seats. The following resulted from the meeting.

1. The President approved our proposal that at this stage the Executive Council should not be given the right to impose the terms of settlement of a dispute but that its function should be to promote peaceful settlement, to make recommendations to the parties and to settle disputes only on the request of the parties.

2. On the voting question, as to whether great powers parties to a dispute should be allowed to vote, there was only a brief discussion but the President approved our position that voting under such circumstances should not be permitted, and making a statement that our people would understand the principle that a man should not sit in judgment on his own case.

3. The President approved our recommendation that we stand for a two-year term for non-permanent members of the Council.

4. There was considerable discussion on the question of including France as a permanent member of the Council. The President felt we should not be too explicit on this point as difficulty might arise over the word “recognize”. It was decided that we should accept some provision which would provide for a permanent place for France when she has a permanent government. We also discussed the case of Brazil and the President finally expressed the view that he thought we should raise the question of an additional permanent seat in general terms but that we should not insist on it at this time. He thought in this connection that we might make informal references to Brazil in the discussion.

5. With only brief discussion the President approved our recommendation that we should accept a two-third rather than a majority vote in the Council except on minor decisions.

6. The President agreed with our position that the proposals should not contain provisions for withdrawal and suspension. He seemed to feel that such provision would tend to weaken the organization and that the matter should be left to further experience.

7. On ad hoc judges the President approved our position after a very brief discussion. (Our recommendation was that we should make it clear that we feel the principle of ad hoc judges is unwholesome but that we should not press the matter because we ourselves would always have a judge on the court.)

8. There was then some discussion of the name of the organization, its headquarters, and also of the seat for the world court. It developed that the President favors the name “The United Nations” and that he feels strongly that Geneva should not be the headquarters. He expressed the opinion that the permanent secretariat would require some fixed seat but that the Council and the Assembly could hold its sessions at different places, pointing to the experience on Pan-American conferences in this regard. He mentioned the Azores and Hawaii as possible places of meeting where ideal climates could be found. He referred to the Pentagon and Empire State Buildings as places where the permanent secretariat could be housed and did not seem to feel there would be too much difficulty in holding meetings in different places with the secretariat not located in the same city. He made inquiry as to the ownership of the World Court Building at The Hague, which we were unable to answer specifically, but we could tell him that it had proved to be adequate. The President expressed the opinion that the history of the Court was good. Opinion toward it was favorable and he felt that continued association of the court with The Hague would be desirable.

9. We discussed about the economic and social functions of the organization and the Soviet position that they should be entirely separate from the international security organization stating that the Soviets laid great emphasis upon the ineffective debates in the Assembly of the League and the apparent confusion of purposes in that body. After discussion the President expressed the conviction that the Assembly should have adequate functions with respect to economic and social problems but he felt the actual provisions written into the proposals might be in general terms.

After leaving the President the group went with me immediately to my office where I placed a call to Mr. Hull and I informed him in some detail of the outcome of the conversation with the President. When we came to the question of Brazil the Secretary indicated that he himself at several times, had supported the idea of a permanent seat for Brazil. Mr. Hull reported that the Senatorial group was coming in for a discussion with him tomorrow and asked that we get together adequate material for him. I arranged to have Pasvolsky prepare an appropriate memorandum and to hand it to Mr. Hull personally in the evening, with such oral explanation as might be advisable.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14 The personal diary of Edward R. Stettinius, Jr., covering the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations, was based on personal conversations, correspondence, telegrams, minutes of meetings, and other documents; vol. i covers the period August 20 to September 7, 1944, and vol. ii, September 8 to October 7, 1944.

15 See footnote 3, p. 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 421].

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./5

[Document 425]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 25, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Fifth Day

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee

This meeting, the only one held today, was the most important of the entire conversations so far.

(a) Relation of the World Organization to Economic and Social Matters

This important topic, which when previously raised had been postponed for future discussion, was considered fully for the first time.17

(1) Unity of British and American Views.—The British indicated that they are prepared to accept our views that an Economic and Social Council should be created and should be an organ of the Assembly.

(2) Full Presentation and Discussion of Soviet Views.—The Russians earnestly and exhaustively argued that the League’s experience demonstrates that an intermingling in the same organization of responsibilities for both the maintenance of peace and for economic and social matters will work out to the detriment of security. We presented at length our reasons for believing that the general organization must concern itself with all matters which bear upon the maintenance of conditions conducive to peace. We also urged that our proposal not only accomplishes this but leaves the executive Council free to concentrate on the primary task of security, thus obviating the defects in the League’s structure. We were encouraged by the attention which Ambassador Gromyko and Mr. Sobolev paid to our arguments. It was agreed that Ambassador Gromyko would report fully to his Government.

(b) Regional Organizations

We agreed to postpone consideration of this topic.

(c) Composition of the Executive Council

We agreed to postpone consideration of this topic.

(d) Expulsion and Withdrawal of Members 18

Ambassador Gromyko insisted that the power of expulsion is desirable for the “discipline” of members. The British, as a substitute, proposed suspending the privileges of membership of those states against which action is taken by the Council. This proposal was tentatively accepted, ad referendum.

(e) Should the Council make Decisions by ⅔ or Majority Vote?

We stated that we could agree to the British proposal that important questions should be decided by a ⅔ vote (including the unanimous vote of members having permanent seats on the Council). Ambassador Gromyko indicated no dissent and said he would inform his Government.

(f) Should Parties to a Dispute Vote?

We agreed to state our views early next week.

(g) Composition of Military Staff Committee

The British clarified their proposal and said their military authorities regard it as of very great importance.19 We agreed to present our view on the British proposal next week. There was also tentative discussion, with little apparent divergence of view, of the question of the supreme commander for joint security forces.

(h) International Court of Justice

There appeared to be general agreement (1) that there should be a Court, (2) that the Court should be a part of the Organization, and (3) that there should be no attempt to draft the actual Statute of the Court during these conversations.

(i) Authority of Council to make its Decisions Obligatory

There appeared to be tentative agreement with the British proposal that the Council should have authority to make its recommendation obligatory in any dispute involving a clear threat to peace when all other methods of settlement have failed.

17 See extracts on this subject from the minutes of meeting No. 5 of the Joint Steering Committee, infra.

18 Mr. Stettinius suggested that the basic document not include any provision for withdrawal or expulsion of members. He said that we should simply assume that all members would remain within the organization. (Minutes of meeting No. 5 of the Joint Steering Committee, August 25, p. 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 6].)

19 Sir Alexander Cadogan made plain the British position that all States having permanent places on the Council should be permanently represented on the military staff and that other States, whether having seats on the Council or not, should have representatives on the military staff only on an ad hoc basis depending upon the needs of the particular occasion. (Minutes of meeting No. 5 of the Joint Steering Committee, p. 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7].)

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 5 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 11 a.m., August 25, at Dumbarton Oaks Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 1–12

[Document 426]

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 5 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 11 a.m., August 25, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, August 25, 1944, 11 a.m.

[Extract]

Present: Sir Alexander Cadogan and Mr. Jebb of the British group;

Ambassador Gromyko, Mr. Sobolev, and Mr. Berezhkov of the Soviet group;

Mr. Stettinius, Mr. Dunn, and Mr. Pasvolsky of the American group.

Mr. Hiss also present, as secretary.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The Committee then proceeded to consider part A of the list of questions20 which had been prepared by Mr. Pasvolsky, Mr. Sobolev, and Mr. Jebb yesterday afternoon.

1. Economic and Social Questions

Sir Alexander Cadogan pointed out that the British position is that important economic and social questions should somehow be dealt with as a part of the general organization. He said that he understood that the American view was somewhat similar to the British view but that the Soviet view lays emphasis upon the desirability of keeping these questions separate from matters of security. He said that he understood that the reason for the Soviet position was the feeling that the League had been over-loaded with matters unrelated to security. He made the point, however, that economic and social questions might lead to acute differences from which there might result threats to security. Consequently, he said, there was need for some liaison in this connection. He suggested that perhaps the Director General of the international organization might effect such liaison.

Ambassador Gromyko then stated that the Soviet Government considers that it is desirable that there be a separate economic organization. He pointed out that the League had actually considered more questions relating to general welfare than it had questions relating to security. He said that estimates prepared by Soviet officials indicated that some 77 percent of the questions dealt with by the League did not relate directly to the maintenance of peace and security. He said that the public in general had the impression that the League had constantly under consideration important matters relating to peace and security when in reality it was usually engaged only in consideration of secondary matters. The Soviet view, he said, is that the primary and indeed the only task of the international organization should be the maintenance of peace and security. This should satisfy the general aspiration for an organization having as its aim the preservation of peace. He added that some kind of liaison may be found between the security organization and other organizations, at least for purposes of information.

Mr. Stettinius stated that he was impressed by Ambassador Gromyko’s emphasis upon the main task of the proposed organization. He said that he did not consider that the various views were very far apart. He said that we are all agreed that the council should have the maintenance of peace as its task but that in the American view there should be only one over-all organization. He said that in the American opinion it is desirable that there be “one tent” covering international relations generally. He suggested that perhaps there might be general agreement upon a formula to the effect that from time to time the assembly may create such subsidiary commissions or bodies as it considers necessary to facilitate the maintenance of peace and security. The American group, he said, does not wish to press its suggestion for a definite detailed plan in this connection. For example, the reference to an Economic and Social Council of twenty-four members is merely a suggestion. The American group has an open mind on the whole subject but it does desire that the way be left open for action by the international organization in this general field.

Mr. Pasvolsky then stated certain of the reasons which had led the United States to the conclusion that an Economic and Social Council is desirable. He explained that it had been recognized that one of the difficulties with the League of Nations had been that the League’s Council was charged with the same responsibilities as was the League’s Assembly. Consequently, the League’s Council had had its attention diverted from security questions. Because of the League experience, it appeared desirable to provide that the council should be the primary body charged with the maintenance of peace and security. The assembly should not be an action body in the same sense as should be the council although it also should be concerned to some extent with the question of peace and security. He said that it is the American view that it is desirable to bring within the general scope of international concern as many economic and technical questions as possible. However, this in turn raises the question of the desirability of coordinating the policies of agencies established to deal with such matters. He emphasized that the international organization, in the American view, should not take over these functional agencies. They would remain quite autonomous but by the “tent” to which Mr. Stettinius had referred we would have a means of obtaining the coordination of these various international activities so as to obviate conflicts between agencies. Moreover, there will for some time, probably indefinitely, be various fields of economic and other activities for which no functioning international agencies will be in existence. The international organization, if the American view were to be adopted, would be able to promote better relations in these fields of activity. So long as no serious conflict arises, or is threatened, in regard to these matters, all such activities would be conducted entirely outside the council.

Mr. Stettinius pointed out that last winter President Roosevelt had suggested to Prime Minister Churchill and Marshal Stalin the need for an over-all steering committee to coordinate economic policy.21

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20 Not printed.

21 See telegram 476, February 23, from President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister, vol. ii, p. 14.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt [Document 427]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt 22

Washington, August 28, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Sixth Day

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee

The Committee continued to discuss the topics of which consideration had been begun last Friday.23

(a) Expulsion and Withdrawal of Members

Ambassador Gromyko stated that the tentative opinion of the Soviet group now is that the proposal made by the British last Friday for suspension of the privileges of membership should be regarded not as a substitute for the Soviet proposal for expulsion but as a proposal for action in addition to expulsion.

(b) Composition of the Council

(1) Possible Permanent Seat for Brazil.—In response to a question by Ambassador Gromyko, we indicated that at some later stage of the discussions we may wish to propose that there be added to the number of permanent members of the Council some one of the Latin American countries. We mentioned Brazil specifically, in reply to another question by Ambassador Gromyko. Sir Alexander Cadogan said that he would inform his Government, commenting that he doubted if they had contemplated the possibility of such a proposal. He thought that if the number of permanent seats were increased beyond five there would be considerable difficulties. The Russians want only five permanent seats.

(2) Status of France.—There appeared to be general agreement upon the desirability of a permanent seat being reserved for France, regardless of whether or not a government of France has been formally recognized by the time the Organization is formed.

(3) Number and Tenure of Non-Permanent Members.—There seemed to be general agreement that there should be six non-permanent members and there was tentative agreement, ad referendum, with the Soviet proposal for a two-year term.

(c) Vote of Permanent Member Involved in a Dispute

We stated that we had come to the conclusion that a state involved in a dispute should not vote on matters affecting that dispute and that this rule should apply to all members. There ensued a full discussion in which we explained carefully the reasoning which had led us to our present position in which we were strongly supported by the British. The Soviet representatives stated that they considered our proposal to be in violation of and a “retreat” from the basic principle that major decisions of the Organization should be arrived at on the basis of unanimity among the great powers. They maintained their prior position that a special procedure should be worked out to govern instances in which one of the states having a permanent seat may be involved in a dispute and indicated that a specific Soviet proposal on this might be forthcoming later.

(d) Initial Membership of the Organization

We discussed this topic at the request of Ambassador Gromyko and there appeared to be general agreement with our proposal that initial membership would include the United Nations and associated nations.

Ambassador Gromyko then said that all of the 16 Soviet republics should be included among the initial members of the Organization. Sir Alexander Cadogan said that he had no comment on the Ambassador’s statement at this stage but he remarked that he believed his Government will have to talk to the Soviet Government about the general question of the international status of the Soviet republics. We said that we would have to think about the Ambassador’s statement.

Meetings of New Formulation Groups

Pursuant to arrangements arrived at in Friday’s meeting of the Joint Steering Committee, small formulating groups of the Organization Subcommittee and of the Security Subcommittee met this afternoon to draw together the work which has been done by these Subcommittees and to put this work into form suitable for approval by the Joint Steering Committee.

E[dward] S[tettinius]

22 Copy obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.

23 August 25.

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 6 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 11 a.m., August 28, at Dumbarton Oaks Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 1–12

[Document 428]

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 6 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 11 a.m., August 28, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, August 28, 1944, 11 a.m.

[Extracts]

Present: Sir Alexander Cadogan and Mr. Jebb of the British group;

Ambassador Gromyko, Mr. Sobolev, and Mr. Berezhkov of the Soviet group;

Mr. Stettinius, Mr. Dunn, and Mr. Pasvolsky of the American group.

Mr. Hiss also present, as secretary.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The Committee then proceeded to a consideration of topic 3 (Composition of the Council). Ambassador Gromyko inquired whether the American group had as yet formulated its view on the question of the number of permanent and of non-permanent seats. Mr. Stettinius replied that the initial American position had favored provision for four permanent seats and seven non-permanent seats, thus making a total of eleven seats on the Council. Mr. Stettinius went on to say that the later American opinion had been to add France as a fifth permanent member. He said that he wished to point out at this time that, at some later time, the American group may wish to discuss a possible sixth additional permanent seat on the Council for one of the Latin American countries.

Ambassador Gromyko inquired which one of the Latin American countries the American group had in mind. In reply, Mr. Pasvolsky said that we had thought that perhaps Brazil might be given a permanent seat. Mr. Sobolev inquired at what point of time Brazil should be added. Mr. Stettinius stated that the American group is not at present making an actual proposal as to Brazil and is, therefore, not suggesting any particular time for such an addition to the number of permanent seats.

At Mr. Stettinius’ request, Mr. Dunn explained that because of the extremely important place which Brazil occupies in the relations between this Hemisphere and the rest of the world the American group has felt that it might like to bring that question up at some later time. Ambassador Gromyko inquired whether it was contemplated that reference to Brazil would be included in the agreed recommendations resulting from the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations. In reply, Mr. Stettinius said that provision might be made in the agreed recommendations that a place should be reserved for France and for one of the Latin American countries. Ambassador Gromyko pointed out that the Soviet group considers it necessary to underline that it is in favor of limiting the permanent members of the Council to the representatives of four powers and later of five powers including France.

The discussion then turned to the question of how many non-permanent members should have seats on the Council. It was stated by the American representatives that in the American view there might perhaps be six permanent members and six non-permanent members, or again, provision might be made for six permanent and for five non-permanent members. Mr. Pasvolsky stated that if the tenure of the non-permanent members should be lengthened to two years, it would seem desirable to have a divisible number of non-permanent members so that an equal number could be elected each year. Sir Alexander Cadogan said that he, too, thought it advisable to have six elected members on the Council in order to insure the election of an equal number each year.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

After further discussion there appeared to be general agreement that it would be desirable to provide for at least five permanent members including France and six non-permanent members. It was made plain that if France did not have a generally recognized government at the time of the initiation of the Organization a permanent seat should nonetheless be reserved for France. Sir Alexander Cadogan said that he would wish to reserve his position as to whether the Council should undertake to determine when France had a responsible government. He pointed out that perhaps the three Governments might wish to decide this question for themselves before action on that subject was taken by the Council. He said that he has had fairly clear indication that his Government feels that the earlier France can be brought in, the better.

The Committee then proceeded to discuss the question of the tenure of non-permanent members. There seemed to be tentative agreement on an ad referendum basis that perhaps a two-year term, as proposed by the Soviet group, would be desirable. Sir Alexander Cadogan emphasized that he could not give final approval to a two-year term because he has been asked to press for a three-year term. He was willing, however, to let the appropriate formulation group go ahead with the drafting of a provision providing for a two-year term.

The Committee then briefly discussed once more the question of expulsion of members, and Ambassador Gromyko restated the Soviet position that a provision for expulsion should be included in the basic document. He added that the Soviet group is studying the question of whether or not a provision for suspension should be included in addition. There seemed to be general agreement that the appropriate formulation group might profitably draw up a tentative provision for suspension, this provision to be brought before the Steering Committee for examination.

The Committee then discussed topic 6 (Should parties to a dispute vote?). Mr. Stettinius said that the American group has come to the conclusion that a “guilty” party should not vote in its own case, no matter who that party might be. It was indicated that on this point the British and American groups are in agreement. Ambassador Gromyko said that his group is of the opinion that some special procedure should be worked out to cover cases in which one of the great powers is touched by a dispute. He said that his group had not considered the question of what that procedure should be in as much as they had anticipated, on the basis of the American document, that the American group might bring forward a proposal providing for such a special procedure. In response to a question by Sir Alexander Cadogan, Ambassador Gromyko said that his group might be able to propose such a special procedure at some time during the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations, if it should have worked out something along these lines before the conclusion of these Conversations.

Sir Alexander observed that this is a most important subject. He said that if it is not made clear that great powers which are parties to a dispute cannot vote, the small powers and the great powers will have been put upon a very different footing. He said that without such a provision the great powers would even be able to prevent the Council from considering disputes in which they were parties. This result would be recognized at once when the plan was made public and there would consequently be the greatest difficulty in obtaining general acceptance of the proposed plan. He said that he wished to emphasize that this was the biggest problem with which we are faced and that unless some way out is found great difficulties can be foreseen.

Ambassador Gromyko said that in his opinion the large countries should have a special position consonant with their responsibilities, and again referred to the need of devising a special procedure.

Mr. Pasvolsky then stated that after prolonged consideration the American group had come to the conclusion that it could not devise a satisfactory special procedure to meet this situation. He said that the American group feels so confident that this country will not wish to use force on a unilateral basis that it is willing to recommend that the United States should put itself on the same plane as all other nations of the world in regard to the settling of disputes. He said that the American group had felt that if the United States were ever to conclude that it was not willing to listen to the Council in the event of a dispute in which it might be involved such a conclusion would be practically tantamount to a decision that the United States was ready to go to war with all the rest of the world. He said that the American group could not imagine such a development taking place and it therefore believes that any risks involved in its proposal are outweighed by the advantage of strengthening the Organization by a provision that in this respect all countries be placed on the same footing. Mr. Pasvolsky went on to say that one question in particular had given concern to the American group, namely, what would be the situation if the Organization should undertake to consider questions which under normal rules of international law are reserved to domestic jurisdiction. He said that it was recognized by the American group that some safeguarding formula covering this point will have to be worked out. He said that he feels confident that it can be worked out. He added that there had been another question of detail, i.e., whether the Council could call upon any party to a dispute to furnish forces. He believed that this, too, can be worked out.

The American representatives emphasized that they would, of course, be glad to consider any formula the Soviet group might propose, although they themselves had not been able to find one. Ambassador Gromyko said that if his group developed anything on this during the course of the conversations he would inform the other groups.

Mr. Sobolev then asked whether the American and British position does not violate the basic principle that every decision must be taken jointly by the four great powers. Mr. Pasvolsky pointed out that in the American document the principle of unanimity of the four powers had been set forth but it had been made subject to two subsequent paragraphs. The first of these paragraphs had provided that any power could voluntarily abstain from voting but would nevertheless be bound by the vote taken. He said that this provision had been designed to meet a situation in which a country had no objection to certain action being taken but did not wish to go on record as favoring such action. This provision does not impair the basic principle of unanimity, he said. Mr. Pasvolsky then said that the second paragraph to which he had referred set forth the need of finding some way in which to meet a situation in which one of the four big powers may be involved in a dispute. He pointed out that the American document had put that question in the same category as the question of voluntary abstention from voting. He said that the American group had started with the idea of unqualified unanimity, but had concluded that this would be injurious to the success of the Organization. The American group had reached its conclusion as a result of very full consideration in the course of which attention had been given to the attitude of the American people.

It was brought out that the American and British positions are in accord with the practice of the League.

Ambassador Gromyko stated that he felt that, generally speaking, the American proposal would be a retreat from the principle of unanimity. Mr. Pasvolsky observed that some members of the American group feel, on the contrary, that it would strengthen the principle in its essential aspects. Sir Alexander Cadogan observed that, in any event, any other decision would detract from other important principles of justice and equity.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

There was then some discussion of the question of the initial membership of the Organization.…

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

… It was made clear that the American proposal includes not only the initial signatories of the United Nations Declaration and those countries which have subsequently adhered to that Declaration, but also a few additional countries which have broken relations with Germany and are cooperating in the war effort. It is these latter countries which are covered by the term “Associated Nations”.

It was agreed that a tentative list for purposes referred to above should be drawn up in the appropriate formulation group.

At this point Ambassador Gromyko stated that all of the sixteen Soviet Republics should be included among the initial members of the Organization. Sir Alexander Cadogan said that he had no comment to make on this point at this stage, but that he felt that his Government will have to discuss with the Soviet Government the question of the international status of the Soviet Republics. The American representatives said that they will have to think about Ambassador Gromyko’s proposal.24

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24 In his Diary of August 28, Mr. Stettinius identified this as the meeting “at which our Soviet friends dropped the bombshell in the form of bringing up the famous X-matter, during a discussion of the initial membership of the organization”, and, he added: “We always referred to it as the X matter and kept it out of the regular minutes which were circulated, keeping a special file of a secondary set of minutes with references to it carefully guarded in my safe.”

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[Document 429]

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Sixth Day, Monday, August 28, 1944.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5:00 Meeting with the President.

I went directly from the airport25 to the White House, arriving at 4:45. I found Mr. Hull still with the President and asked General Watson26 to announce my arrival. They asked me, however, to wait for a few moments. Unfortunately, by the time I was shown in, Mr. Hull had left. The President was alone and in a relaxed mood. I told him I could cover my business in five minutes but he raised various questions and I stayed with him from 5:02 until 5:50. I first presented him with our summary memos covering the proceedings for the fifth and sixth days. He glanced over these and seemed satisfied and said he would read them carefully tonight. He made the observation that these were an excellent record for him to have covering the conversations for the future. He asked me what open items were of the most importance which I would like to take up with him at the time. I mentioned: (1) The status of France and told him of the private indication I had had that Sir Alexander might request at an early date that France be given a seat immediately. The President said he could not agree to this but was perfectly willing to have a seat reserved for France on an “if and when” basis that France had a government justifying it, and if and when the council duly elected France to take her place at the table on a permanent basis. He expressed the hope that I could work out some general language on this which would leave the matter flexible.

(2) Brazil. I reported to the President that we had raised the question of a permanent seat for Brazil this morning and both the British and Soviets attitudes had been negative. I expressed the opinion that if he wishes us to press this hard now it would be more difficult. The President considered this carefully and finally said personally he would be willing on the initial draft not to name Brazil but that he wished a general provision incorporated in the proposals which would leave the door open so that he, possibly working with the Prime Minister and Stalin27 at a later time, could bring this up with them before the organization was actually launched.

(3) X Matter. I then informed the President of the raising by the Russians of the X matter. The President said “My God”, and went on to instruct me to explain to Gromyko privately and personally and immediately that we could never accept this proposal. He said to tell the Ambassador this might ruin the chance of getting an international organization approved by the United States Senate and accepted publicly in this country.28 He then drew a comparison between the organization in this country and the Soviet Union and the British Empire and the possibility of creating new Dominions in the Empire out of colonies, islands, etc., and that I should spell all of this out for Gromyko. I promised to do so immediately and added that at a later date we might ask him to communicate with Stalin.

(4) Votes of members involved in a dispute. I explained again our position that members of the council who are parties to a dispute should not be allowed to vote on matters affecting that dispute and that the British stated this view but the Soviets feel it violates the principle of unanimity of the Big Four. The President reiterated he felt our position was entirely correct and that we must not depart from it. He asked me to explain to Gromyko that this was a matter on which we would have to be consistent and that we hoped his government would find it possible to agree with us.

(5) General. (Mr. Hopkins29 joined the meeting at this point.) I inquired if his plans of meeting the Prime Minister were sufficiently definite for him to indicate whether he wished us to prepare any special notes for him covering the security conversations to take with him. He said he would like to have such a memo prepared but that he would not take the initiative in discussing the international organization with the Prime Minister but that he should be briefed in case the Prime Minister brought it up. He intimated he expected his conversation with the Prime Minister to relate chiefly to military matters.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(4) [(6)] Expulsion and Suspension. I said the British supported our view that it should not be included in the document but that the Russians were insistent that it contain such provisions. The President said he thought that would be a mistake and that he hoped we would win our point.

(5) [(7)] Location. The President then inquired whether we had discussed location. I told him only privately to date in informal discussions. He said he had been thinking more about this and continued to hope we would agree on the assembly meeting in different places “from hemisphere to hemisphere”, and that the council should have two locations, one in the Azores and the other in the Hawaiian Islands.

At this point I expressed the view it would be a mistake to separate the secretariat from the permanent headquarters of the council. I said the secretariat might consist of a couple of thousand of people and that to have them somewhere on the mainland with the council located on an island just would not be practical. I also said we were afraid his suggestion of having the secretariat located in America would not be acceptable to the other nations. At this point I spoke in favor of Geneva, pointing out that the climate was good, facilities excellent, it was readily accessible to the European countries and that the only bad feature was the bad name of the League, suggesting that if it were not for that, I believed he would agree to it without question. The President said he would not object to the permanent secretariat being located there but that he would object strongly to the assembly or the council having official meetings there. I got the impression from what he said that if it was thought advisable he could be persuaded to have the place of operations of the council in Geneva if it held its meetings elsewhere. He then spoke definitely of the Island of Flores in the Azores and I told him I would have a map prepared showing its location and containing information as to its climate, its port facilities, etc. I promised to do likewise for the small island of Niihau in the Hawaiian group which the President described as the most interesting and heavenly spot he knew of on earth and which he said would be magnificent for a permanent seat of the executive meetings of the council. In the meeting the President could not recall the name of this island but stated it was northwest of Oahu and that it was owned by an old sugar family. The President then spoke of the Black Hills, saying it was 400 miles in every direction from civilization; that there were two good hotels and trout streams available and that it would be a magnificent place for the council to meet.

(6) [(8)] Name. The President then inquired if we had reached a decision on a name. I replied that we had not discussed this formally but would do so, but that I did not feel we would have any difficulty in putting over the name “The United Nations”.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25 Mr. Stettinius, with some others from the American and British groups, had gone to the airport to greet the Chinese Ambassador to the United Kingdom, V. K. Wellington Koo, on his arrival in the United States.

26 Maj. Gen. Edwin M. Watson, Secretary to President Roosevelt.

27 Iosif Vissarionovich Stalin, Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars (Premier) of the Soviet Union.

28 Secretary Hull, referring in his Memoirs to their efforts to keep this proposal absolutely secret, stated: “It seemed to me so explosive an issue that, if it got out, it would inevitably be dramatized by forces of opposition everywhere and do injury to Russia’s situation as well as to that of the conference.” (Memoirs, vol. ii, p. 1680.)

29 Harry L. Hopkins, Special Assistant to President Roosevelt.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./6

[Document 430]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 29, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Seventh Day

Meetings or the Formulation Group on General Organization 30

The formulation group of the Subcommittee on General Organization, meeting Monday and today, has reached tentative agreement on the following aspects of the International Organization:

I. Purposes

To maintain peace and security through effective collective measures for the prevention and suppression of threats to or breaches of the peace; to adjust or settle peacefully disputes which may lead to a breach of the peace; to develop friendly relations among nations; to serve as a center for harmonizing the action of nations for these ends. We and the British agreed that the Organization should achieve international cooperation on economic, social and technical matters, but the Soviet group, while constructively participating in discussion of this point, reserved judgment pending instructions.

II. Principles

The Organization will act in accordance with the following principles: the sovereign equality of all peace-loving states; fulfillment by all members of the obligations assumed in accordance with the basic instrument; settlement of all disputes by peaceful means not endangering peace and security; avoidance of the threat or use of force in any manner inconsistent with these purposes; and no assistance to a state against which preventive or enforcement action is being undertaken.

III. Membership

Membership should be open to the United Nations and all other peace-loving states; initial members should be the United Nations (the Soviet group reserves judgment as to whether “the nations associated with them” should be included31 ); states not initial members should be admitted individually after adoption of the basic instrument and in accordance with regulations in it.

IV. Principal Organs

An assembly, a council, an international court, a general secretariat, and such additional organs, councils, commissions or agencies as may be found necessary.

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee

We reviewed and rather promptly reached agreement, with very minor revisions, on the draft statements of the formulation group, summarized above.

The ease and the dispatch with which agreement was reached on these matters was encouraging.

We also agreed easily upon the schedule of meetings to be followed tomorrow and the next day. The arrangements at which we have arrived for considering and disposing of the various matters under discussion seem to be working smoothly and effectively.

30 The establishment of Formulation Groups for the Subcommittee on General Questions of International Organization and for the Subcommittee on Security Questions resulted from a decision by the Joint Steering Committee on August 25 to institute such a group for each of the two larger subcommittees, with responsibility for drafting specific proposals as the subcommittees reached general agreement of views. This decision was put into effect on the next Monday afternoon, August 28, when the two Groups met together for the first time; after a series of meetings together they lost their separate identity and became known as “the Formulation Group”. (Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, pp. 307–308.)

31 In course of discussion of the question of membership at the seventh meeting of the Joint Steering Committee, at 3 p.m. on August 29, Ambassador Gromyko questioned the phrase United Nations and “the nations associated with them”. Mr. Pasvolsky agreed to bring to the next meeting of the Committee a list of those countries which had taken part in recent conferences sponsored by the United Nations. He said that such a list would show that there were thirty-five United Nations and nine associated nations. (Minutes of meeting No. 7, p. 3.) For the list of nations, see pp. 757–758 [Pgs. 757–758 include portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437].

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[Document 431]

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Seventh Day, Tuesday, August 29, 1944.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Private Talk with Gromyko.—After the press conference this morning Gromyko asked if he could have a private talk with me and we went down into the garden and sat by the swimming pool for a half hour. The Ambassador stated he was concerned and wished to discuss several points with me. The question of the ⅔ vote, the Ambassador said, he and his colleagues in Moscow had been greatly pleased with the proposal in the American document with a simple majority vote and that he was now very discouraged over the fact that we had retreated from that and were prepared to agree to a two-thirds majority. He was afraid this would cause great difficulty with his government and hoped we could reconsider our position. I assured the Ambassador we would give the matter further study. He then talked about the voting issue when big powers were involved in a dispute, and stated that he had a firm feeling which was also the official view of his government that the unanimity of the four powers must be preserved and he hoped it would be possible for us to reconsider our position on this matter. I explained to the Ambassador this was a question to which we had given great study, which had been reviewed carefully both with the President and Mr. Hull and that only last night the President had asked me to explain to him that it would cause great difficulty in presenting the plan to the American public if it provided that a party involved in a dispute could vote on its own case. The Ambassador then replied that it was clear this would be a point of actual disagreement but that perhaps we could find some general language to cover it so that it could be dealt with at a later date and that a definite position would not have to be arrived at during these conversations. I emphasized again this would be very disappointing to our government and that I hoped it would be possible to find a solution during the conversations which we could all support. The Ambassador then said he had two other points he wished to make but which he did not consider as important as the first two. On both of these latter questions I got the distinct impression that we should not have much difficulty in reaching satisfactory solutions. The first was the matter of the international air force for which they wished to press. I asked him to explain exactly what he now had in mind on this and he said that they visualized each of the four powers placing at the disposal of the council airplanes and forces which could be used very promptly without the delay of many days which the procurement of authorization from a government would cause. I then said, “Mr. Ambassador, you don’t mean a new uniform with a special insignia on the plane under command of some officer of the council” and he replied “Not at all”. I then went on and said in effect “I understand you mean joint operations with a plane of the RAF32 and a plane of the Red Army and a plane of the USAF33 all operating together under same Allied command.” The Ambassador agreed and added that the Soviets think of troops and naval vessels in the same way. I told him that on the question of the authority of the council to utilize these forces on a moment’s notice we would have to study further because by the terms of our Constitution, Senate relations are involved in that position.34 He replied he understood that and knew we were studying the entire matter.

The Ambassador then stated he was impressed by our arguments relative to an economic and social council and would be available to discuss it in more detail at any time at my convenience. At the close of the conversation, I told the Ambassador I had discussed his statement on the matter both with the President and Secretary. I told him it was the opinion of the American government that the suggestion is out of order and that pressing the point at this time might jeopardize the success of the conversations. I said it was my earnest appeal the Soviet group withdraw the request and added that if the Soviet government had such a thing in mind, it should more properly be presented to the international organization in due course after its creation. The Ambassador was most cooperative and indicated that he had raised the point at the meeting merely to inform us that they had this matter in mind but said he would agree in the present meetings at Dumbarton Oaks there should be no further reference whatsoever to the subject. He added that he would agree to define the initial membership as consisting of the United Nations and the Associated Nations.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Tea with Cadogan and Gromyko

Immediately after the conclusion of the Joint Steering Committee I took Cadogan and Gromyko to tea in the garden and we had another frank talk. Cadogan inquired of Gromyko how much longer he felt it would take to finish the conversations, volunteering that he (Cadogan) hoped they could be completed by the middle of next week. Gromyko agreed to this and said he could see no reason why we should not end up by the middle of the week.

Gromyko asked Cadogan if he had studied the Chinese plan and Cadogan replied that he had and that there seemed to be nothing in it which would cause difficulty. Cadogan referred to the mention in the Chinese document of the equality of race question.

Gromyko then stated the only points he could see that were really open and might cause difficulty was the question of the two-thirds vote, the question of voting when a big power was involved in a dispute; international air force, the economic and social council, and the military committee. He admitted he had heard from home on all these points but said it was taking him about three days to get an exchange of views between Washington and Moscow.

Cadogan and I both talked very frankly with the Ambassador on the question of a country voting when it was involved in a dispute. Among other things we stressed that such a procedure would be entirely unacceptable to the small nations. The Ambassador refused to recognize the validity of that point or of our other arguments.

Cadogan then stated at lunch to me that he had had the thought we might work on another formula along the lines that the council could be empowered to request such a government not to vote. If that country then insisted on voting we would then know where we stood. After a 45-minute talk, I left as Cadogan had not previously had an opportunity for talking with Gromyko today.

Gromyko seemed most enthusiastic and most encouraged with the way matters were proceeding. Cadogan said facetiously that we would certainly have to speed things along and end up before the collapse of Germany as this just couldn’t occur without his being in at the kill.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

32 Royal Air Force.

33 United States Army Air Forces (USAAF).

34 Article I, section 8, includes among the powers of Congress the power to declare war, to raise and support armies, to provide and maintain a navy and to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers.

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 7 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 3 p.m., August 29, at Dumbarton Oaks Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 1–12

[Document 432]

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 7 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 3 p.m., August 29, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, August 29, 1944, 3 p.m.

[Extract]

Present: Sir Alexander Cadogan and Mr. Jebb of the British group;

Ambassador Gromyko, Mr. Sobolev, and Mr. Berezhkov of the Soviet group;

Mr. Stettinius, Mr. Dunn, and Mr. Pasvolsky of the American group.

Mr. Hiss also present, as secretary.

At the opening of the meeting Mr. Stettinius referred to the statement which Ambassador Gromyko had made yesterday at the last previous meeting of the Committee with reference to the possible inclusion of the sixteen Soviet republics among the initial members of the Organization. Mr. Stettinius suggested that, in view of a conversation he had had with Ambassador Gromyko on this subject, he wondered whether perhaps reference to the subject might not appropriately be omitted from the minutes of yesterday’s meeting. In reply, Ambassador Gromyko said that he did not feel that it would be necessary to omit mention of this matter from the minutes. In this connection, reference was made to the very limited circulation which is being given to copies of these minutes. The Ambassador went on to say that in making his statement of yesterday on this subject he had desired simply to call the matter to the attention of the other groups and that he does not insist upon discussing the matter further in the Dumbarton Oaks conversations for the purpose of arriving at any decision on this point in these present conversations.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 1–12

[Document 433]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)35

Washington, August 29, 1944.

On Monday, August 28, 1944, toward the end of a long and important meeting of the Joint Steering Committee of the Dumbarton Oaks conversations during the American, British and Soviet phase of those conversations, while the group was discussing which nations of the world should be the initial members of the Organization, we explained that we had in mind the same group of United Nations and associated nations36 which had been invited to attend the Food and Agriculture Conference, the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Conference and the International Monetary Fund Conference. There was a good deal of discussion as to the details of this whole question.

There was general agreement that our proposal would be satisfactory. However, just after the discussion on this point appeared to have been concluded, Ambassador Gromyko stated, almost as if he were bringing up a separate and unrelated topic, in a definitely casual manner, that the sixteen republics comprising the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics should be included among the initiators. By our manner, Sir Alexander Cadogan and I both indicated our surprise and our anticipation of great difficulty from this proposal.

Sir Alexander said, with casualness equal to that of the Ambassador’s, that he had “no comment at this stage.” He then added that he thought his Government would have to talk to the Soviet Government about regularization of the international position of the Soviet republics (thus indicating a desire to keep the subject separate from the Dumbarton Oaks conversations.)

The Ambassador then observed something to the effect that each of the republics had its own separate governmental organization.

The American representatives (Mr. Dunn and Mr. Pasvolsky were with me) then said, in a quiet and deliberately informal and off-hand way, that the American side would have to think about the proposal.

There was no further discussion about the proposal and the Committee proceeded at once, and as if with relief, to discuss the practical matter of the schedule of meetings to be adopted for the next few days of the conversations.

We next discussed a proposed press release and then adjourned without further discussion of any substantive questions.

In reporting the progress of the Dumbarton Oaks conversations to the President on August 28, 1944, at 5:00 p.m.,38 I raised with him, among other things, the above-mentioned request of the Soviet Government. The President stated emphatically that this was a proposal that the United States could under no conditions accept, and he instructed me forthwith to explain to Ambassador Gromyko that this would complicate matters, that it would present untold difficulties, and there would be just as much logic for us to ask for the admittance of our forty-eight states as it would be to admit their sixteen republics.

This morning, Tuesday, August 29, 1944, I went to Mr. Hull’s apartment at 9:00 a.m. to discuss this matter. Mr. Hull stated that he was amazed that such a proposal had been made and that no such question had ever entered the minds of any of us in the American group who had been working on this. I told him that the President had instructed me to explain to Ambassador Gromyko promptly that such a proposal could not be considered by the Government of the United States.

At 11:15 a.m. today, August 29th, after the joint press conference of the heads of the three groups, Ambassador Gromyko stated that he wished to discuss a few private matters with me.39

We went into the garden at Dumbarton Oaks and the Ambassador raised a number of points about our discussions which have been recorded elsewhere.

At the close of this conversation, I advised the Ambassador that I had discussed the Ambassador’s statement as to the sixteen Soviet republics with the President and the Secretary of State. I said that it is the opinion of the American Government that the suggestion is out of order and that pressing the point at this time might jeopardize the success of our present conversations. I said it was my earnest appeal that the Soviet group withdraw the request and said further that if the Soviet Government had such a thing in mind it should more properly be presented to the Council of the international organization in due course after its creation.

The Ambassador was most cooperative and in effect said, “The reason I raised this point at the meeting yesterday was merely to advise the United Kingdom and the American Governments that we had this matter in mind but I will agree, in our present meetings at Dumbarton Oaks, that there should be no further reference whatsoever to this subject, and I agree that we will define the initial membership as consisting of the United Nations and associated nations.”

At the outset of today’s 3:00 o’clock meeting of the Joint Steering Committee,40 I asked Ambassador Gromyko if it would be agreeable to him to have reference to this matter omitted from the minutes of the Committee’s meeting of yesterday. The Ambassador said something to the effect that what was said was said, but that he would not refer further to the matter during the present conversations. He did, however, indicate that on some other occasion the question would probably be raised again by his Government. It was agreed, in deference to the Ambassador’s position, to let the minutes include reference to this point but it was emphasized that, in accordance with prior general arrangements relating to these minutes, only two copies of the minutes containing this reference would be distributed to the Chairman of each of the three national groups.

I am retaining those pages of the minutes which contain reference to this matter in my office safe at the Department. Until further instructions are issued by me or Mr. Hull, those pages will not be available to anyone. This memorandum (of which there are no copies) will, after being read by Mr. Hull and by the President, also be retained in my office safe.

35 Annex to minutes of meeting No. 6 of the Joint Steering Committee, August 28, 11 a.m., p. 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428].

36 See list of nations, pp. 757–758 [Pgs. 757–758 include portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437].

38 See extracts from Diary, August 28, p. 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429].

39 See extracts from Diary, August 29, p. 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 431].

40 See supra.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./7

[Document 434]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 30, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Eighth Day

Meeting of the Special Military Subcommittee

(a) Provision of Forces

The Subcommittee, meeting for the first time this week, resumed its discussion of the nature of forces to be provided for enforcement action. Admiral Willson submitted for the American group a formula which would obligate each state to maintain, in accordance with a general agreement, a stipulated quota of air, sea and land forces in readiness for immediate movement upon receipt of an order from the Council. A warning order would indicate at what time these forces would come directly under the command of the Council. Our formula was agreeable to the British but the Russians asked whether it would exclude an international air force corps under direct control of the Council. Our view was that the American formula was more comprehensive than the Soviet proposal because sea and land forces, as well as air forces, as provided for under the agreement, would be subject to control of the Council when and as required. The Soviet group asked for a few clays in which to consider the American proposal.

(b) Composition of the Military Committee of the Council

The British set forth their view that the four principal powers should be continuously represented on this Committee, presumably by representatives of their respective Chiefs of Staff, Representatives of other states would be associated with the Committee as occasion arose on a basis to be determined later by the Committee and the Council. The American and Soviet groups were in general accord with this proposal, subject to later agreement upon exact language.

Meeting of the Subcommittee on General Organization

The Subcommittee on General Organization, meeting for the first time this week, discussed but did not undertake to reach agreement on the questions which follow. Ambassador Gromyko explained that the Soviet group would be able to contribute little to the discussion because they had not given much previous consideration to these questions.

1. Should amendments to the basic instrument be binding on dissenting states?

2. Enforcement of obligations over non-member states.

3. Has a non-member of the Council a right to vote on special questions affecting its interests or should it merely have a right to be heard?

4. Nomenclature.

5. Should the Council be “in continuous session”?

6. Director-General’s right to call the attention of the Council to threatening situations.

7. Character of the Secretariat.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./8

[Document 435]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 31, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Ninth Day

Meeting of Joint Steering Committee

The Joint Steering Committee met at noon today for the first time in two days to consider drafts relating to the Assembly which had been prepared for it during those two days by the formulation groups. There was striking unanimity of views on these drafts.

a. Points Agreed Upon

1. Composition. To be composed of all state members of the Organization.

2. Functions and Powers. Assembly to have the right to consider questions relating to the maintenance of peace and security, but not on its own initiative to deal with any such matter which is being dealt with by the Council; to approve the annual budgets; to have the power of suspending members against which action has been taken by the Council; and to elect non-continuing members of the Council and the Director-General (upon recommendation of the Council) and judges of the Court in accordance with the Court’s statute.

3. Voting. Important decisions to be by a two-thirds majority.

b. Expulsion; Economic and Social Council

The Soviet group continued to urge that the Assembly also be given the power to expel members and they continued to reserve their position with respect to the substance of our proposal for an Economic and Social Council. However, on both these matters agreement was reached as to form of language.

c. Amendment of the Basic Instrument

Our position was that amendments should be proposed by a majority vote of the Assembly and should come into effect when approved by two-thirds of the member states including all those having permanent seats on the Council. The Soviet and British groups are drafting their own respective formulae on this point.

Meeting of the Legal Subcommittee

We reached tentative agreement with both the Soviet and British representatives that: (1) an international court should be the principal judicial organ of the Organization, its statute to be part of the basic instrument; (2) the Statute of the Present Permanent Court41 should be revised or used, subject to modifications, as the basis of the new statute; (3) all members of the Organization should ipso facto be parties to the statute; and (4) the conditions under which states not members of the Organization may become parties to the statute should be determined in each case by the Assembly on recommendation of the Council.

Meeting of the Security Subcommittee

We reached tentative agreement with the Soviet and British representatives on the following questions, all of which were then referred to the formulation group for more detailed consideration:

a. Determination of Threats to or Breaches of Peace

The Council should determine in each case when a threat to or breach of peace exists.

b. Council’s Right to Obtain Facilities

Member states should be obligated by a general agreement to furnish facilities. Supplementary agreements might be made by the Council in emergencies.

c. Responsibility of the Council for Enforcing Surrender Terms for Germany and Japan

There should be continuing supervision of the enemy states.

41 For text of statute of December 16, 1920 (effective in September 1921), as amended by the Protocol of September 14, 1929 (effective February 1, 1936), see Department of State Conference Series No. 84: The International Court of Justice: Selected Documents Relating to the Drafting of the Statute, p. 1.

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 8 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 12:15 p.m., August 31, at Dumbarton Oaks Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv. A/JSC Mins. 1–12

[Document 436]

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 8 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 12:15 p.m., August 31, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, August 31, 1944, 12:15 p.m.

[Extract]

Present: Sir Alexander Cadogan and Mr. Jebb of the British group;

Ambassador Gromyko, Mr. Sobolev, and Mr. Berezhkov of the Soviet group;

Mr. Stettinius, Mr. Dunn, and Mr. Pasvolsky of the American group.

Mr. Hiss also present, as secretary.

At the beginning of the meeting Mr. Pasvolsky distributed copies of a memorandum entitled “List of Nations which Participated in Hot Springs, UNRRA and Bretton Woods Conferences”,42 as he had agreed to do at the last meeting of the Committee.43

It was explained again that the distinction which has been made between United Nations and nations or authorities associated with the United Nations has been that the former is composed of nations which have actually declared war on the Axis and that the latter consists, first, of authorities (French Committee of National Liberation) and, second, of states which have actively assisted in the prosecution of the war but have not formally declared war. It was also brought out that a mere breaking of relations with the Axis does not, ipso facto, bring a state within the category of “associated nations”.

Ambassador Gromyko said that he understood that the Committee would regard this list as supplementary information but that there would be no attempt at this stage of the conversations to determine upon an actual list of the initial members of the proposed organization. He said further that it was his understanding that the joint recommendations to be prepared as a result of the present conversations will not contain an actual list of proposed initial members but will contain a general formula governing initial membership.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

[Annex]

List of Nations Which Participated in Hot Springs, UNRRA and Bretton Woods Conferences 44

united nations

Australia Cuba

Belgium Czechoslovakia

Bolivia Dominican Republic

Brazil El Salvador

Canada Ethiopia

China Greece

Colombia Guatemala

Costa Rica Haiti

Honduras Norway

India Panama

Iran Philippine Commonwealth

Iraq Poland

Liberia Union of South Africa

Luxembourg U.S.S.R.

Mexico U.K.

Netherlands U.S.A.

New Zealand Yugoslavia

Nicaragua

states or authorities associated with the united nations in the war

Chile Iceland

Ecuador Paraguay

Egypt Peru

French Committee of National Liberation Uruguay

Venezuela

Observers

Danish Minister at Washington, attending in a personal capacity

42 The annex, below.

43 See footnote 31, p. 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 430].

44 Reference is made to the United Nations Conference on Food and Agriculture, Hot Springs, Virginia, May 18–June 3, 1943 (for documentation, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 820 ff.); the first session of the Council of the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, held at Atlantic City, New Jersey, November 10–December 1, 1943 (for documentation, see Department of State publication No. 2040, Conference Series No. 53: First Session of the Council of the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration: Selected Documents (Washington, 1944); and the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference, Bretton Woods. New Hampshire, July 1–22, 1944 (for documentation, see Foreign Relations, 1944, vol. ii, pp. 106 ff.).

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[Document 437]

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Ninth Day, Thursday, August 31, 1944.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5:00 P.M. Meeting with the President.

I called at 5 o’clock on the President at the White House and presented to him the memorandum outlining the day’s developments.

The President seemed very much pleased with the Chinese plan and said he wished to study it carefully over the weekend at Hyde Park.

He inquired why Gromyko did not like the sentence he had added to the joint press release.45 I said I could not tell but apparently the Soviets wished the release to be as brief as possible and probably wished that it say as little as possible. I then presented to the President the proposed wire for him to send to Marshal Stalin on the “X” matter.46 The President seemed very pleased with the message and signed it while I was there. He added one sentence, “This would not prejudice later discussion of the question after the organization has been formed and the Assembly would have full authority to deal with the question at that time”.

I handed the President the memorandum on Brazil, which had been prepared by Pasvolsky and Dunn. The President read this very carefully and I had quite a struggle with him on the matter. At first he was not impressed but finally swung around and said it would be satisfactory for us to go ahead along those lines. (The memorandum recommended that we not press at this time for a permanent seat for Brazil.) I told the President that the Secretary had a great personal interest in this matter and might wish to review it with him further next week. The President said this was very important as some day he might wish to propose a seat for a Moslem country on a permanent basis. Finally he said the Brazilian matter was a card up his sleeve.

I then presented to him the memorandum on France, recommending in effect that a seat be reserved for France which she could take on a permanent basis at the appropriate time. He immediately approved this procedure but stated that he wanted it to be thoroughly understood that any one of the Big Four would have a veto power in the matter, and that France could not take this seat at the Council unless and until the United States approved. I stated that was my understanding of the proposed procedure.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Telephone Conversation with Mr. Hull.

I then went into the old cabinet room to receive a phone call from Mr. Hull, and had a long talk with him. I apologized for not being able to review with him the memorandum on France and Brazil before I went to the White House. I reviewed both with him on the phone and he did not seem to understand thoroughly the memorandum on Brazil. After he has had an opportunity to study the memorandum I must ask him whether or not he is satisfied to leave the matter on that basis.

He seemed very satisfied with the memorandum on France.47

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

45  For statement by the Heads of the American, British, and Soviet Delegations, and statement by the Under Secretary of State, released to the press on August 29, see Department of State Bulletin, September 3, 1944, p. 233.

Reviewing for the American Group the two releases before the joint press conference on the morning of August 29, Mr. Stettinius explained that the Soviets did not approve the addition which the President had made which was to point out that the number of non-permanent members of the Council would be greater than the number of permanent seats. (Diary, August 29, p. 2.) This addition was omitted from the press release.

46 For the telegram as sent, see infra.

47 Mr. Stettinius noted in his Diary of September 1, with reference to his meeting with the Secretary: “At noon I called on the Secretary with Mr. Hackworth present. I read aloud to him our memos to the President on Brazil and France, which I had discussed with the White House yesterday. He approved both and commented specifically on the memo on Brazil as follows: ‘That is sound reasoning and it is entirely satisfactory for you to proceed on that formula.’”

President Roosevelt to the Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars of the Soviet Union (Stalin) Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 1–12

[Document 438]

President Roosevelt to the Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars of the Soviet Union (Stalin)49

Washington, August 31, 1944.

55. Personal for Marshal Stalin. I am much concerned at the reference made by your delegation at Dumbarton Oaks that the Soviet Government might desire to have the sixteen constituent republics considered for individual membership in the new international organization. Although it was made clear by your delegation that this subject would not be raised again during this present stage of the conversations, I feel I must tell you that to raise this question at any stage before the final establishment and entry into its functions of the international organization would very definitely imperil the whole project, certainly as far as the United States is concerned and undoubtedly other important countries as well. I hope you will find it possible to reassure me on this point.

This would not prejudice later discussion of the question after the organization has been formed, and the Assembly would have full authority to deal with the question at that time.

49 Copy of telegram transmitted to the Secretary of State by Col. Richard Park Jr., General Staff, Assistant to the Military Aide to President Roosevelt, in his memorandum of September 4, 1944, not printed. He stated that the message was sent as the President’s 55 to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) for Marshal Stalin as drafted by the State Department with the addition of the last paragraph by the President.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 500.CC/8–3144

[Document 439]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 31, 1944.

The Soviet Ambassador called at my request. I discussed and earnestly urged the retention of the proposal that no nation could vote in a case in which it was interested and, secondly, I strongly emphasized the great importance of an elaborate discussion of economic problems.50 The other question which I discussed is not to be made of record.51 I complimented the Ambassador very highly on his excellent showing as head of his delegation. This was in all sincerity.

C[ordell] H[ull]

50 With reference to the Soviet contention that economic and social problems should be handled by a separate organization apart from the international security organization, the Secretary argued to Mr. Gromyko that peace and security were inextricably linked with economics, because a world in economic chaos would be forever a breeding ground for trouble and war. (Hull, Memoirs, vol. ii, pp. 1680–1681.)

51  The other question was Ambassador Gromyko’s proposal in the Joint Steering Committee on August 28 that all sixteen Republics composing the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics should be made initial members of the United Nations Organization. In his Memoirs, Secretary Hull said he told the Soviet Ambassador the large nations that would have to furnish leadership and the military force for the organization would have no difficulty in getting their views listened to, whether they had one vote or many votes, and the United States did not think to have more than one vote.

Mr. Hull stated that prior to his resignation in November, 1944, this question of plural Russian membership was mentioned only once more by Gromyko, and that toward the end of the conference. At no time, according to the Secretary, did the Soviets take up with him their later request for the admission of the White Russian and Ukrainian Republics to which President Roosevelt agreed at the Yalta Conference. Had they done so, Mr. Hull stressed that he would have opposed it. (Memoirs, vol. ii, pp. 1679–1680.)

For discussions at the Yalta Conference on this subject, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, 1945, pp. 712, 772, and 991.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./9

[Document 440]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 1, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Tenth Day

Meeting of the Formulation Group on General Organization

The Formulation Group of the Subcommittee on General Organization met this morning and reached a tentative agreement on the following points on the Pacific Settlement of Disputes.

1. The parties to any dispute the continuance of which is likely to endanger peace should be obligated to seek a settlement by peaceful means of their own choice.

2. The council should watch the situation, investigate it, and by all the means in its power, encourage states to peacefully settle their disputes. If, nevertheless, the parties fail to settle it by such means they should be obligated to refer it to the council, which should be empowered, at any stage of a dispute, to recommend appropriate procedures or methods of adjustment.

3. Should the council deem that a failure to settle a dispute in accordance with its recommendations constitutes a threat to the maintenance of peace and security, it should be empowered to take all measures necessary to maintain peace in accordance with the purposes and principles of the organization.

4. Justiciable disputes should normally be referred to the international court of justice and the council should be empowered to refer to the court for advice legal aspects of other disputes.

5. The provisions of the preceding paragraphs of this section should apply equally to non-member states.

Meeting of the Formulation Group on Security

The Formulation Group on Security reached tentative agreement on the following points relating to the determination of threats to and breaches of the peace and action with regard thereto.

1. The Committee agreed that the council should be empowered to determine when a threat to or breach of the peace exists and should decide upon the action to be recommended or taken to maintain or restore peace.

2. The council should be empowered to determine what non-military measures should be employed and to call upon member states to apply these measures.

3. If other measures prove inadequate, the council should be authorized to provide for the use of armed force.

4. All states should be obligated to assist the council to the utmost of their power in carrying out these actions.

5. The question of member states affording relief to states assuming undue burdens in enforcement action was reserved for decision by the Steering Committee.

6. Member States should undertake to make available to the council on demand armed forces and facilities necessary for the maintenance of peace and security in accordance with a special agreement or agreements. Such agreement or agreements would come into effect when ratified by the number of states to be determined by the council, including all permanent members of the council.

7. A Soviet proposal in regard to an international air corps was referred to the Steering Committee.

8. Plans for the application of force would be made by the council aided by a military commission.

9. Pending the conclusion of the above-mentioned special agreement or agreements the states party to the Moscow Declaration, and other states in a position to do so, would provide forces and facilities necessary for the maintenance of peace and security.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./10

[Document 441]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 2, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Eleventh Day

Meeting of the Formulation Group on Security

The group reconsidered the questions relating to the determination of threats to and breaches of the peace and action with regard thereto, and made a number of verbal changes in the points agreed to yesterday. The only changes of substance were the following: 1. It was agreed that no reference should be made in the basic instrument of the organization to the interim provision by the states party to the Moscow Declaration, pending the conclusion of special agreements on this subject, of forces and facilities necessary for the maintenance of peace and security.

2. It was agreed that there should be attached to the council a Military Committee composed of representatives of the Chiefs of Staff of the permanent members of the council, the functions of which would be to advise and assist the council on all questions relating to the employment of forces placed at the disposal of the council. Representatives of other states might be associated with this committee from time to time.

Meeting of the Formulation Group on General Organization

The Formulation Group of the Subcommittee on General Organization met this afternoon to reformulate certain provisions relating to the functions, procedures and voting methods of the council.

As regards functions, the Group agreed that: 1. In order to insure prompt and effective action, member states should confer on the council primary responsibility to maintain peace and security.

2. In order to carry out this responsibility the council should be empowered to encourage states to settle their disputes by peaceful means, to recommend appropriate procedures of adjustment and, in cases where failure to settle a dispute constitutes a threat to the peace, to take all necessary measures to maintain or restore peace; and to take effective collective measures to prevent and suppress threats to or breaches of the peace.

3. In discharging these responsibilities, the council should act on behalf of all members of the organization. (There was a slight difference between the American and British members on the one hand, and the Soviet on the other, as to the wording of the obligatory character of the council’s decisions on member states.)

On procedure, the Group agreed: 1. That a state not having a seat on the council should be invited to attend during the consideration of a dispute of which it is a party, but that the council should decide whether to invite a state not having a seat on the council to attend when its other interests are especially affected.

2. To present for further consideration by the Steering Committee the wording of a paragraph relating to the continuous session of the council and the character of permanent representation on the council.

In regard to voting, the Group formulated four questions for further consideration: 1. Whether the normal vote of the council should be by majority or two-thirds.

2. Whether the provisions for unanimous vote of the permanent members should be enumerated or left in general terms.

3. Whether provision should be made for voluntary abstention.

4. Whether the vote of a party to a dispute should be counted.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./11

[Document 442]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 3, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Twelfth Day

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee

The Joint Steering Committee met at 11:00 a.m. today (Sunday) and went over drafts submitted to the Committee by the formulation groups on the following subjects: The composition, principal functions and powers, voting and procedure of the council;

Pacific settlement of disputes;

Determination of threats to the peace or breaches of the peace and action with respect thereto.

A number of phraseological changes were made in these drafts but none of these changes involved matters of substance.

Points of interest which came up as a result of the discussion at this meeting are listed below:

(a) Time Schedule of Consideration of Unsettled Points

At the outset of the meeting I inquired of Ambassador Gromyko and Sir Alexander Cadogan as to when they thought we could take up those points on which one or more of the groups had thus far maintained reservations. I said that I was prepared to discuss these moot points at any time. Ambassador Gromyko said that “so far” the Soviet position on these points is unchanged. Sir Alexander Cadogan indicated that he, too, had not yet received his final instructions.

It was generally agreed that we would plan at least to consider these reserved points on Tuesday and there was also general agreement with my expressed hope that we might complete the present phase (i.e. British-Soviet-American phase) of the discussions by Thursday or Friday.

(b) Number of Permanent Seats on the Council

The formulating group had agreed upon a provision that the council should have eleven members and that the United States, the United Kingdom, the U.S.S.R., China, and, in due course, France should have permanent seats. I took this occasion to remind Sir Alexander and Ambassador Gromyko that we had previously brought up for discussion the possibility of adding Brazil as a sixth permanent member. I said that in deference to the positions taken on this point by the British and the Soviet groups we were withdrawing our requests for further consideration of this question. I added in a somewhat jocular aside that I hoped that our prompt and unsolicited withdrawal from a position which we considered one of importance to us might perhaps serve as an example or as a precedent for our further discussions.

I then suggested that perhaps we might insert in the basic document a general provision authorizing a possible future increase in the number of permanent seats. Sir Alexander replied quite promptly that he regretted being the first to depart from the newly established precedent but that he must say that he hoped no such provision would be necessary. Ambassador Gromyko added that he felt such a position would not be suitable at this stage. Sir Alexander remarked that if in the future it is considered desirable to have a sixth permanent member recourse might always be had to the amendment processes.

(c) Miscellaneous Points

After some discussion there seemed to be general agreement that for purposes of the joint recommendations it would be well to set forth the important provisions relating to the pacific settlement of disputes and to the determination of threats to or breaches of the peace in a separate section of the recommendations. We all seemed to feel that at this stage it is desirable to call special attention to these important questions, an end which might not be served were they merely to be listed under the other powers of the council.

The British group on several occasions indicated, by their suggested revisions of phraseology, their continued concern with the sensibilities of the smaller powers.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./12

[Document 443]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 4, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Thirteenth Day

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee

In general the progress made was less than had been the case at prior meetings. In particular Ambassador Gromyko was more insistent than previously upon preserving intact the language of various statements contained in the Soviet plan even though the substance of these statements had, with the approval of his representative, already been incorporated in the drafts under consideration.

Among points of importance discussed at the meeting were the following:

(a) Assistance to and Compensation for States Carrying out Economic Measures Decided by the Council

The Soviet representatives contended that no specific measures of assistance and, particularly, no specific measures of compensation can as a practical matter be devised. They felt, consequently, that to include such provisions would be misleading. They said further that if as a result of the adoption of such provisions the member states were encouraged to try to devise methods of assistance or compensation it might be found that the organization would degenerate from one designed for security into one concentrating on devising measures for mutual relief.

The British and ourselves, on the other hand, emphasized the importance of provisions of this kind. He pointed out that we are all agreed that we should limit the commitments of the member states with respect to military measures to the provisions of a multilateral agreement to be negotiated among the member states. However, the commitment to carry out economic measures decided upon by the council is unlimited and it would be very difficult for various states to accept this commitment unless provisions for assistance and compensation are included. We said that this is not a matter of relief; it is an important means of more effectively insuring the carrying out of the very great authority which will be conferred on the council.

(b) Authorization for Council to Decide, in Appropriate Cases, that only the Armed Forces of the Great Powers Need be Used

Ambassador Gromyko proposed that there should be explicit authorization for the council to determine, in appropriate cases, that the armed forces of some or all of the great powers alone should be utilized to restrain aggression. He thought it desirable that such a procedure be clearly authorized in advance.

(c) Voting in the Council

I took occasion to emphasize the very great importance which we attach to our proposal that a party to a dispute should not vote in connection with that dispute. I emphasized that if we should be unable to reach an agreement on this matter during the Dumbarton Oaks conversations the success of the whole project for an international organization might be endangered. Sir Alexander Cadogan supported our position. Ambassador Gromyko said that he agreed with my estimate of the importance of this matter being settled during the Dumbarton Oaks talks but he added, rather unyieldingly, that he had no other proposal than the one he had previously made (i.e., that a special procedure should be worked out to govern the voting of a great power involved in a dispute).

Meeting of Subcommittee on Organization

The Subcommittee on Organization met this afternoon and discussed the draft joint document as it has thus far been approved by the Joint Steering Committee. In addition, an ad hoc committee on nomenclature52 of which Mr. Fletcher is chairman, made a preliminary report. The Soviet group is maintaining a reservation as to the name “United Nations” for the general, over-all organization. They assert that the term “United Nations” has a special connotation relating to the prosecution of the war against the Axis which it would be undesirable to have carried over to the future world organization. On other points of nomenclature there appears to be a general meeting of the minds among the three groups.

52 The duties of the Subcommittee on Nomenclature, established on August 23 by the Subcommittee on General Questions of International Organization, were to recommend the names or titles for the international organization. Its few meetings were entirely conversational and without minutes, and its report was accepted by its parent subcommittee on September 4 and, with tentative reservations, by the Joint Steering Committee on September 12.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./13

[Document 444]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 5, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Fourteenth Day

Meetings of the Formulation Group on Security

In meetings yesterday afternoon and this morning the group considered further the questions relating to the determination of threats to or breaches of the peace and action with regard thereto, and began consideration of the question of the regulation of armaments. In regard to the first of these matters, the following points were dealt with: 1. At the request of the Soviet group there was inserted an enumeration of the possible types of measures involving and not involving the use of force to which the council might resort in the maintenance of peace and security.

2. The Soviet representatives took the position that there should be inserted a provision that member states not having sufficient armed forces for carrying out enforcement action undertaken by the council should make available territory for bases for this purpose. The United States and British groups felt that this matter was adequately covered by the paragraph already agreed to in regard to the provision of facilities and furthermore objected to the phrasing of the Soviet proposal. Both the United States and British representatives submitted alternative drafts for this provision which will be considered by the Formulation Group and the Joint Steering Committee.

3. There was approved a paragraph providing that the council is to determine whether all or some members of the organization should participate in any particular enforcement action.

In regard to the regulation of armaments the group reached agreement that member states should undertake to negotiate a general agreement on this subject and that the international organization should be responsible for initiating these negotiations. Both the British and the Soviet representatives objected to the United States proposal that regulation cover “armed forces” as well as armaments. The Soviet representatives were also desirous of mentioning the regulation of armaments specifically among the questions concerning which the general assembly should be authorized to make recommendations, but the British and United States representatives saw no reason for singling out this one among the many subjects which the assembly might discuss.

Discussion of the regulation of armaments will be continued in the Formulation Group and in the Joint Steering Committee.

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[Document 445]

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Fourteenth Day, Tuesday, September 5, 1944.

Telephone Conversation with the Secretary.

I called Mr. Hull at 9:10 this morning and reported that we had had full working days Sunday and Labor Day and that the only note of discouragement was the slowness on the part of the Russians. Mr. Hull said, “Yes, your memorandum of yesterday was discouraging.” I said that this expressed the general sentiment of our group but that personally I felt we would work things out all right in the end and that in the end the Russians would come through but that we might have to be patient for a while. I said that as things looked now I didn’t think we could set a definite time for the termination of the Conversations.

Mr. Hull then raised the question of his meeting with the Senators and Congressmen and said that he couldn’t put it off much longer.53 I asked him to try to wait until tomorrow as by noon tomorrow there was a good chance that we would be able to tell them considerably more than we could today. The Secretary said he would call Senator Connally and Speaker Eayburn54 on this as he wanted to avoid being put in such a position that they could accuse him of not giving them information.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Lunch at the Soviet Embassy.

Gromyko entertained the top members of the three delegations at lunch at the Soviet Embassy this noon. Messrs. Dunn, Pasvolsky and I attended from our Group. Gromyko told me at luncheon that he felt the time had arrived when we should all begin to remove brackets but that each of us would have to concede on some points. He told me in a low voice—“I am ready to start to concede but I want you to know that we attach big importance to the voting procedure both on the matter of majority and the matter of dispute.” I replied that the question of voting when involved in a dispute was the aspect of the question that disturbed us most. The Ambassador concluded by saying—“I will be ready tomorrow to start getting down to cases.”

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Meeting with the Secretary.

I went directly from the press conference into the Secretary’s office and took McDermott with me and told him about the conference. He did not seem concerned with the fact that I had to give out some substance, saying, “The world is not going to come to an end if you give the press a little information to keep them happy.”

I also told him of our luncheon at the Soviet Embassy and he was pleased that we had attended. I told of my private conversation with Gromyko at the luncheon. I also reported to the Secretary on the rather alarming information which Cadogan had given me to the effect that the Prime Minister on his return to London had apparently looked over the papers on the international organization for the first time and had apparently been quite impressed by the Soviet proposal for an international air force. Cadogan feared he might overrule the Foreign Office and change his instructions on that matter. The Secretary seemed quite disturbed and I told him I would send for our generals and admirals immediately to discuss it.

I reviewed the X matter with the Secretary and left with him a copy of the memorandum I had prepared. He promised to read it tonight and return it tomorrow. If the Secretary and then the President approve it, it will then be placed in Mr. Hull’s safe as the only copy.

I left with the Secretary the memorandum outlining the tentative schedule with the goal of the United Nations Conference on October 25th. He promised to study it carefully and to let me know his reaction to it.

He thinks my idea of taking the Chinese and the British on a trip down to Virginia is a wonderful one.

I told the Secretary I did not think he should be concerned about the wording in the final document, telling him we would be very careful to couch it in phraseology which will leave no doubt that the proposals are tentative and not binding on our Governments.

The Secretary was very disturbed that he had not yet seen the eight Senators and the eight Congressmen and asked when he could do so. I repeated to him that if he could wait another day he might be able to tell them considerably more. He was somewhat irritated and said he had to keep them satisfied. He said he couldn’t just give them some general statement but that he had to tell them exactly what had taken place and he must do it tomorrow. I promised to have a memorandum in his hands which he could use tomorrow. (This meeting was later postponed until Thursday.)

During our conversation, the Secretary told me he had been considering the question of our statement on dependent peoples and was leaning toward the feeling that it should be published shortly after the end of the Dumbarton Conversations. I then inquired of the Secretary how he felt on the question of voting as between a simple majority and a ⅔ majority. He felt if it was a matter of reaching an agreement we could easily return to a majority but that he felt we would have to maintain our position that a great power involved in the dispute could not vote, and that if the Russians became immovable we might have to extend this conference for some time to come. He also suggested we explore the possibility of putting a statement in the document that this was a very important question on which all three Governments had strong views and that it was being left open for further consideration at a later date. I told him that the American Group generally felt that this might show weakness and perhaps a lack of unanimity and might be seized upon by the small nations as a reason for not attending the large conference feeling it would be useless if the Soviet Union maintained its view.

53 Secretary Hull held consultations on September 12–13 with groups of Senators and Representatives to inform them of the status of agreement reached in the Conversations. For information on this subject, see Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, pp. 323–324.

54 Tom Connally, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee; Sam Rayburn, Speaker of the House of Representatives.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./14

[Document 446]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 6, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Fifteenth Day

Regular Meeting of the American Group

The American group held its regular 9:30 a.m. meeting to exchange views and discuss developments in the last twenty-four hours.

Meeting of the Legal Subcommittee

The American, Soviet and British representatives on the Legal Subcommittee agreed, subject to approval by their respective groups, that the statute of the international court of justice should be prepared not later than the remainder of the basic instrument of the international organization. To this end it was suggested that the Governments participating in the conference to consider the international organization should send representatives to the seat of the conference, at least two weeks in advance, for the purpose of preparing a draft of the statute for submission to the conference.

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee

The meeting of the Joint Steering Committee scheduled at 10:30 a.m. today has been postponed until later in the day because of the continued delay in the receipt by Sir Alexander Cadogan of his final instructions. The Committee is holding itself in readiness to meet this afternoon or tonight if these instructions arrive.

Yesterday’s Late Afternoon Meeting of the Formulation Group on Organization

The Formulation Group on Organization late Tuesday afternoon prepared the following sections of the basic document:

(a) The Secretariat

The group agreed that the secretary-general should be the chief administrative officer and should be appointed by the assembly on the recommendation of the council for such terms and under such conditions as are specified in the charter; should act in that capacity in all meetings of the assembly, the council, and the economic and social council; should make an annual report to the assembly on the work of the organization; and should have the right to bring to the attention of the council any matter which in his opinion may threaten international peace and security. (The Soviet group continued to reserve their position on any reference to the economic and social council.)

(b) Economic and Social Cooperation

The Soviet representative participated in the discussion of the section on economic and social cooperation but maintained the Soviet reservation on the merits of this entire question. The American and British representatives agreed to use substantially the entire American draft text on this subject. It was agreed, however, to reduce the size of the council from twenty-four to eighteen members, and a new concept of the functions of the economic and social council was added by empowering this council to assist the security council upon its request and by enabling the secretary-general to inform the security council on the work of the economic and social council.

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[Document 447]

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Fifteenth Day, Wednesday, September 6, 1944.

Meeting with the President and the Secretary.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I first presented to the President maps and analyses of the climatic conditions and harbor facilities of the Flores in the Azores and Mihau in the Hawaiian group.55 The President said he still thought the Azores would be the place. I said, “Well, your island of Flores is fine but has no harbor”. He said, “Ed, you don’t know your poetry”. The President said he would take these memos and maps to Quebec and discuss them with the Prime Minister.

I then informed the President that we felt that inasmuch as Vice Admiral Willson would be in Quebec56 and was completely informed on the proposals and the activity thus far at Dumbarton Oaks that it would be better for him to rely on the Admiral for information if he became involved in discussions on this subject rather than to burden him with memoranda and other documents. He agreed with the proviso that Admiral Willson be supplied with complete papers in case it was necessary for him to refer to them.

I next took up with the President the question of an international air force. We had some little difficulty in explaining this so that the President completely understood it. But after we had stressed that he had already gone on record against an international police force and recommended to him that we stick to our guns on this question, he finally agreed. I confirmed our previous discussion about the possibility of a change in the Prime Minister’s position and he said that he would be ready to discuss this with him at Quebec if we found it was necessary for him to do so. I then asked the President whom we would work through in Quebec, and he said, “I don’t want you to work through anybody; you should call me direct.” I said this was not always practicable; and he said that in such an event to call Admiral Leahy if Hopkins was not going. (He did not go.) I then told him that if the international air force question remained open until after the Churchill arrival in Quebec that this might hold up our proceedings with the Russians until the middle of next week, and I wondered what he thought of recessing our Russian conversations and holding our Chinese conversations in the interim. Both the President and Mr. Hull approved but Mr. Hull thought that we would have difficulty in persuading the Russians to agree, but that if we could do it graciously it would be an excellent plan and would have a fine public reaction.

I then told the President of the possibility of Cadogan being called to Quebec. Mr. Hull thought this would be bad and the President felt so strongly about it that he said that if Churchill spoke of having a diplomat come that he would suggest Eden … During this conversation, Mr. Hull got the incorrect impression that the President was talking about Eden taking Cadogan’s place in Washington while Cadogan was in Quebec and objected violently to such a procedure. We of course straightened this out. I suggested that I be authorized to press for Halifax taking Cadogan’s chair if the latter should be called away. Both gave complete approval to this but wished me to make every effort to persuade Cadogan not to leave the meeting. I told the President that inasmuch as I had some other special matters pertaining to the conversations to discuss that I would leave today’s progress reports with Miss Tully.57 I then presented the memorandum on bases which had been prepared by Pasvolsky and Dunn.58 At first I could not get the settled interest of either on this question but when I explained it was a matter of the Council being given authority to demand territory or bases they both had violent objections, feeling this whole performance should be voluntary and that it would be a great mistake at this time to place any compulsion on a small nation to furnish a base or facilities. They felt that the Council should have authority to request but not the authority to demand.

We then reviewed the question of the next step. I said we hoped to finish within two weeks and that we felt the demand in this country from the public for the plan would be so great and the demand from the smaller nations to get it would be so great that it would be most embarrassing not to send out the memorandum to the United Nations just as promptly as possible and that it would be ideal if we could possibly keep the schedule to send it to the other Governments the latter part of September, simultaneously inviting them to attend a United Nations full dress conference in the interior of the United States the latter part of October. I said we had been thinking of French Lick, Indiana. At first the President thought this would be too early but then after he had grasped the idea of having it in the interior, isolationist part of the United States he said it was a magnificent idea. The name of French Lick made his face light up.… He agreed on an immediate presentation to the United Nations and to aim for October 25th at French Lick.

We then discussed the idea of presenting the document simultaneously by the four participating Governments in the capitals of the other countries with the invitation to the big conference accompanying it. The President approved this procedure.

Just before the Secretary and I left, I told him that while I was not pressing the matter as it would take some time to get the Russians and the Chinese to agree on a procedure for presentation and approval, etc., I wondered if he would have any objection to my raising, on my own initiative, this question with the representatives of the other Governments. They both approved this immediately and wholeheartedly, asking me to take whatever action I felt necessary and they expressed the hope that I would do so promptly.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

During our discussion of French Lick I told the President that our recent international conferences had been held on the Atlantic Seaboard (Hot Springs, Atlantic City, Bretton Woods, Philadelphia59 ) and that we had not held any in the West. He was quite impressed by that point. The President inquired who owned French Lick and Mr. Hull said that Tom Taggard had owned it and that his son still did. All in all the President was quite pleased with the idea of French Lick and said there was no other place comparable to it.

I then raised the question of the provisions on suspension and expulsion for which the Soviet group has been pressing and reminded them that they had both previously said that that should not be included in the document. I explained that our group agreed with them but as the provisions were relatively minor in nature it might be wise for us to yield on that, especially if we could get something in return. They authorized me to use my own discretion on this, feeling that it would be all right to trade on the matter.

We then discussed the question of voting in the Council and I explained that they had both instructed to take the position that a two-thirds vote was preferable. I reported that the Russians were insisting on a majority and that this was another matter on which we thought it might be wise to yield, particularly for trading purposes. I explained that with a Council of eleven, the difference between the two methods meant only one vote. Mr. Hull backed me up at this point with a convincing argument that it made little difference either way and that it should be settled as we thought best at Dumbarton. I received authorization to proceed along those lines.

I then raised the difficult question of voting on the part of a great power when it was involved in a dispute. Although this had been raised previously with the President on several occasions this time he seemed confused on the issue and both Mr. Hull and I had to explain the matter in some detail before it was clear to him. Mr. Hull said that the Russians would be practically unanimously voted down on this issue at the United Nations conference and that in their own self-interest they should see that point now and agree to the other procedure (Mr. Hull while driving to his apartment, after leaving the White House, advised me to stress this point strongly when talking to Gromyko in the morning). I told the President this question might be the one big point on which we could not reach agreement at Dumbarton. The President then spoke up and said there might be a second—whether that might be the one of the use of force without the approval of our Senate. Mr. Hull and I both replied to this, saying we thought it was pretty well in hand and it was something he could follow through politically on a sound basis. The President indicated clearly that he realized that this question of the immediate use of force is a key point of the whole plan, saying that if we had to go to the Senate in each case as it arose, the plan would not be any good. Mr. Hull in explanation said that of course if the Council used force and if the Senate later disapproved through failure to authorize appropriations, etc., we could always withdraw. This approach was new and apparently of interest to the President.

I then said that Sir Alexander Cadogan had received instructions today that he could settle on a majority vote but that he must stand pat on the larger issue of a great power voting when involved in a dispute. I reported that Cadogan had reported to me that Eden felt the issue was of such prime importance, and that if it could not be settled at Dumbarton, consideration should be given to having it settled at a meeting of Foreign Ministers. The President and Mr. Hull felt that was unthinkable and that having Foreign Ministers devoting the two, three, or four weeks time, which would be necessary for that would be widely misunderstood. The President added that he saw no reason why this should not be left open for settlement at the United Nations conference. I explained that it was doubtful the Russians would agree to going into that conference with the point open, and also that as it would look as if we had not reached agreement on such a big point it might arouse suspicions of the Soviet Union on the part of smaller nations and in that way perhaps jeopardize the possibility of success of the big conference, or of some of the smaller nations attending it. That did not impress the President or the Secretary and it was left that if we could not agree we would attempt to find some very general language to hold the matter over for discussion at the later United Nations conference. Practically, this means that I am now instructed by the President and the Secretary to stand firm against the Soviet position.…

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

During our conversation with the President he said that he hoped we would do everything within our power not to allow the “X” issue to become public and he quizzed me in some detail on how we stood. I reviewed the matter with him, mentioning the cable to S,60 etc.

55 In a discussion with the President on August 28 with respect to the location of the headquarters of the proposed international organization, Under Secretary Stettinius had promised to furnish maps and information on points in the Azores and the Hawaiian Islands; see pp. 745–746 [Pgs. 745–746 include portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430].

56 Documentation on the Second Quebec Conference, September 11–16, 1944 (meetings of President Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill, and the Combined Chiefs of Staff), is scheduled for publication in a subsequent volume of Foreign Relations.

57 Grace Tully, private secretary to President Roosevelt.

58 Not printed.

59 Conferences held during 1943 and 1944, of the Food and Agriculture Organization, United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, the International Monetary Fund, and the International Labor Organization, respectively.

60 See telegram 58, September 8, from President Roosevelt to Moscow, p. 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453].

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./PR-/15

[Document 448]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 7, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Sixteenth Day

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee

The Joint Steering Committee met at 10:00 o’clock this morning and had before it a draft of the entire proposed document in eleven chapters. We gave special attention to the “open items”. Points of interest were brought out as follows:

(a) Economic and Social Council

The Soviet representatives maintained their reservation as to this point. However, it is significant that they have participated fully in the drafting of the provisions covering this point so that only the matter of inclusion or exclusion of these provisions remains open.

(b) Initial Membership

The Soviet representatives maintained their position that the initial members should be only the United Nations. When we pointed out that such a proposal is not consistent with the participation, already agreed to by the Soviet Government, of other nations in UNRRA, the Food and Agriculture Organization, and the International Monetary Fund,61 Ambassador Gromyko said that perhaps the other nations could be admitted to membership “immediately after” the United Nations.

(c) Suspension and Expulsion

The Soviet representatives agreed to the elimination of their proposal for the express provision of expulsion powers. Interestingly enough Sir Alexander Cadogan stated that he had been prepared to agree to the inclusion of the expulsion agreements.

(d) Amendment Process

The Soviet representatives proposed their own formula, namely that amendments should be proposed by a simple majority of the assembly and should become effective when ratified by a simple majority. We suggested a new approach, i.e., that procedural amendments should require only a simple majority and that substantive amendments should require something more than a mere majority.

(e) Should the Council Normally Vote by 2/3 or by Simple Majority?

The British representatives maintained their position in favor of a 2/3 majority. Here also we proposed a new approach and suggested that an affirmative vote required approval of seven of the eleven members.62

(f) Voting by a Great Power Involved in a Dispute

No progress was made on this point, the Soviet representatives maintaining without discussion their reservation to the British and American proposals that a great power involved in a dispute should not be entitled to vote.

(g) Soviet Proposal that Small Powers grant Sites for Bases

Discussion of this point was inconclusive. However, there appeared to be some possibility that agreement can be reached on this question.

(h) International Air Force

The British proposed, as a compromise, that after the creation of the organization member states should undertake to examine the practicability of organizing international air forces.

(i) Regionalism

This subject, which the British have urged us to consider on several prior occasions, was discussed in general terms. The British stated that they did not favor regional groups having political functions but that they did think that regional groups might prove very helpful to the council in carrying out military action decided upon by the council.

61 See list of nations, pp. 757–758 [Pgs. 757–758 include portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437].

62  The question was also raised whether the decisions requiring a unanimous consent of the permanent members should be enumerated. Sir Alexander noted that the most important matter was to agree that procedural decisions do not require unanimity of permanent members and proposed that a general provision to that effect be agreed upon with a further statement that on all other questions the unanimity of permanent members was necessary. Mr. Pasvolsky argued in favor of the enumeration in that thereby large countries are assured of the particular questions as to which they are entitled to the rule of unanimity.

It was also pointed out that the question whether provision should be made for voluntary abstention had arisen as a result of the United States tentative proposals of July 18, 1944 (III C (4)). Sir Alexander said that if it was clearly understood that any decision reached by the Council is to be accepted and acted upon by the member abstaining from voting, and that abstention does not adversely affect the principle of unanimity, he saw no objection to the provision for voluntary abstention. (Minutes of meeting of Joint Steering Committee, September 7.)

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[Document 449]

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Sixteenth Day, Thursday, September 7, 1944.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Luncheon Meeting with Gromyko and Cadogan

At lunch today I had another long and intimate conversation with Gromyko and Cadogan. I suggested that I thought the time had arrived when we should begin to formulate a definite agreement on the method of approving the Dumbarton document and presenting it to the United Nations in calling together the United Nations conference. I told them I was expressing my own personal views in an informal way and that I hoped that when they took this up with their Governments they were qualified in that way and mate it clear that I was not expressing official views of my Government.

They seemed interested and asked me to present my personal views in detail. I said I thought we should take steps to have our four Governments approve the document before we disbanded Dumbarton Oaks and that it should be agreed that at the conclusion of these talks the document would be presented to the other United Nations. I added that I hoped this could be done by the end of September and that simultaneously with the presentation, an invitation to the United Nations conference could be extended to the other countries for a date some time before November 1, probably around October 25. I said I thought the invitations should make clear that we propose that the Dumbarton document should be used as the basis of discussion at the full dress conference. I further suggested that the conference should be held at some suitable convenient place in the central part of the United States. (I did not mention French Lick or any other specific place to them.) This last suggestion as to location brought forth a considerable amount of good-natured repartee back and forth. For instance, Cadogan said “Well, the climate in England in October is the best of all”. He added that we had started in Moscow, continued in Washington and should end up in London. Gromyko interjected the statement that the climate in Moscow in October was much better than it was in London in that month. I explained the matter further in general terms and I think they understood the political advantage of having the meeting in the interior of the United States at the time suggested. Gromyko specifically indicated that he thought his Government would be impressed with that feature. I again made clear that I was speaking personally and not in the names of Mr. Hull or the President.

They then asked me a number of questions. Cadogan asked about the size of the delegation I had in mind. I said I thought that we would require a delegation of from ten to twelve people in order to meet our special requirements. He said that they might have three delegates plus experts but that he could understand why we would need a larger group. Cadogan agreed that when we finished our work it would be practically impossible to hold the document from the other United Nations and from the public for long but indicated that if it were made public by the end of September it would undoubtedly cause a debate in Parliament at that time even though it was not then being submitted to Parliament for official ratification. He was not apprehensive that this would prejudice approval but thought we should know we would be running that risk. In answer to his inquiry I said this would not concern us. Gromyko inquired at what level the conference would be held and I said I assumed it would be at the level of Foreign Ministers and that Mr. Hull would be the chairman of our delegation. Cadogan added that he was certain Eden would wish to come. Cadogan estimated that such a conference would consume approximately three weeks. Gromyko expressed the opinion that this schedule would allow too short a time for the other United Nations to study the question but Cadogan disagreed. Gromyko did not express an opinion as to whether Molotov would be prepared to attend a meeting of this type and I did not ask him.

We then had a long discussion on the general progress of the Conversations viewed in the light of this morning’s Joint Steering Committee meeting. Gromyko seemed discouraged. He told me privately that he was ready to act on all matters. He put it this way, “I am 99% sure I could clean up everything except the voting procedure and this is a serious matter with us”. Cadogan and I both stressed to him that a document with this matter unsettled would be weak and Cadogan added that he thought in the event it was unsettled Eden would insist on the inclusion of a footnote making the British position on the question dear. This disturbed Gromyko. I explained to him that we would have trouble ourselves on this matter with the Latin American countries. After some little talk, Gromyko seemingly came around to the position that it was necessary to settle the voting question at this time and not refer it to a general United Nations conference.

I then asked whether he felt there was a possibility of agreement at this meeting on the economic and social council and he replied that he felt it should be settled at Dumbarton.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Arranging for Gromyko’s Bedroom Conference with the President

After reaching my apartment late in the afternoon, I continued to mull over the present situation and came more and more to the conclusion that the voting question was the crux of the problem and that we had now reached the stage where we should call out our biggest and last remaining gun. It seems obvious to me that the success or failure of the conference depends upon this one point. I then telephoned Mr. Hull and after reporting to him in detail on the developments of the day, told him I had reached the conclusion that bold action was now in order on the major open point. I reviewed various possibilities of bring[ing] this to a climax, such as Hull phoning Molotov, the President sending a wire to Stalin, our requesting Harriman to see Molotov, or the President sending for Gromyko for a private talk. Mr. Hull immediately responded that he felt the most effective step would be to have the President see Gromyko, but warned that in presenting the matter to Gromyko, I should do it in a rather personal way, asking if he would be willing to discuss the matter with the President and not put it on the basis of the President sending for him. (My later talk with Gromyko carried out the Secretary’s instructions to the last letter. I obtained Gromyko’s full concurrence and his willingness to talk to the President.)

I then explained the whole plan to Dunn who gave it his full approval and encouraged me to carry it out promptly. I then called Harry Hopkins but could not reach him. He called me back in about ten minutes. I outlined to him the developments of the day and told him the plan I had in mind. He thought that in addition to the President talking to Gromyko that he should also send a cable to Stalin. I asked Hopkins if he could arrange the meeting at the White House and he said he would immediately go to the President’s office and tell him that there was a matter of great urgency which I wished to talk to him about on the phone. The President called me in about five minutes. We had a long conversation. I reported to him in detail on developments at the Joint Steering Committee meeting. I told him I was convinced that we could settle the remaining open items, such as the economic and social council question, and the international air force question, except that the Soviets were being stubborn and apparently were not willing to yield on any of these other points until the voting procedure issue was settled. I said that in my opinion once this matter was disposed of, I was confident that we could wind up everything else with flying colors in a few hours time. I told him I thought the time had arrived to use our big gun on this question and ran over with him the several alternatives which I had discussed with Mr. Hull. After considerable discussion, he said, “Why not call in Gromyko?”, and then added that he had a press conference at 10:30 in the morning but could see him at noon. I told him that it was important that it be done between 5 o’clock this afternoon and 10 o’clock in the morning. The President said that he could not do it tonight but if Gromyko would not be offended, he would be glad to receive him in his bedroom tomorrow morning. I said I thought the Ambassador would be immensely impressed. He then asked me to bring him in at 9:30 in the morning. I asked him if he felt it would be best for me to be present. We left open the question of the President’s sending a wire to Stalin.

I then telephoned Gromyko immediately on the White House wire and told him I had just finished reporting to the President on the day’s developments at Dumbarton, and that the President had expressed a desire to talk with him on the question of voting, which he felt was of over-riding importance. I then asked him whether he would be willing to call on the President in order that he might have an opportunity of receiving directly from the President his views on this question. Gromyko immediately replied that he would, of course, be delighted, that he would be happy to see the President, and that he knew he was a busy man and he hated to take his time. After I told him that it would take only a few minutes he said that he would be very pleased to meet me at 9:30 in the morning for his meeting in the President’s bedroom.

I then called Mr. Hull and told him of the arrangements which I had worked out. Mr. Hull inquired, and I assured him that I had made it clear to Gromyko that we did not want him to do this unless he were willing. I told Mr. Hull that in addition to this meeting I thought the President should also send Marshal Stalin a wire. He agreed in principle. I then called Harry Hopkins and thanked him for arranging so promptly for the President to call me. I told him it had worked out very well and that I was bringing the Ambassador to see the President in his bedroom at 9:30 in the morning. Hopkins emphasized again the importance which he attached to sending a wire to Stalin, in addition, and suggested that I should have a draft of a wire in my pocket to show the President after he had finished talking to Gromyko. He also suggested that it would be wise for me to remind the President to tell Gromyko that he was planning to cable Stalin on the question. I then phoned Chip Bohlen and after telling him of the arrangements, asked him to prepare the appropriate wire to Stalin for me to have ready in the morning. Bohlen thought the entire plan was excellent. I then told Dunn of all of these developments and asked him to tell Pasvolsky.

I then called Sir Alexander and explained the whole plan to him and told him that I thought it would be best for him not to tell anyone except Lord Halifax until we could determine how it worked out. Sir Alexander told me that he was wiring London suggesting that their Ambassador in Moscow be instructed that the real significance of the voting procedure question is that Gromyko does not understand the issue and that he probably has not presented the facts to Moscow accurately, although Sir Alexander was not entirely clear apparently that Clark Kerr was being instructed to call at the Soviet Foreign Office and attempt to give them an accurate explanation of the voting issue.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The Chairman of the Council of Peopled Commissars of the Soviet Union (Stalin) to President Roosevelt Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 1–12

[Document 450]

The Chairman of the Council of Peopled Commissars of the Soviet Union (Stalin) to President Roosevelt 63

Moscow, 7 September, 1944.

I have received your message64 on the question of participation of the Union Soviet Republics in the International Security Organization.

I attach exceptional importance to the statement of the Soviet Delegation on this question. After the known constitutional reforms in our country in the beginning of this year, the governments of the Union Republics are extremely alert as to what attitude the friendly States will take toward the adopted [provision?] in the Soviet constitution broadening of their rights in the sphere of international relations.65 You, of course, know that for instance the Ukraine, Byelorussia which are constituent parts of the Soviet Union, by the number of their population and by their political importance are surpassing certain countries in respect to which all of us agree that they should belong to the number of initiators of the establishment of the International Organization. Therefore, I hope to have an opportunity to explain to you the political importance of the question brought up by the Soviet Delegation at Dumbarton Oaks.

63 Copy of telegram transmitted to the Secretary of State by Vice Adm. Wilson Brown, Naval Aide to President Roosevelt, on September 14, 1944.

64 Telegram 55 of August 31, p. 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439].

65 See telegram 347 of February 2, 1944, from Moscow, vol. iv, p. 810, concerning the unanimous approval by the Supreme Soviet of proposals by the Soviet People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs (Molotov) changing the constitutional system whereby the sixteen constituent republics would exercise autonomy in foreign affairs.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./16

[Document 451]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 8, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Seventeenth Day

On the initiative of Ambassador Gromyko, he, Sir Alexander Cadogan, and I met this morning for the express purpose of eliminating so far as possible points as to which we had as yet been unable to reach agreement. Thereupon we reached agreement on the following items:

(a) Economic and Social Council

It was agreed that provision for an Economic and Social Council, along the lines of the American proposals, will be included in the joint recommendations. All that remains is perfecting the drafting.

(b) Suspension and Expulsion

Sir Alexander and I agreed to reinstate the expulsion provisions, in order to facilitate agreement. It is, therefore, now agreed that powers both of suspension and of expulsion will be expressly stated in the joint recommendations.

(c) Voting in the Council

I stated that the American group is prepared, though with reluctance, to agree that the normal vote of the Council shall be by majority vote, if the adoption of such a provision proves to be necessary in order to reach agreement on the joint recommendations as a whole. Sir Alexander reserved his position for consultation with his Government.

(d) Continuous Session of the Council

Agreement was reached on the provisions stipulating that the Council should be in continuous session.

(e) Specific Reference to Disarmament

Sir Alexander and I agreed that in addition to empowering the organization to consider the regulation of armaments there should be an express provision for the power to consider also the question of disarmament. The phrasing of the provisions relating to regulation of armaments and to disarmament remains under discussion.

Points Still Open

As a result of the decisions recorded above there now remain unsettled only the following items of significance: (a) Whether the initial members should include, in addition to the United Nations, the associated nations. We do not anticipate difficulty on this point.

(b) The vital question of whether parties to a dispute should be prohibited from voting. You are aware of the special efforts being made to achieve agreement on this point so that further reference to the matter in this memorandum is unnecessary.

(c) Sites for bases. This topic appears to have somewhat diminished in importance in the opinion of the Soviet group. However, the matter has not been finally disposed of, as yet, in a manner agreeable to all concerned.

(d) International air force. Here also the prospect for agreement seems brighter although final agreement has not yet been reached.

(e) Assistance to states suffering loss as a result of carrying out decisions of the council. The Soviet group still maintains, though without rigidity, its reservation to this point.

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[Document 452]

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Seventeenth Day, Friday, September 8, 1944.

Meeting with Ambassador Gromyko in the President’s Bedroom.

As arranged yesterday, I met Ambassador Gromyko promptly at 9:30 at the main entrance of the White House, and took him to the President’s bedroom immediately. We talked for thirty-five minutes and I felt it was most constructive. At the beginning the President warmed the atmosphere by telling Gromyko some of his plans for his trip to Quebec to meet Churchill. In this connection, he spoke of the desirability of having another conference of the three Chiefs of State as early as possible.66 The President also spoke briefly of the war, that our forces in the west as well as the Soviets in the east had gone beyond their respective supply lines and that this was a period of pause for consolidation on the part of both. The President told Gromyko how delighted he was with the way things have gone on both fronts. He then read to him a wire from General Pat Hurley67 in which Hurley had said that Molotov had told him that the Soviets were not interested in the Chinese Communists, that they were not really Communists anyway.68 The President commented that they were agrarians.

After this preliminary friendly exchange of comments on the several subjects mentioned, the President finally came around to Dumbarton Oaks and said that he understood there was only one fundamental point remaining open. Gromyko said that there were others and I then nailed him down on the others and it turned out that only the one point is really difficult. Gromyko indicated pretty clearly that he would be able to yield on everything else except the voting question, specifically mentioning that he could approve our economic and social council proposal. He also seemed perfectly open minded on the question of the international air force, indicating that to his mind it had now reached the point of merely being a question of saying the thing in the right language. Gromyko told the President he was sure we were all talking about the same thing and said that if we seriously objected to the term international air force, or the proposal as originally submitted by the Soviets, they would be perfectly willing to drop it. I said I was confident we could write a provision in simple language which would accomplish the aim which all of us sought on this aspect of the problem.

The President then told Gromyko that we would be prepared to accept a majority rather than a two-third vote in the Council if that would help him at home. He then went on into the major issue, opening this part of the discussion by saying that traditionally in this country, husbands and wives when in trouble never have the opportunity to vote on their own case, although they always have an opportunity to state their case. The President told a beautiful story tracing the development of this American concept of fair play back to the days of our founding fathers. He then stressed the difficulty which we would have in our Senate with the Soviet proposal, saying at the same time that he felt the issue of the quick and immediate use of force could be met successfully in the Senate.

Gromyko did not seem at all depressed by what the President said. He accepted the remarks gracefully, asked a number of questions about it, and discussed the way in which he could explain our position clearly to his people at home.

At this point I asked him if it would be helpful to him if we sent a message on the matter to Marshal Stalin. The President added that we did not desire to send such a message unless it would be helpful to him. Gromyko said he would leave that to our judgment. I then lianded to the President the draft cable which Chip Bohlen had prepared, which referred to the President’s talk with the Ambassador, outlined the difficulty we faced on the voting question, referred to the traditional American concept that parties to a dispute never vote on their own case, and we said that American public opinion would neither understand nor support a plan of international organization in which this principle was violated. It also indicated that we felt that other nations, particularly the smaller nations would feel as we did. It ended with an expression of hope that Stalin would be able to instruct his delegation to meet our point on this issue. The President thought the cable was excellent but wanted us to add a reference to his husband and wife simile which he had made earlier in the conversation, and stress more the probably adverse reaction of the Soviet proposal on the smaller nations and the difficulty we would have in getting their plan through our Senate. The President asked that the cable be redrafted to incorporate his suggestions and be sent to Miss Tully for transmission immediately.69

The President then said we should start with the Chinese on Monday. I did not comment. The President inquired if Mr. Kung would be around for these Conversations and I said “Yes”, but only as an observer. I told him he had asked to go on the Sunday trip to Virginia. The President asked what kind of arrangements we were making for the Chinese phase of the Conversations and I said the Chinese would expect the same ceremony which we had had for the opening phase. I told him we would expect to have Mr. Hull speak at the opening meeting with the movie and still photographers present, have a diplomatic dinner and give them, say a week for the actual discussions. The President said he thought that was too long, that we should do it in four or five days, adding that he wanted to have this whole matter finished up by the end of next week when he would be returning to Washington. He said, “I want at that time the document signed and a report from you that great success was achieved. This is an order to you”. During this conversation, Gromyko squirmed a bit in his chair as I did in mine. I could not, however, let it all go by without comment and I said that I had not yet had a chance to sound out the Ambassador on this idea and asked him, if we were delayed in the Conversations with them if it would be all right if we recessed, and in order to save time, hold the Chinese Conversations in the interim, resuming and completing the Soviet phase after finishing with the Chinese. Gromyko at first said he thought this would be all right but later came back to the matter and said he hoped that we would not make these plans definite yet. He indicated that he felt the general principle should be established before we talked with the Chinese. I then asked him how long he thought that would take and he expressed the opinion that we should be able to cover everything in another two days, and certainly finish up not later than Monday. The President then suggested that we start with the Chinese on Tuesday, to which Gromyko agreed. We had considerable discussion about the question as to whether all four powers should sign the same document and I argued strongly for that course of action, following the Moscow pattern. Gromyko commented that I had mentioned this to him yesterday. I inquired of the President if he wished the signing to take place at the White House. As he would be away from Washington and would not be there to witness it, he said he felt we should have a formal ceremony at the signing and that it should take place at Dumbarton Oaks. He said we must be certain it will feature full agreement, full understanding, and complete unanimity of the four great powers of the world.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Meeting with Sir Alexander Cadogan and Ambassador Gromyko

I met privately with Ambassador Gromyko and Sir Alexander at the invitation of the former for the express purpose of eliminating as many brackets as possible. We reached agreement that provision should be made for an economic and social council along the general lines of our proposal. Sir Alexander and I agreed to the reinstatement of the expulsion provision so that now both suspension and expulsion will be covered in the document. I announced that we are prepared reluctantly to agree that the normal vote of the Council could be but a simple majority, if it should prove necessary in order to reach agreement on the joint recommendations as a whole. Sir Alexander reserved in order to consult his Government on this specific point. We reached agreement that the Council should be in continuous session. Sir Alexander and I agreed that in addition to considering the regulation of armaments, the organization should be empowered to consider the question of disarmament. The phrasing of these provisions remains to be worked out. (As does the language of the economic and social council.) This results in bringing the list of open items to the following.

A. Initial membership (the question of whether the Associated Nations should be included as well as the United Nations).

B. The vital question of voting when a great power is involved in a dispute.

C. Sites for bases, although we gathered that the Soviet group is not pressing this as hard as they had been.

D. International air force. We seemed to be getting nearer together on this although final agreement has not yet been reached.

E. Assistance to states suffering loss as a result of carrying out decisions of the Council. The Soviet group still reserves, but not very strongly, on this issue.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

66 For documentation on the Yalta Conference of President Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill, and Marshal Stalin, February 4–11, 1945, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, 1945, pp. 549 ff.

67 Maj. Gen. Patrick J. Hurley, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt in China.

68 Reference is probably to telegram 3328, September 5, 1944, from Moscow, reporting a conversation between Donald Nelson (Chairman of the War Production Board) and Soviet Foreign Minister Molotov. General Hurley accompanied Mr. Nelson to Moscow and apparently was present at the conversation. For an extract from the telegram summarizing Mr. Molotov’s remarks, see Department of State, United States Relations With China, p. 71.

69 See infra.

President Roosevelt to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) [Document 453]

President Roosevelt to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)70

Washington, 8 September, 1944.

58. Please deliver the following message from the President to Marshal Stalin: “I have just had a pleasant and interesting talk with your Ambassador in regard to the progress of the Dumbarton Oaks talks, There is apparently only one issue of importance on which we have not yet reached agreement and that is the question of voting in the Council. The British and ourselves both feel strongly that parties to a dispute should not vote in the decisions of the Council even if one of the parties is a permanent member of the Council, whereas I gather from your Ambassador that your Government holds the opposite view. Traditionally since the founding of the United States parties to a dispute have never voted in their own case and I know that public opinion in the United States would neither understand nor support a plan of international organization in which this principle was violated. Furthermore I know that this same view is held by many nations of the world and I am entirely convinced that the smaller nations would find it difficult to accept an international organization in which the great powers insisted upon the right to vote in the Council in disputes in which they themselves were involved. They would most certainly see in that an attempt on the part of the great powers to set themselves up above the law. Finally, I would have real trouble with the Senate. For these reasons I hope you will find it possible to instruct your delegation to agree with our suggestion on voting. If this can be done the talks at Dumbarton Oaks can be speedily concluded with complete and outstanding success. Roosevelt.”

Roosevelt

70  Copy of telegram obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y. Message transmitted by the White House Map Room via Navy channels to the United States Naval Attaché Moscow, for Ambassador Harriman.

A memorandum of September 8 by Lt. Robert W. Bogue, U.S.N.R., to Under Secretary Stettinius stated that the message drafted by the Department for transmission to Marshal Stalin was dispatched with the addition by the President of the following sentence: “Finally, I would have real trouble with the Senate”.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./17

[Document 454]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 9, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Eighteenth Day

Meetings of the Formulation Groups and the Joint Steering Committee

The formulation groups (which had worked late the night before) produced by early afternoon a draft of the entire joint recommendations for consideration by the Joint Steering Committee.

The latter Committee met at 3:00 p.m. and, with an interruption for dinner, continued until after midnight.

Points of particular interest include the following:

(a) New Proposal on the Subject of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms

I suggested at the meeting of the Joint Steering Committee the addition of a new paragraph on this subject for insertion in the chapter entitled “Principles”. The new proposal, a copy of which is attached to this report, had been approved by the American group earlier in the day with the strong recommendation that it be brought to the attention of the other groups. Sir Alexander Cadogan expressed opposition to the reference to human rights and fundamental freedoms, saying that he thought such a provision would give rise to the possibility that the organization might engage in criticism of the internal organization of member states. Ambassador Gromyko said that it was his personal opinion that the reference to human rights and basic freedom is not germane to the main tasks of an international security organization. They will both consult their Governments.

(b) Name of the Organization

Ambassador Gromyko continued to maintain the Soviet reservation as to our proposal that the organization be known as the United Nations. He suggested tentatively the title World Union. Sir Alexander Cadogan, somewhat to our surprise, said for the first time that he did not believe that the British Government is particularly “keen” about the title “United Nations”. He added that the British Government had at one time thought of proposing adoption of a title making use of the word “Union”.

(c) British Proposal for Special Qualifications for Non-Permanent Members of the Council

The British suggestion of a modification of this proposal71 has been made the subject of a separate memorandum to you.

(d) Regional Arrangements

Sir Alexander Cadogan pointed out that the provision that “no enforcement action should be taken [under regional arrangements or] by regional agencies without the authorization of the council” might raise difficulties in connection with the enforcement of the German surrender terms.72

(e) Responsibility for Control of the Axis States

Partly as a result of Sir Alexander’s comment referred to in the preceding paragraph, it was agreed to include tentatively in the draft document a provision that the council be empowered to take such responsibility for insuring the execution of continuing measures of control over the Axis states as might be assigned to it by the powers concerned.

(f) Interim Arrangements

In a further attempt to meet Sir Alexander’s point it was also agreed to insert tentatively a provision to the effect that pending conclusion of agreements for the provision of forces and facilities, the four powers and other states in a position to do so should provide such forces and facilities as may be needed for the maintenance of peace and security.

Other Points of Importance which Still Remain Open: (1) Voting in the Council. You are familiar with special steps being taken in this connection.

(2) Sites for Bases and (3) An International Air Force. It was not possible to reach final agreement on these questions although it still seems unlikely that they will prevent final agreement.

(4) Assistance to States Carrying out Measures Decided upon by the Council. We continue to feel that some form of agreement on this point should not be too difficult.

[Annex]

Additional Paragraph Suggested by Mr. Ben Cohen for Inclusion in Section II, Principles, of the Draft Proposals

The International Organization should refrain from intervention in the internal affairs of any state, it being the responsibility of each state to see that conditions prevailing within its jurisdiction do not endanger international peace and security and, to this end, to respect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all its people and to govern in accordance with the principles of humanity and justice.

71 On this subject, see extract from the minutes of meeting No. 12 of the Joint Steering Committee, September 9, infra.

72 The first draft by the Joint Formulation Group was a rewriting of chapter I, section A, paragraph numbered 4, of the United States Tentative Proposals of July 18, p. 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 402].

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 12 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 3 p.m., September 9, at Dumbarton Oaks Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 1–12

[Document 455]

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 12 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 3 p.m., September 9, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, September 9, 1944, 3 p.m.

[Extract]

Present: Sir Alexander Cadogan and Mr. Jebb of the British group;

Ambassador Gromyko, Mr. Sobolev, and Mr. Berezhkov of the Soviet group;

Mr. Stettinius, Mr. Dunn, and Mr. Pasvolsky of the American group.

Mr. Hiss also present, as secretary.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

With respect to Chapter VI (The Council), there was considerable discussion of the bracketed phrase “due regard being paid to the military contribution of members of the organization toward the maintenance of international peace and security”.73 Ambassador Gromyko said that he felt that, of course, the contribution of members of the Organization toward its activities should be taken into account in the election of the non-permanent members of the Council. However, he wondered whether it would be advisable to make special reference to this. It seemed to him as though it might appear to be a form of pressure on the Assembly.

Sir Alexander Cadogan then suggested that the word “military” might be eliminated from the clause under reference and that there might be added at the end of the clause the words “and towards the other purposes of the organization”. He said that he felt that certain of the other powers (which, he observed in passing, are not so small as to be approximately covered by the usual phrase “smaller powers”) ought to be given a preferred position with respect to membership on the Council as compared with powers which will make no contribution to the Organization at all. Mr. Dunn thought that this subject might very properly be taken up at the general conference but he felt that it would not be appropriate to make any provision to this effect at the present stage. He said that such a provision would, in effect, set up three or four categories of powers—the great powers, those who made special contribution, and the remainder. He felt that after all the references which had been made to the principle of sovereign equality a provision of this kind would be most unfortunate. By the special powers conferred upon the four large nations there has already been set up one exception to the principle of equal membership. He recognized that the provision would have attraction for some states and he thought that in time some such demarcation might prove to be practicable but he did not think that at this time a provision of this kind would meet with general acceptance.

Mr. Jebb made the point that the British proposal would favorably influence the leaders of the other states. He felt that it is these leaders whose support we most wish to insure. Mr. Dunn still felt that the inclusion of such a provision as a part of the general impression we now desire to create would be most unfortunate.

Mr. Pasvolsky remarked that it had been pointed out in the discussions of the formulation groups that the provision would have the effect of making it impossible for some states ever to serve on the Council. Mr. Jebb thought that such a result might be a good thing but Sir Alexander said that in his opinion the proposal would not necessarily have that result. He said that it would simply mean that there would not be automatic rotation throughout the entire list of other states. He felt that the larger states among those not having permanent representation on the Council would be needed on the Council and that it was desirable that they should in fact serve more frequently on the Council than some of the smaller states. He felt that the provision does not exclude any state from membership on the Council in as much as it simply provides that due regard be paid to the contributions made by members to the general activities of the Organization. Mr. Pasvolsky observed that such a result would probably work out in practice in any event. He pointed out that some states had never served on the Council of the League whereas other states had served a number of terms. Ambassador Gromyko said that the proposal was an entirely new point and that his group had not studied it thoroughly. Mr. Stettinius said that he would have to reserve his position and that he would want to speak about the matter to Secretary Hull. Mr. Dunn and Mr. Pasvolsky observed that the changes which had been made in the clause by Sir Alexander had helped it considerably but that they still had serious doubt as to the wisdom of including any provision on this subject in the present document.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

73 Reference is made to the sentence with respect to the composition of the Council: “The assembly should elect the six states to fill the non-permanent seats, [due regard being paid to the military contribution of members of the organization towards the maintenance of international peace and security].”

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./18

[Document 456]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 11, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Nineteenth Day

Meeting of the American Group

The only meeting held today was the regularly scheduled meeting of the American group. This meeting was continued in the afternoon in order to complete consideration of the revisions made in the draft proposals at the meeting on Saturday of the Joint Steering Committee.

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee

The Joint Steering Committee did not meet owing to the fact that the Soviet group had not yet received instructions from its Government which would permit further consideration of the bracketed sections of the draft proposals. A meeting of the Joint Steering-Committee has been scheduled for Tuesday, at 11:15 a.m.

Extracts from the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[Document 457]

Extracts from the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Nineteenth Day, Monday, September 11, 1944.

Midnight Telephone Conversation with Gromyko

At midnight Gromyko phoned me at home. He was in a good humor and said he had had a good day of rest on Sunday. He then said that we must finish our conversations with them before we start with any other country and said we had agreed to this on Saturday. I replied that he was entirely correct and asked if anything had appeared to make him feel we were planning to do otherwise. He said, “No, nothing has happened”. My answer apparently completely satisfied him. I was mystified, however, by his calling at this hour to make this point, fearing something might have appeared in the press or radio, as a result of taking the Chinese to Virginia, which had made him apprehensive. He then said he expected there would be a little delay in his hearing from home but that it would be unfair to consider this was caused by the Soviet Union, because we were partially responsible for having made so many changes in the text, which his Government would have to study. I did not press the Ambassador to try to pin him down as to exactly when he thought he would have the final instructions from his Government. He inquired whether we would meet today and I said I did not think we could accomplish much until either he or Sir Alexander had something to report. He replied jokingly “Or you have something to report”. It was left that we would not call a meeting but would check with each other during the morning.

Telephone Conversation with Mr. Hull

I called Mr. Hull at 9:00 o’clock. First I spoke to Mrs. Hull and described to her our Sunday trip to Virginia. Then I told the Secretary about Gromyko’s midnight call. I told him that, as I saw it, all we could do at the moment was to stand by and await developments.…

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Meeting with Sir Alexander

I had a private talk with Sir Alexander immediately after lunch. He raised with me the great importance to him of returning to the United Kingdom by the end of this week. In view thereof, he urged us to start with the Chinese immediately and asked if I would have any objections if he spoke frankly to Gromyko about it this afternoon. I, of course, assured him that I would not.…

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./19

[Document 458]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 12, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Twentieth Day

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee

We met this morning on my call. Some progress was made with respect to reaching agreement on various provisions. Ambassador Gromyko, however, raised one unexpected and disturbing point which is described in the immediately following paragraph.

(a) Soviet Refusal to Sign Joint Agreement with the Chinese

At the outset of our meeting this morning I said that I felt that it would be necessary to make some further joint statement within a few days. I said also that the delay in reaching agreement is placing us in a very embarrassing position vis-à-vis the Chinese. At this point Ambassador Gromyko said that he had conveyed to his Government the suggestion which we had made late Saturday night for a fourpower communication to the other United Nations of the agreed recommendations. He said that the suggestion is not acceptable to his Government which prefers a three-power declaration.

Sir Alexander Cadogan and I stated forcefully that this represented a change in the entire basis upon which we had been working. We both said we were authorized only to participate in joint fourpower recommendations.

The only hopeful aspect of the matter was that the Soviet representatives said that they were referring to the joint recommendations and not to the question of the United Nations conference. It may be that the Soviet representatives will not object to simultaneous publication in the four capitals of identic memoranda of recommendations which would form the basis for the United Nations conference.

(b) Soviet Acceptance of our Nomenclature

Ambassador Gromyko accepted the term “the United Nations” as the name of the organization. In addition he accepted with but slight reservation all our other proposals with respect to the titles of the organs and officials of the organization.

(c) Sites for Bases

Ambassador Gromyko withdrew the Soviet proposal that states having insufficient armed forces should make available territory for the establishment of bases.

(d) International Air Force

Ambassador Gromyko also withdrew the Soviet proposal for a provision establishing an international air corps. In so doing he said that the Soviet purpose in making this proposal had merely been to ensure the effectiveness of the organization. He said that the Soviet Government had no greater interest in this matter than did the other two Governments and that in view of the attitude of the other two Governments toward the proposal he was now withdrawing it.

(e) Responsibility of Military Staff Committee

Ambassador Gromyko also withdrew the Soviet opposition to our proposal that the military staff committee should be responsible under the council for the strategic direction of armed forces placed at the disposal of the council.

Meeting of the Joint Formulation Group

The joint formulation group met this afternoon at 3:00 to try to formulate satisfactory provisions relating to regional organizations and to the problem of interim arrangements in the field of security pending the effective operation of the organization.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./20

[Document 459]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 13, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Twenty-first Day

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee

In addition to the matter which I took up in person with you today74 points of interest which were considered by the Joint Steering Committee at its 10:30 a.m. meeting today were as follows:

(a) Elimination of References to “Technical” Problems

This is a matter to which the American group attached very great importance and to which they have devoted several days of thorough discussion. At the 9:30 a.m. regular meeting of the American group this morning we agreed that we should accept a compromise provision making it one of the purposes of the organization “to achieve international cooperation in the solution of international, social and other humanitarian problem?”. At the Joint Steering Committee meeting I succeeded in obtaining the assent to this formula of Sir Alexander Cadogan and of Ambassador Gromyko, both of whom had previously rather strongly urged the inclusion of the word “technical”.

(b) Initial Membership of the Organization

Pursuant to a recommendation made by the American group this morning, I proposed that the provision relating to initial membership (Chapter III, paragraph 2) should read as follows: “The initial members of the organization should be signatories to the Declaration by the United Nations of January 1, 1942 and such other states as those nations may invite”, provided the four powers could now agree as to the other states to be so invited. The discussion was inconclusive and it is likely that the Soviet and British representatives do not yet thoroughly understand what we have in mind.

(c) Separate Protocol as to Interim Arrangements

I also suggested that section D Interim Arrangements (p. 27)75 be omitted from the document and be made the subject of a separate protocol. Sir Alexander Cadogan agreed that this is a “transitory” provision and he therefore saw no objection to its being made into a separate document. However, he also apparently saw no objection to inclusion of this matter in the document itself. His assistant, Mr. Jebb, suggested that the reference in the document to this subject might say that it is intended to exclude such a provision from the charter itself in view of the provision’s transitory nature. Ambassador Gromyko said that he thought it would be appropriate to mention the subject in the document itself. We said that we would consider whether some reference to the subject might appropriately be included in the document and would give our answer subsequently.

(d) Provision Designed to Permit Women to Serve as Members of the Organization

The American group at its meeting this morning recommended that some provision be inserted in the document especially authorizing the organization to include women among its personnel. They approved the following provision designed to accomplish that purpose as well as other desirable purposes: “All positions under the organization should be open on the basis of pertinent qualifications without regard to race, nationality, creed, or sex.” I presented this provision at the meeting of the Joint Steering Committee and asked the British and Soviet groups to think about it and to give us their reactions later on. Their initial reaction seemed to be rather negative.

Afternoon Meeting of the American Group

At my request the American group met throughout the afternoon in an attempt to devise possible alternative formulae on the question of voting by the council in the event of disputes involving a permanent member. I explained that this is an important subject, that we had received no indication of any inclination on the part of the Soviet group to recede from the principle of unanimity of the great powers and that in view of the time element this is a matter to which the American group should proceed to give careful thought.

74 With regard to the question of voting in the Council, see extracts from the minutes of meeting No. 14 of the Joint Steering Committee, infra, and from Mr. Stettinius’ Diary, p. 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461].

75 “Pending the coming into force of the special agreement or agreements referred to in Section VIII, paragraph 5, and in view of their responsibility for (in) the maintenance of peace and security the states parties to the Four-Nation Declaration, signed at Moscow, October 30, 1943, should consult with one another and as occasion arises with other members of the organization with a view to such joint action on behalf of the organization as may be necessary for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security.” (Minutes of meetings of Joint Steering Committee.)

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 14 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 10:30 a.m., September 13, at Dumbarton Oaks Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 13–18

[Document 460]

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 14 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 10:30 a.m., September 13, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, September 13, 1944, 10:30 a.m.

[Extract]

Present: Sir Alexander Cadogan and Mr. Jebb of the British group;

Ambassador Gromyko, Mr. Sobolev, and Mr. Berezhkov of the Soviet group;

Mr. Stettinius, Mr. Dunn, and Mr. Pasvolsky of the American group.

Mr. Hiss also present, as secretary.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

At this point, Ambassador Gromyko said that on the basis of instructions received from his Government his position on the question of voting in the Council is unchanged. Mr. Stettinius asked whether it was likely that the instructions to which the Ambassador had referred represented the final word on this subject so far as the Soviet Government is concerned. The Ambassador said that this was the case. He went on to say that in the Soviet opinion the American and British proposal as to voting in the Council would violate the principle of unanimity. He said that the Soviet Government considers that this principle has from the beginning of negotiations relating to an international organization been a matter of very greatest importance.

Mr. Stettinius, in reply, said that the American Government attaches overriding importance to the acceptance of its proposal on this point. He said that, as the President had informed Ambassador Gromyko, it is very difficult to see how the American public, the world public, the American Senate, and the small nations throughout the world could accept a proposal by which a party to a dispute should vote. He said that the Ambassador’s statement came as a great disappointment and as a great blow. He said that the Soviet position might very easily mean that, because of the anticipated reaction of the smaller powers, no general conference on the subject could ever be held. Ambassador Gromyko said that the desire of the small nations is to live in peace and security and for this purpose their primary desire is that there be created an effective security organization.

Mr. Stettinius went on to say that the American Government simply cannot understand how any country could take the position that if it became involved in a dispute that dispute could not be brought before the Organization. Sir Alexander said that he believed that not one of the British Dominions would join the Organization if such a principle were to be adopted. Moreover, he did not believe that any of the smaller nations would join.

Mr. Stettinius said that at the moment he could not see that any purpose would be served by the issuance of a document from Dumbarton Oaks. Sir Alexander said that on the basis of the Soviet position the question arose as to what procedure should next be followed. He said that he did not know what to suggest in this connection and that he would have to think about the matter. Mr. Stettinius said that careful consideration must be given to the public effect of the Soviet position. He said that as Sir Alexander had stated the other day the question will necessarily arise in Parliament. He said that he himself had similarly said several days ago that the question will also come up in the American Congress. Both he and Sir Alexander had made plain that the views of each of the three powers on this matter would have to be made clear in answer to such questions. Sir Alexander said that however the matter may be regarded it is bound to be most awkward. If no statement is issued it will mean to the world that the Dumbarton Oaks conversations have failed. He said that he really did not know what would be the best thing to do under the circumstances.

At this point Mr. Stettinius asked Ambassador Gromyko whether he might appropriately inquire as to whether or not the President has received any message from Marshal Stalin. In reply, Ambassador Gromyko said that he did not know. In answer to a second inquiry by Mr. Stettinius, the Ambassador said that he thought that any reply to the President would have to come through his Embassy.

Mr. Pasvolsky said the Ambassador’s statement alters the whole situation and that we will all have to think about the possibilities. Sir Alexander said that he would have to consult Mr. Eden and that the question would be decided at a much higher level.

Mr. Stettinius then asked Ambassador Gromyko whether the Ambassador had any indication that his statement represented the final Soviet position on this point. Ambassador Gromyko replied that as he had said earlier this is the definite position of the Soviet Government. He said that on the general principle of unanimity there is no possibility of any kind of change. He went on to say that this position had been taken definitely by the Soviet group at the outset of the conversations and that on several occasions those views had been stated by him. He said that he had thought that the principle of unanimity had been the understood basis on which everyone was proceeding, that is to say, that the large countries should have a special position in the Organization by reason of the simple fact that they will bear the main responsibility for the maintenance of peace. He said that only the large countries have the necessary resources and military forces to be able to maintain peace and security. He said that he believes that the small countries accept this position and that it has in fact been taken for granted by everyone.

Sir Alexander Cadogan and Mr. Stettinius said that they agreed that it is generally understood that the large powers must occupy a special position and must bear the primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace. Ambassador Gromyko said that it was for that reason that he had said so confidently that the other groups had agreed to the principle of unanimity.

Mr. Stettinius said that, however, the question is different with respect to disputes. Ambassador Gromyko said that he thought it was incorrect to assume that the great powers who are responsible for peace and security are necessarily going to have disputes. He added that one can assume that their successful cooperation during this war and their struggle for security at present would undoubtedly have a great importance for the maintenance of peace and security in the future. Sir Alexander said that he thought that other countries might think otherwise.

Mr. Stettinius said that the Ambassador’s statement meant that we have reached a climax. He pointed out that there remain no other open items which cannot be promptly settled. He said that if it would be possible to find an agreed formula on this point the Committee could meet again promptly.

Mr. Pasvolsky said that consideration must now be given as to whether the type of organization envisaged in the present draft of the document is still feasible.

Ambassador Gromyko inquired whether the others thought that there would be anything warranting further discussion this afternoon. Sir Alexander thought not but Mr. Stettinius thought that possibly there might be. Ambassador Gromyko said that he would be glad to meet at anytime the others desired.

Sir Alexander said that careful thought will have to be given to what recommendations can now be made to the respective governments as to what should be done under the circumstances. Mr. Stettinius said that quite frankly he was struggling in his own mind to see what could be done.

Mr. Dunn said that he thought that that is the important point, namely, to consider what can be done. He thought that the other nations will come along with any reasonable formula upon which the three groups might agree. He said that it might be possible to consider a proposal for a different kind of an organization. He said that it might be a good idea to take a look at a draft of such a proposal.

Ambassador Gromyko then said that he felt it was not necessary to point out that the Soviet group had in the course of the conversations made a number of concessions, if the word “concessions” could appropriately be used in connection with conversations in which all are working toward common agreement. He said that on several matters of importance to it, the Soviet Government had made concessions because of its realization of the great importance of reaching agreement with the other groups. Other members of the Committee remarked that concessions had been made by all the participants.

Sir Alexander then said that the matter under consideration is a vital point for all the other United Nations who, it had been hoped, could be invited to a general conference. Mr. Stettinius inquired whether the other nations of the world would accept the Soviet proposal. Mr. Sobolev said that he had no doubt of this. Ambassador Gromyko said that if the four powers present the proposal unanimously he had no shadow of doubt as to the positions of the other nations. He said that he did not believe the other nations are mainly interested in the procedure of voting within the Council; they are chiefly interested in peace and in an effective organization designed to preserve peace. He said that the four powers have not failed the other nations so far and that they merit the confidence of the other nations. Mr. Sobolev said that if the British and American proposal on this point were to be accepted it would mean that the existing situation between the great powers would thereby be changed. At present all matters are decided on the basis of unanimity.

At this point Mr. Stettinius said that he would like to ask the others to consider what the result of the Soviet proposal would be in the hypothetical situation of some action taken by the United States against Mexico. He said that there would be an impossible situation if the United States in such a case were to say that it would not permit the Council to consider the matter.

Mr. Stettinius then said we must all put our minds to the question of what we can do about this matter. Sir Alexander said that the fact of disagreement will have to become public. He said the question is just how the matter should be made public. He said we could announce that no agreement has been reached at Dumbarton Oaks, in which event the point of disagreement would become known sooner or later. Alternatively, he said, we could send a draft document to the other United Nations setting forth in the document the two alternative positions on this point. This second possible means of procedure would, he thought, give a very bad impression. Mr. Stettinius said that it would be necessary to take some action promptly.

Ambassador Gromyko then said that he could not imagine how there could be a conference if the four powers are not in agreement. He thought that any statement of alternative provisions or any footnote on disagreement would cause great confusion. Sir Alexander said that the fact of disagreement would become known in any event. Mr. Stettinius said that the Senate Foreign Relations Committee would demand to see the document if the conversations ended without any publication of the document. Sir Alexander said that the press would invent all sorts of reasons for the failure to agree and that the real reason would soon have to become known.

Mr. Dunn said that he thought it would be better to issue a memorandum limited to those things on which agreement could be reached. He said that this might require a change in the form of the document, perhaps the document would have to be limited to an agreement simply to consult one another. Mr. Jebb said that enforcement provisions would have to be eliminated from the document if agreement were to be reached. Mr. Dunn agreed, saying that we could not expect the other United Nations to agree to all of the provisions now contained in the document. Mr. Jebb said the document would have to be quite a different one from the present draft. Mr. Dunn expressed his agreement with this view.

Mr. Jebb then said that recasting of the document along these lines would take quite some time; it could not be done in a day or two. Mr. Dunn said that he agreed and that he was thinking of a recasting of the whole form of the document.

Mr. Jebb wondered whether a recasting of the document would prove to be profitable employment of the time of the groups. Sir Alexander Cadogan said that a revised document would have to leave out the whole matter of voting and all provisions as to enforcement; it would provide merely for consultation. He said that he did not believe the world would think much of such a document.

Mr. Stettinius said that the American position could not be changed on this point and that he saw no area for concession from the American viewpoint. He said the matter has been thoroughly considered by the President, by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and by Mr. Hull. He felt that the American position is unalterable regardless of future developments. He said that he wanted Ambassador Gromyko to understand this quite thoroughly; that he did not want the Ambassador to think that there is any chance of the American position being altered. Sir Alexander said that he thought that expressed Mr. Eden’s position also. Ambassador Gromyko said that he had fully informed his Government of the British and American positions.

He said that he also wished to point out that the Soviet group is unable to agree that action by the Council should require more than a simple majority. Sir Alexander Cadogan said that he would have acceded to the Soviet position on this point if such a concession had been necessary in order to arrive at an agreement. Mr. Stettinius said that the American group had agreed to meet the Russian position on this point half way.

Sir Alexander Cadogan said that he felt Ambassador Gromyko’s position meant that four-power unanimity is in fact being abandoned. At this point Mr. Dunn said that he wanted to make a rather full statement. He said that the present situation is that the three powers are cooperating fully. The concept of establishing a world organization represented a new endeavor, another type of cooperation. He said that in view of the fact that the three powers are cooperating harmoniously in all cases and have every intention of continuing to cooperate in the future, he did not see why it should not be possible to draw up a document on which they could all agree. He said that it may be that such a document cannot provide for the particular machinery we have thus far had in mind. However, he felt that it is very important that we not consider that we have failed. He said that it is vastly important that these nations which are cooperating among themselves should now produce evidence that they will continue to cooperate in the future. He said that we must not allow any disagreement to creep into our relations. Sir Alexander expressed himself as in agreement with Mr. Dunn’s statement. Mr. Stettinius said that there must be no whisper that there have been any disagreements among the members of the Committee. Ambassador Gromyko said that he could give assurance that there would be no such disclosure on the part of the Soviet group.

Mr. Stettinius said that the members of the Committee must leave Dumbarton Oaks in agreement. He asked what hope there would be for future peace and security if the three nations did not remain shoulder-to-shoulder in the future as they had fought shoulder-to-shoulder in the present war. He said that this matter of continued close cooperation is a matter on which the very future of civilization depends. Sir Alexander expressed his agreement with Mr. Stettinius’ remarks but he said that consideration must be given to how the matter is to be presented publicly. He said that there is a terrible danger of speculation by the press and by others as to why no agreement along the lines previously indicated is promptly forthcoming.

Mr. Jebb said that the three groups will have to work hard and quickly. Mr. Stettinius inquired how long the others thought it would take to draw up an agreed-upon document. Mr. Dunn said that the joint formulation group has met all demands which have heretofore been made upon it. He said that it might perhaps be possible to shorten the document considerably.

At this point Mr. Stettinius asked what the others thought of the possibility of leaving the matter of voting in the Council for discussion at the general conference of the United Nations. Mr. Sobolev thought that it would not be possible to do that and Mr. Jebb also felt that that could not be done.

Mr. Stettinius then asked Ambassador Gromyko what the latter thought would be the effect of the Soviet formula on world opinion. Ambassador Gromyko replied that the effect upon the world would be the effect produced by the document as a whole. He said that he did not wish to separate the point under discussion from the rest of the document which contains many valuable and constructive provisions. He felt that the other countries of the world would gladly accept the document as a whole. He said that although the question of voting is important for the great powers and for the Organization it is, however, considered separately, a question of secondary importance for other nations. They are most of all interested in the effectiveness of the Organization.

Sir Alexander said he would wish to consult his Government as to the possibility of a new type of document.

Mr. Stettinius said that in adjourning the meeting he wanted it to be clearly understood that there would be no hint of any disagreement among the three groups and that the situation in fact is that all questions which have been raised remain under discussion. The other members of the Committee expressed their full agreement with these views.

Mr. Stettinius asked whether the others wished to meet again this afternoon. Ambassador Gromyko and Sir Alexander Cadogan said that they are prepared to meet at any time. The meeting was adjourned with the understanding that no definite time for the next meeting would be set but that the members of the Committee would remain subject to call by Mr. Stettinius, as chairman, and that in the meantime the joint formulation group would continue its work.

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[Document 461]

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Twenty-first Day, Wednesday, September 13, 1944.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Meeting with Mr. Hull

As soon as the Joint Steering Committee ended, I immediately went to Mr. Hull’s office to report to him the serious development of the morning. He immediately grasped the great significance of it and took it very well. He thinks we should take our American group into our confidence on the question and direct our efforts toward trying to save the document by some formula which would result in this question being referred to the general conference where the pressure on the Soviets might be so great that they would have to change their position. He suggested a recess for the Chinese discussions but I explained that the Soviets were also adamant on that. He suggested that we try to handle the question by stating very general principles only.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Talk with Ambassador Gromyko

I called Gromyko on the phone about 4:30 and suggested to him that the Formulations Group get together immediately to try to find some solution to the voting question problem. He agreed to send Sobolev to such a meeting.

The Formulations Group convened promptly and continued in session for several hours. They worked out an informal compromise solution76 which would allow a great power a veto in case of enforcement action but not in the pacific settlement of disputes. The representatives of all three countries in the Formulations Group seemed to feel that this formula was satisfactory.

Miscellany

During the day I addressed a memorandum to the Secretary77 asking for definite instructions with regard to the provision with respect to a qualification for non-permanent members for the Council, which the British are fighting for so strongly. The provision is “due regard being paid to the contribution of members of the organization toward the maintenance of international peace and security and toward the other purposes of the organization”.

It was interesting to receive a cable from Harriman78 saying that the British colleague in Moscow had not received instructions to see Molotov relative to attempting to persuade him to have the Soviets reverse their position on voting. Cadogan had told me several times that such instructions would be sent to Clark Kerr. Apparently the Foreign Office in London has not acted on his recommendation.

76  Infra.

77 Not printed.

78 Telegram 3473, September 13, not printed.

Compromise Proposal Drafted by the Formulation Group 500.CC/9–1744

[Document 462]

Compromise Proposal Drafted by the Formulation Group

[Washington,] September 13, 1944.

C. Voting

1. Each member of the Security Council should have one vote.

2. Decisions with respect to the following matters should be taken by ___________ majority vote including the concurring votes of the permanent members of the Security Council: a. All decisions coming under Section VIII–B, entitled “Determination of Threats to the Peace, Acts of Aggression, or any Breaches of the Peace, and Action with Respect Thereto”, and under Section VIII–C, entitled “Regional Arrangements”.

b. All matters relating to [disarmament] and regulation of armaments.

c. Recommendations to the General Assembly with regard to admission of new members, suspension and restoration of rights of membership, and expulsion of members.

d. Establishment by the Security Council of its subsidiary bodies or agencies.

3. Decisions under Section VIII–A, entitled “Pacific Settlement of Disputes”, should be taken by ______ majority including the concurring votes of the permanent members of the council, but excluding the votes of such member or members of the council as are parties to the dispute.

4. All other decisions should be taken by ________ majority vote.

The Chairman of the Council of Peopled Commissars of the Soviet Union (Stalin) to President Roosevelt [Document 463]

The Chairman of the Council of Peopled Commissars of the Soviet Union (Stalin) to President Roosevelt 80

[Translation]81

I have received your message regarding the discussions at Dumbarton Oaks.82

I also hope that these important discussions may end successfully. This may be of serious significance for the further strengthening of cooperation of our countries and for the whole cause of future peace and security.

I must say that for the success of the activities of the International Security Organization, of great significance will be the order of voting in the Council, having in mind the importance that the Council work on the basis of the principle of coordination and unanimity of the four leading powers on all questions, including those which directly relate to one of these nations. The initial American proposal that there should be established a special procedure of voting in case of a dispute in which one or several members of the Council, who have the statute [status?] of permanent members, are directly involved, seems to me correct. Otherwise will be brought to naught the agreement achieved among us at the Teheran Conference which is proceeding from the principle of provision, first of all, the unanimity of agreement of four powers necessary for the struggle against aggression in the future.

Such a unanimity proposes [presupposes?], of course, that among these powers there is no room for mutual suspicions. As to the Soviet Union, it cannot also ignore the presence of certain absurd prejudices which often hinder an actually objective attitude toward the U.S.S.R. And the other nations also should weigh the consequences which the lack of unanimity among the leading powers may bring about.

I hope that you will understand the seriousness of the considerations expressed here and that we shall find a harmonious solution of this question as well.

[ Moscow ,] September 14, 1944.

80 Copy of telegram obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y. Marginal note indicates that a copy was transmitted by the White House Map Room to President Roosevelt in Quebec and, by direction of the President, a copy was sent to Mr. Stettinius.

81 For the Soviet translation of this telegram, see Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the U.S.S.R., Correspondence Between the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R. and the Presidents of the U.S.A. and the Prime Ministers of Great Britain During the Great Patriotic War of 1941–1945 (Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow, 1957), vol. ii, p. 160.

82 See telegram 58, September 8, p. 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453].

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./21

[Document 464]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 14, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Twenty-second Day

Meeting of the Joint Formulation Group

The joint formulation group met this afternoon and made a number of refinements in and additions to the draft proposals as follows:

(a) Introductory Statement

An introductory statement was added to the effect that an international organization should be created under the title of the United Nations and that its charter should contain provisions to give effect to the proposals.

(b) Voting Procedure in the Assembly and in the Economic and Social Council

The provisions on voting in the assembly and in the Economic and Social Council were amended to read that in either case the vote should be by a majority of those states present and voting. This would apply in the assembly in the case of either a ⅔ majority or a simple majority.

(c) Representatives in the Assembly

It was agreed to add to the provision concerning the composition of the assembly a statement to the effect that the states members should have “a number of representatives to be specified in the Charter.”

(d) Disarmament

The British insisted that the word “disarmament” should be placed in brackets wherever it occurs in the draft proposals to indicate that they have not as yet agreed to its use in the document.

(e) Availability of Air Force Contingents

Agreement has not as yet been reached to accept either our alternative83 or the British alternative84 concerning national air force contingents. However, the British and Russian representatives agreed to our proposal to eliminate an inner bracket in the American alternative and to alter the statement to read that “the strength and degree of readiness of these contingents and plans for their combined action should be determined by the Security Council with the assistance of the Military Staff Committee within the limits laid down in the special agreement or agreements referred to above”.

(f) Transitional Arrangements

It was agreed that the present section of Chapter VIII relating to Interim Arrangements should become a new Chapter XII to be designated Transitional Arrangements but should for the time being remain in brackets.

(g) Non-intervention in Domestic Matters

With reference to the present bracketed paragraph of the chapter on Principles which states that the organization should refrain from intervention in the internal affairs of any state, the British proposed the addition of a new paragraph to the section on Pacific Settlement to the effect that the present provisions of this section should not apply to situations or disputes arising out of matters which by international law are solely within the domestic jurisdiction of the state concerned. Both the Soviet and the American representatives regarded this addition favorably but reserved their positions on it pending consideration.

Meeting of the American Group

The American group, at its regular 9:30 meeting, considered the tentative proposal on voting in the council formulated on Wednesday. Suggested modifications by individual members will be considered on Monday.

83 “In order to enable urgent military measures to be taken by the organization there should be held immediately available by the members of the organization national air force contingents for combined international enforcement action. The strength and degree of readiness of these contingents should be determined by the council with the assistance of the military committee within the limits laid down in the special agreement or agreements referred to above.” (Formulation Group’s draft of September 9, 1944, 2 p.m.; draft not printed.)

84 “The agreement or agreements should provide for the most rapid means of making military force available and effective in order to maintain or restore peace and security. To this end it should be one of the first tasks of the military committee referred to in paragraph below to examine the practicability of organizing contingents from the air forces of members of the organization into a combined air force made up of such contingents serving under their national commanders but under the supreme command of a commander appointed by the council and under the council’s directions. The composition of such a force would be decided by the council and the size of the contingents to be provided by each member of the organization would be decided by the agreement or agreements above referred to.” (Formulation Group’s draft of September 9, 1944, 2 p.m.; draft not printed.)

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[Document 465]

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Twenty-second Day, Thursday, September 14, 1944.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Conversation with Gromyko

At 10:20 I called Gromyko to tell him Sir Alexander had been ordered to Quebec to spend the evening there and that he hoped to be back tomorrow. I suggested that as a consequence we call off the 10:30 Joint Steering Committee meeting unless he had something he particularly wanted to bring up. I suggested that we not meet again until Cadogan returned unless he wanted to talk to me privately.

I then told Gromyko that I had talked to Hull relative to the informal formula which had been developed late yesterday and that while Mr. Hull was not in a position to give it final approval that it looked good to him and that he thought it had in it the basis of agreement. I explained to Gromyko that we could not approve it in any final way until we had discussed it with the President. I then said that as our curbstone opinion of it was favorable, I wondered if he would not think it appropriate to sound out his own Government on it tentatively. I also told him that Cadogan could not yet speak but probably would be able to on his return, after talking to Eden in Quebec. During the conversation we decided it would be well for the Formulation Group to continue working on the other points which had not been couched in final language. I then told him that I would have to say something to the press this morning and that I was thinking something along the line that we are making good progress but that it would take a few more days to complete the talks. Gromyko promised that he would consult his Government on the possible compromise.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Conversation with Mr. Hull

I called Mr. Hull early in the morning and told him of Cadogan’s midnight call about going to Quebec. Mr. Hull again said that he thought it was a mistake for Cadogan to go and for that conference to get into political matters but that he agreed that we would not make a further point of the matter.

I then inquired what he thought of the informal formula which had been worked out late yesterday and which Mr. Dunn had taken to him last night. He thought off hand that it looked good but said that he would have to consider it from the complete setting before he could give final judgment and also talk to the President on it. He said he had not heard from the President about going to Quebec and did not feel in any event that he should go. This comment was made after I had reminded him of the President’s promise to send for him or someone else in the Department if the conference went into political matters.

I asked the Secretary’s advice as to whether we should immediately inform the President of the voting development and the compromise which we had been studying informally. He thought we should do so and I arranged promptly to send such a wire to the President in Quebec.85

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Conversation with Harry Hopkins

Harry Hopkins called me just before 11:00 in the morning and I reported to him the recent development, particularly on the voting question. I also told him that Cadogan was going to Quebec this morning and that Eden was arriving there late this afternoon. I told him about our proposed press statement.86

He then told me it was expected that the Quebec conference would break up Monday night and that probably the Prime Minister and the President would go to Hyde Park Sunday night and that if Eden went probably Hull would be invited up. He told me he was not going to Quebec but would go to Hyde Park. He thought Churchill had gotten a little stiff about Cadogan and that his visit and also Eden’s did not have too much significance in view of the quick termination of the meeting. He thought our idea of sending a wire to bring the President up to date was excellent.

Then, to my amazement, Hopkins told me that an answer had been received at the White House from Stalin before the President had left for Quebec. He was not familiar with what it contained but promised to get it for me but he did say that the President thought it said “No” with a loud bang but that he personally had not had the same impression.

Later Hopkins called me back to say that he could not find the Stalin wire in the map room and that it had been taken to Quebec. He said he had sent a message up there to get it and would let us have it as soon as he had an answer. We received the message later in the afternoon.87

Conversation with Mr. Hull

Later in the morning I called Mr. Hull to tell him I had heard that the Quebec conference would be over on Friday and that the two top men would probably go to Hyde Park alone for several days and that possibly Eden and he would be invited there. I told him Hopkins was going to Hyde Park. I also informed him that Cadogan was definitely leaving on the 11:30 plane and that we were going to put out a press release stating that we were getting along well, that our papers are being reviewed by our Governments, that Cadogan was being called to Quebec on other matters and that it would, therefore, take us a few more days to finish up.

I then told the Secretary how upset I was to discover that a reply from Stalin on the voting procedure had been received by the White House several days ago and that we had never been told about it. The Secretary said he was used to this type of thing and I replied that I guessed I was young and inexperienced. I explained that we did not yet know whether the reply referred to the Secretary’s talk with Gromyko or to the wire which the President had sent to Stalin.

Meeting with Mr. Hull

I called on Mr. Hull at 3:30 to tell him about the contents of the message from Stalin, which was on the “X” matter and which was discouraging. It said that while they were not going to press it further at Dumbarton Oaks they are going to bring it up later, perhaps at the general conference. Mr. Hull was discouraged over the reply and said that if it were brought up at the general conference a showdown would have to take place at that time. He agreed completely with my thought that no matter what happened on the voting issue we would have to produce some memorandum of agreement in these Conversations, perhaps leaving certain open items for consideration at the United Nations conference. We agreed that if the Soviets continued to be sticky about questions such as the “X” matter that it was going to be difficult to work things out.

The Secretary agreed with my plan of recessing tomorrow and Saturday and thought, if possible, that it would be good for me to get away to the country for a day or two.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

General

Today was the low point of the Conversations. It looks as if an impasse has been reached and we cannot tell whether we will be able to work out of it to a successful conclusion or whether the conference will blow up. I am much encouraged by remarks made by old hands at international negotiations, such as Joe Grew and Ed Wilson, who said there never has been a conference which did not look as if it had completely broken down at one stage or another.

85 Telegram of September 14, not printed.

86 For statement by the Under Secretary of State, released to the press on September 14, see Department of State Bulletin, September 17, 1944, p. 292.

87 Telegram of September 7, p. 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450].

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./22

[Document 466]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 15, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Twenty-third Day

Because Sir Alexander Cadogan was called to Quebec to confer with Prime Minister Churchill (on matters other than the Dumbarton Oaks conversations), no official meetings were held today.

Various members of the American group took advantage of the suspension of meetings to confer with one another and examine latest drafts of various documents.

Members of the secretariat took advantage of the delay to catch up with preparation of minutes and other papers. The latest draft of the document, based upon changes agreed to by the joint formulation group at its meeting yesterday afternoon, was copied and distributed to participants in the conversations.

Marshal Stalin’s reply88 to the President’s message89 on voting procedure was received. I sent a wire to the President90 quoting the exact text of the formula now under study.

At 4:00 p.m., Messrs. Long, Hackworth, Pasvolsky and I met with you for a 40 minute round-up discussion on the open questions.

88 Dated September 14, p. 806 [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463].

89 See telegram 58, September 8, p. 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453].

90  Infra.

The Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt [Document 467]

The Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt 91

Washington, September 15, 1944.

Supplementing yesterday’s wire on voting procedure,92 it may be helpful for you to have before you the exact text of the formula which is now being studied by the three governments as a possible solution.

You will note the size of the majority vote is left blank. The Russians want 51 percent and the British want two-thirds.

[Here follows text of compromise proposal as drafted by Formulation Group on September 13, printed on page 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462].]

The result of adopting this procedure would be that consideration and recommendations with regard to pacific settlement of disputes referred to in numbered paragraph three above would be taken without the vote of the party to the dispute even if that party happens to be a permanent member of the council and that consideration and decisions as to enforcement action of any kind would require the unanimous consent of all the permanent members of the council, whether or not one of them is involved.

In view of the fact that this, if accepted, would represent a substantial concession to the Soviet point of view, we feel that we would be justified in trying to obtain their consent to the two-thirds majority vote.

Could we have your views as soon as convenient, both as regards the formula in the text and the size of majority vote?

E[dward] S[tettinius]

91 Copy of telegram obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y. Message transmitted by the White House Map Room to President Roosevelt in Quebec.

92 Not printed.

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[Document 468]

Extracts From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Twenty-third Day, Friday, September 15, 1944.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Conversations with the Secretary

As soon as I heard that the cable from Stalin on voting had been received I called the Secretary. I explained to him that while Stalin did not back away from the expressed Soviet opinion he did not close the door. The Secretary seemed encouraged. I sent him a copy of the text as soon as we received it.

Mr. Hull had just talked to the President, who had confirmed that the meeting in Quebec was breaking up tonight and that Eden was flying back to England tonight. Mr. Hull said Cadogan would return directly to Washington.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Meeting with the Secretary

I met with the Secretary in his office this afternoon to bring him up to date generally. He was very disturbed because Mr. Long had been in and given him the impression that there was a great amount of dissension and differences of opinion among members of the American delegation. I told him this was completely wrong and suggested that we have Long in to go over the ground with him. We then had a forty-minute meeting with Long, Hackworth, and Pasvolsky present. Mr. Long backed down completely from his position when I explained clearly that yesterday I had canvassed the American group as to their position on the compromise formula and that with the exception of reservations by Bowman and Cohen, they were all united that it was the thing to do, if it was acceptable to the Russians. Pasvolsky, Hackworth and I all then expressed the opinion that there was nothing to be excited about. Long seemed apologetic for having brought the matter up.

Pasvolsky expressed his view that the Russians may accept this formula and that it would be acceptable to us. I made it completely clear to the Secretary that the three Governments had received it only for study on an informal tentative basis and that no one had made a commitment on it.

The Secretary was very definite that we could not exclude the Associated Nations from original membership as it would result in a very bad effect in Latin American relations. The Secretary, answering my memorandum of the 13th,93 indicated definite opposition to the British proposal of qualification based on contribution made, on the election of non-permanent members of the Council.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

93 Not printed; see extracts from Diary, September 13, p. 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461].

President Roosevelt to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) [Document 469]

President Roosevelt to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)94

[Quebec,] September 15, 1944.

Neither the Prime Minister nor I are inclined to approve the proposed amendment.

My thought has been that this amendment or a general reference to the subject should be mentioned in the agreement as having been discussed but without reaching any agreement or decision, thus leaving it up to the meeting of the United Nations.

Mr. Churchill, on the other hand, is afraid that this procedure will be unacceptable to the Russians, as they would know that they would be overwhelmingly defeated in a United Nations’ meeting and that they would get sore and try to take it out on all of us on some other point.

That is about the only information I can give you. Cadogan will return Monday, I think, and he can give you any further news.

I think we should keep on trying but if we cannot agree on this or any other point, I am inclined to favor either not mentioning disagreement or putting disagreements under a general statement that certain points have not been agreed on. I am still greatly in favor of a reference to the United Nations for discussion as soon as possible.

94 Copy of telegram obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y. Message received in the White House Map Room on the night of September 15, from President Roosevelt at Quebec.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./23

[Document 470]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 16, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Twenty-fourth Day

Because of Sir Alexander Cadogan’s continued absence in Quebec (he did not return until late this afternoon) no official meetings were held today.

However, there were, as you are aware, a number of conferences both this morning and this afternoon with you at the Department and in my office at Dumbarton Oaks, in which various members of the American group participated, on the latest developments relating to the important question of voting procedure in cases of disputes involving a great power.

In addition, I met Sir Alexander Cadogan and Lord Halifax at the British Embassy just after Sir Alexander’s plane arrived late this afternoon.

As you know, the crux of these discussions revolved around the President’s wire95 on the voting question and consideration of the British position of non-acceptance of the possible compromise.96 When Sir Alexander told Ambassador Gromyko of the British position, the Ambassador told him that that was likewise the position of his Government, although he did not make it completely clear to Sir Alexander whether or not he had final official instructions on the matter.

95  Supra.

96 Sir Alexander informed Under Secretary Stettinius that he had been officially instructed, after consultation with Mr. Churchill and Mr. Eden, to advise Ambassador Gromyko and Mr. Stettinius officially that his Government could not endorse the compromise proposal on voting in the Council. (Diary, September 16, p. 2.)

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt 500.CC/9–1744

[Document 471]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt 97

Washington, September 17, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Twenty-fifth Day

In the morning I checked with Ambassador Gromyko to ascertain whether he had received official instructions from his Government indicating that the possible compromise voting formula98 was unacceptable. He confirmed that he had received such instructions.

A little before noon, as I have told you on the telephone, a small American group had a long discussion with Secretary Hull.99 Following that I called you on the telephone,1 at which time we agreed on a proposal for closing down the conversations at Dumbarton Oaks with the Soviets as soon as possible, holding conversations with the British and Chinese immediately thereafter, hoping to limit them to three or four days, and then to issue simultaneously in the four capitals releases indicating the progress made and explaining that there were certain open points which the Governments would have to study in more detail. The release would then explain that the delegations were going home to report to their Governments and that representatives of the three Governments would meet again not later than November 15 to prepare complete proposals which could serve as a basis of discussion at a full United Nations conference.

I attach a copy of the outline of this proposal which I made to Sir Alexander Cadogan and Ambassador Gromyko at a meeting at 4:00 p.m. They seemed to receive it favorably and agreed to wire home for instructions on it. The [American] Group then drafted two possible communiqués—one intended for issuance at the end of the British-Soviet talks and the other at the end of the British-Chinese talks—inasmuch as Ambassador Gromyko stated that he would have to tell his Government exactly what would be said publicly under this proposal. These are the communiqués which I read to you in our telephone conversation around 9:00 p.m. Copies are attached.

E[dward] S[tettinius]

[Annex 1]

U.S. Proposal of Possible Procedure

1. Suspend the Soviet phase of the conversations.

2. Begin discussions with the Chinese.

3. At the conclusion of the Chinese discussions an identical communiqué would be issued by each government to the effect that: (a) Agreement has been reached on a wide range of subjects. The discussions at Dumbarton Oaks have been another instance of cooperation among the principal allies in this war, and a step forward in reaching agreement for the post-war period.

(b) Before complete proposals can be placed before the other United Nations as a basis of discussion at a conference, it is necessary for each of the governments to give further consideration to the subject in all of its phases and implications.

(c) In the meantime, in order to provide an opportunity for public study and discussion, there is made public a memorandum setting forth the substance of the document worked out at Dumbarton Oaks, except the section relating to voting in the Council. This document should be described as indicating the area of agreement reached so far.

(d) Not later than November 15th, after the governments have completed their further studies and sufficient time has been afforded for public discussion, representatives of the governments now represented at Dumbarton Oaks would meet again to complete the preparation of proposals which could then serve as a basis of discussion at a full United Nations Conference.

[Annex 2]

Draft Communiqué

Conversations between the United States, United Kingdom, and Soviet Union delegations in Washington regarding the establishment of a World Security Organization have now been completed. The three delegations are making reports to their respective Governments who will consider these reports and will in due course issue a simultaneous statement on the subject.

[Annex 3]

Draft Communiqué

The Government of __________ has now received the report of its Delegation to the conversations held in Washington between August 21–September ____________ with the Delegations of ____________ on the subject of an international organization for the maintenance of peace and security.

There is annexed hereto a statement of the tentative proposals which have resulted from the conversations, indicating in detail the wide range of subjects on which agreement has been reached.

The Governments which were represented in the discussions in Washington have agreed that after further study of these proposals, and not later than November 15, they will take the necessary steps with a view to the preparation of complete proposals which could then serve as a basis of discussion at a full United Nations Conference.

Meanwhile the _____________ Governments, which are already directly and jointly engaged in the suppression of the forces that have disturbed the peace of the world, are resolved to work together for the future enforcement of the terms of surrender to be imposed on the common enemy.

97 Substantially the same report was made on the same day to Secretary Hull.

98 Dated September 13, p. 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462].

99 Agreement was reached during the noon meeting in the Secretary’s apartment to present to the President a proposal for closing down the conversations as soon as possible.

1 At Secretary Hull’s suggestion, Under Secretary Stettinius telephoned President Roosevelt at Hyde Park, N.Y., where the President had gone after the Quebec Conference, to make an appointment to come there to discuss the compromise formula with him in person. Secretary Hull indicated in his Memoirs that he had the impression that “the President and the Prime Minister were so busy with their discussions at Quebec that they simply did not take the time to give the question the serious consideration it deserved.” President Roosevelt favored postponement of any discussion of the problem until his return to Washington. (Memoirs, vol. ii, p. 1702.)

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 15 of the Joint Steering Committee, Held at 4 p.m., September 17, at Dumbarton Oaks Lot 60–D 224, Box 56: D.O./Conv.A/JSC Mins. 13–18

[Document 472]

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 15 of the Joint Steering Committee, Held at 4 p.m., September 17, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, September 17, 1944, 4 p.m.

[Extract]

Present: Ambassador Gromyko of the Soviet group;

Sir Alexander Cadogan and Mr. Jebb of the British group;

Mr. Stettinius, Mr. Dunn, Mr. Hackworth, and Mr. Pasvolsky of the American group.

Mr. Hiss also present, as secretary.

In opening the meeting Mr. Stettinius said that he wished to apologize for having called a meeting on Sunday afternoon. He said, however, that he felt it was time for the Committee to take inventory of the situation. He went on to say that an appraisal of the situation reveals that an amazing amount of ground has been covered and that much in the way of agreement has been accomplished except for one obstacle, the question of the right of a state to vote when it is involved in a dispute. He said that as he understood the situation the position of the Soviet Government is that it cannot change its views on this matter.

Ambassador Gromyko replied that when this question had been asked of him at the last meeting of the Committee he had said that the Soviet position was a final one. Sir Alexander Cadogan stated that on the issue of voting in the Council there was no prospect at all of his Government changing its attitude.

Mr. Stettinius then said that he thought that for the benefit of all concerned the record should show clearly that the compromise proposal on this subject, which had recently been drafted and had been given consideration, was a tentative sounding of the respective Governments and had never been proposed or accepted by any of the three Governments.

Mr. Stettinius then went on to say that it seemed to him that there are three alternatives as to the procedure to be followed. He said that, first, the conversations could be terminated with a statement that the three groups have met and have found it impossible to reach agreement. He said that for his part that seemed to be an unthinkable solution. He said that, as he had remarked at the last meeting of the Committee, civilization as we know it and the entire future of the world depend upon the three powers remaining side by side in peace as in war. He said that he felt that means must be found for adjusting the positions of the three powers so that an international organization will be possible.

The second alternative procedure would be to publish the document as agreed to and to refer it to a general conference of the United Nations, leaving open the question of voting in the Council. He said he understood that Ambassador Gromyko could not agree to such an alternative.

Ambassador Gromyko said that he thought such a course would not be practicable, that it would be necessary to have prior agreement among the three powers. He said that he was expressing merely his own opinion. Mr. Stettinius asked whether his statement also represented the official view of the Soviet Government. Ambassador Gromyko replied again that he was simply stating his own view.

Mr. Stettinius then said that the third alternative would be to finish the conversations at Dumbarton Oaks, each group reporting to its own Government. The Governments could then study the results of the labors of the groups and a further meeting could be held thereafter. He said that he had a specific plan to this effect to propose but he wished first to inquire whether Ambassador Gromyko and Sir Alexander Cadogan had some other suggestion to make.

Mr. Pasvolsky suggested that it might be profitable to discuss the possibility of a general conference being held with the question of voting left open. Mr. Stettinius said that if such a course of procedure were possible he would like consideration to be given to it. Ambassador Gromyko said that he had no prepared proposal to make and that he would like to hear Mr. Stettinius’ specific plan.

Sir Alexander Cadogan said that he had just seen his Prime Minister and his Foreign Secretary. He said that he felt sure that they would not like the first alternative, namely, a mere breaking up of the discussions. He felt that the impression which would be given by such a course of action would not be quite a true one in as much as there has in fact been agreement on a wide range of subjects. As to the second alternative, he said that he believed that his Government would not like that either. He did not feel it would be wise to go into a large conference without prior agreement. He felt that the third alternative is the preferable one. He said that we could say that the groups have not been able to reach full agreement and that they, therefore, were referring the difficulties which had arisen to their Governments for them to study. He said that still another alternative, which he proposed only to knock down, would be to terminate the conversations without making any statement. Mr. Pasvolsky thought that this last alternative would not give a fair impression in view of the fact that so much has in fact been accomplished by the conversations.

Mr. Stettinius said that he was prepared to distribute copies of a memorandum setting forth a specific plan of procedure but that first he wished again to emphasize that the world dream of partnership among the nations is of such overriding importance that a way must be found to accomplish it. He said that he felt that the plan of procedure which he was about to suggest is not itself too good. He said that there will be tremendous adverse speculation as a result even of that course, speculation to the effect that the groups have not been able to agree. He said that everything in his being tells him that some way must be found to reach agreement.

Ambassador Gromyko said that he also felt that it should not be said that the groups had conferred and had been unable to agree. He said that his personal view is that the best thing to say would be that agreement had been reached on many questions relating to a security organization but that consideration of some questions had not been completed. He would say that discussion of these questions would have to be continued among the Governments themselves. He would not say that there had been disagreement; he would say that these questions would be considered at some later time. He said that he was expressing merely a “raw idea” and was not expressing official views on this particular subject.

Mr. Stettinius then distributed copies of a memorandum entitled “Possible Procedure”.4

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Annex 1, p. 817 [Pg. 817 is part of Doc. 471].

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./25

[Document 473]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 18, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Twenty-sixth Day

Meetings with Ambassador Gromyko and Sir Alexander Cadogan

After my telephone conversation with you at 9:45 this morning Ambassador Gromyko came to Dumbarton Oaks at my invitation. I emphasized to him, as you requested, the very serious consequences, both for the creation of an international organization and for the Soviet Union, which might result from terminating these conversations without having reached agreement on the question of voting procedure in the Council. I asked the Ambassador whether, in the light of these circumstances, his Government would be willing to consider a new formula with respect to voting in the Council. Ambassador Gromyko replied that the position of his Government on this question is final and would not be changed regardless of whether the conversations were prolonged a week or a year. He emphasized that the Soviet Government would never consider joining an organization in which a major power involved in a dispute did not vote.

The Ambassador stated that it was his personal view rather than the official view of his Government that the Soviet Union would not agree to the holding of a conference of the United Nations before agreement had been reached among the four powers on the vital question of voting procedure. He stated, however, that he would obtain the formal view of his Government on this question. The Ambassador asked whether I believed the British could be expected to change their position, and I replied that it was my personal opinion that no change was in prospect in the reasonably near future.

I later repeated to Sir Alexander Cadogan my conversation with Ambassador Gromyko. Sir Alexander stated that his Government also could never accept the plan to bring the draft proposals before a United Nations conference prior to agreement on all basic issues by the four powers. He subsequently agreed, however, to take up with his Government my suggestion that the four nations join in inviting other United Nations to a conference, leaving open the issue of voting procedure in the Council.

I stated to Sir Alexander in Ambassador Gromyko’s presence that if the proposals were published in their present form the Secretary or President would find it necessary to make a statement clarifying the position of this Government. Sir Alexander said that the same would go for his Government. Presumably, Ambassador Gromyko has reported these statements to Moscow.

Sir Alexander again asked whether it would be necessary to have an opening ceremony for the Chinese. I replied that we must do so and that it was our intention that you would be present and would speak. Sir Alexander said that he thought this whole procedure was absurd and that he did not wish to sit with the Chinese for more than three days.

Meeting of the American Group

At the meeting of the American group at 9:30 this morning I reported the developments of Saturday and Sunday and subsequent developments during the morning. The group discussed at length the probable consequences of adjourning the discussions with the Soviet representatives prior to agreement on the question of voting. There was a marked division of opinion which led to the drafting of two memoranda.5 The first of these expressed the view of Mr. Long and our military representatives that an adjournment of the discussions would have the most serious political and military consequences and proposed alternatives, extending to full acceptance of the Russian position, for the purpose of reaching agreement prior to adjournment. The second, prepared by other members of the American group, weighed the consequences of adjournment prior to agreement and suggested a new course of action.6

5 Neither printed; for an outline of the American Group’s views, see memorandum to President Roosevelt and the Secretary of State, September 21, p. 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480].

6 This second memorandum favored concluding the Conversations at the technical level and referring the problems of voting arrangements for discussion at a higher level.

Extract From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[Document 474]

Extract From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Twenty-sixth Day, Monday, September 18, 1944.

Meeting with Gromyko and then with Gromyko and Cadogan 7

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

… I told Gromyko that we felt failure to reach agreement on voting would seriously jeopardize the acceptance of the plan by the American people and ratification of it by our Senate. In elaborating on the possible consequences to the Soviet Union, I told him that in our judgment if their position became known there would be a serious attack on them by the small nations over the world and also considerable anti-Soviet discussion in the American press. I told him in view of our happy relations with his Government that we would like to see both avoided. Gromyko took the position that if there had to be a break among the big four on this issue they might as well have the break right now rather than at some later conference. The Ambassador assured me that not only he but his Government as well understood the serious implications of this situation and that the whole international organization was at stake. He repeated, however, that he saw no possibility of a change of position on the part of his Government. He asked me if I was familiar with the message Stalin sent to the President and I replied in the affirmative and he said that that was the final word and spoke for itself. I appealed to him to reexamine the ten or twelve different possible solutions which had been considered by the Formulation Group. He said, “This is useless. None of the alternate proposals would ever be considered by my Government”. I asked him personally as to whether he felt there was any chance at all of change on the part of his Government and he replied that he thought there was no chance whatsoever. I inquired how long he thought it would take to hear from his Government on the proposed procedure for winding up the talks and he thought certainly not before tomorrow and possibly not before Wednesday. He did not venture in answer to my inquiries any opinion as to whether this procedure would be acceptable or whether the date of November 15th would be acceptable. I sounded him out informally on whether he thought our Foreign Ministers or our Chiefs of State could find a way out and he received this suggestion rather negatively. He then said, “You can’t have an international organization without us. We can’t have one without you. And there has to be unanimity between us and the other powerful states. The moment this principle of unanimity breaks down there is war, and it seems to me in view of that realistic situation that all this discussion of one or another solutions to the voting question is purely academic”. I reported in full this conversation to Mr. Hull later in the day.

Telephone Conversation with the Secretary.

After talking with Gromyko and Cadogan, I promptly called the Secretary on the phone and reported to him in detail on it. He expressed astonishment that they would be willing to let this one point stand in the way of full agreement on the international organization. He came back to the point he had made on Sunday that this must go down to the bottom of a lot of things, a lot of grievances and be more significant than merely Dumbarton Oaks. In view of this, the Secretary is thinking along the line that the President should make another appeal to Churchill and to Stalin. He thought we should make an attempt to get Gromyko’s comments in writing. I told him that I thought that might be embarrassing to Gromyko and suggested that maybe he would want to call Gromyko in and ask him to repeat to him directly what he had told me. I stressed to the Secretary that I had told both of them that we would have to make the opposition on the question public and said in answer to a question that I thought Cadogan felt as we did on that point. The Secretary asked that the American Group continue to study this problem in order that they might find something to save the situation. I told him that the American Group had been in continuous session all morning for just that purpose. The Secretary raised the question as to whether it would be wise to say to Gromyko and Cadogan that unless agreement was reached on this point it might be the end of the whole idea of the international organization and I explained that I had almost gone that far in my conversations this morning. He instructed me to definitely ask them each for their best proposal to keep the subject alive, which I told him I had already done but that I thought Gromyko was not trying to find any other solution and was simply standing on the position that his Government had taken its one, only and final stand. The Secretary agreed that we would have to make the whole situation public. He again stressed the importance he attached to a prompt discussion of the whole matter with the President.8

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7 Sir Alexander Cadogan joined the Ambassador and the Under Secretary for the last part of their meeting.

8 In accordance with Mr. Hull’s request during a late afternoon meeting, the Under Secretary reported by telephone the substance of his talk with Ambassador Gromyko to President Roosevelt at Hyde Park. (Diary, September 18, p. 12.)

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./26

[Document 475]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 19, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Twenty-seventh Day

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee

A meeting of the Joint Steering Committee was held today at Ambassador Gromyko’s request to reach agreement on a number of unsettled items.

(a) Voting in the Council

With reference to the section on voting in the Council the Soviet group preferred a general statement rather than an enumeration of the questions requiring unanimous vote.9 The Soviet group also were agreeable to providing that a permanent member could abstain from voting, but be bound by the decision.9 The British said emphatically that the voting question was closed at this time and maintained that the matter of voting should be settled as a whole rather than in parts. I suggested the voting question might best be covered by a statement that the matter has been left open.

(b) Regional Arrangements

The Soviet group withdrew their reservation on regional arrangements, but requested that the clause excepting from the authority of the Security Council action in relation to enemy states be transferred to the chapter on transitional arrangements.10

(c) Respect for Human Rights

The British were reluctant to accept our proposal for a provision obligating states to respect human rights and fundamental freedoms. The Soviet group would accept this principle provided it were coupled with a provision that Fascist or fascist-type states could not be members of the organization.11

(d) Disarmament and Regulation of Armaments

The British agreed that the general Assembly might consider disarmament, but maintained their view that the military staff committee should not deal with disarmament.

The Soviet group withdrew objection to empowering the Security Council, assisted by the military staff committee, to formulate plans for regulating armaments.

(e) Election of Non-Permanent Council Members

The British agreed to eliminate the qualification that the contribution of members to peace and security be a consideration in filling nonpermanent seats.

(f) Settlement of Disputes

The Soviet group suggested that the obligation of parties to refer an unresolved dispute to the Security Council state that the Council should in each case decide whether the dispute is a threat to peace and whether the Council should deal with it.

(g) Bases and Transit Facilities

The Soviet group agreed to drop the provision, originally proposed by them, that smaller states should provide transit facilities and sites for bases.

(h) International Air Force Corps

The American formula regarding national air force contingents was accepted and the British alternative was dropped.

(i) Transitional Arrangements

Agreement was reached that until the special agreement or agreements to provide armed forces come into force, the states parties to the Moscow Declaration should consult with one another and, as occasion arises, with other members of the Organization with a view to joint action to maintain peace and security.

9 See footnote 62, p. 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 448].

9 See footnote 62, p. 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 448].

10 The last phrase of the second paragraph (September 13 draft by the Joint Formulation Group, not printed) stated: “… no enforcement action should be taken under regional arrangements or by regional agencies without the authorization of the Security Council, with the exception of action in relation to enemy states as a result of the present war taken or authorized by the governments having responsibility for such action.”

11 In response to an inquiry by Mr. Pasvolsky as to whether the Council would determine whether or not a state was of a fascist type, Ambassador Gromyko replied: “Of course”. (Informal minutes of meeting No. 16 of the Joint Steering Committee, September 19, p. 3.)

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/9–1944: Telegram

[Document 476]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 19, 1944—1 p.m.
[Received September 19—9:25 a.m.]

3572. Before receiving this morning your personal message No. 2234, September 18, 10 a.m. [p.m.],12 I had drafted the first part of a message on this subject. I am now sending you this part of the message as background and will follow shortly with more specific answers to the questions which you have raised. Original message follows: “I submit the following for such value as it may have in your consideration of Marshal Stalin’s reply13 to the President’s message on the question of voting of the permanent members in the Council of the World Security Organization.

The British Ambassador has informed me of his discussion with Molotov on this subject, report of which I assume you have received.14 Molotov’s reaction followed precisely the same line as Stalin’s message to the President.

From the evidence we have, it would appear that the underlying reason for the position of the Soviets on voting is their unwillingness to allow the Council to deal with any dispute in which the Soviet Government is a party affecting their relations with at least their neighboring countries. Some of the evidence we have in mind is the following: (1) You will recall that at the Moscow Conference when the question of European problems was discussed Molotov stated that the Soviet Government was prepared to consult with the British and yourselves [ourselves?] on matters relating to all questions except those between the Soviet Government and its immediate western neighbors. On these matters the Soviet Government was prepared to keep us informed but would take no further commitments.

(2) Light on the Soviet Government’s attitude toward small nations was reflected in an informal conversation Mr. Eden and I had at the British Embassy with Litvinov and Maiski15 in which Litvinov expounded the concept that it was unreasonable to consider that the interests of 30 million Poles should be given equal weight with those of 180 million Russians. Where the interests of the Russians conflicted with those of the Poles, the Poles would have to give way.

Recently Litvinov expounded the same philosophy to the Norwegian Ambassador when he said ‘The glory of the small nations is past’.

(3) Throughout the year we have seen evidence of the Soviet Government’s intention to prescribe unilaterally the manner in which the Polish political problem should be settled.16

(4) Throughout the period of occupation of Iran the Soviet Government has shown unwillingness to collaborate to any substantial degree with the British and ourselves and in fact has been unwilling to allow our observers to study conditions in northern Iran.17

(5) The Soviet Government’s agreement with the Italian Government for the exchange of representatives was reached without consultation.

(6) As soon as the Soviets decided that Turkey’s entry into the war was no longer vital they took the first pretext to break away unilaterally from their agreement at Moscow and Tehran to work with the British and ourselves for Turkey’s entry into the war.18

(7) The Soviet Government declared war on Bulgaria19 without consultation with the British and ourselves, giving us thirty minutes notice. It would appear probable that the reasons for failure to consult were political even if the move itself may have been based on military considerations as well.

(8) Molotov’s attitude in the discussions preceding the Rumanian armistice20 has been cold to say the least toward real collaboration of British and American political representatives in Rumania. It is of course too early to judge the manner in which the Soviets will use their powers under the armistice.

(9) We have seen an unbending and impatient attitude toward Chiang Kai Shek particularly regarding the difficulties in Sinkiang. Our air force as well as China are being penalized by an unwillingness to allow the use of the overland route through the Soviet Union21 in order to bring political pressure on the Generalissimo.

I do not attempt to appraise whether the Soviets are right or wrong in their objectives in any one of the above cases. I refer to them only as indicative of their attitude and consistent method of unilateral action in accomplishing their objectives. I believe we have thus sufficient evidence to foresee that if the world organization is established requiring agreement of all permanent members for the consideration of any dispute regardless of whether or not one of them is involved the Soviet Government will ruthlessly block consideration by the Council of any question in which it considers its interests affected and will insist that the matter be settled by the Soviet Union within the other country or countries involved particularly any disputes with their neighbors.

I am convinced that Stalin and his principal advisers place the highest importance on the association of the Soviet Union in a major way with the three great powers in world affairs but have expected that their political and military strength would enable them to dictate the conditions. There is no doubt the Russian people crave peace and have been led to believe that the intimate relationship developed during the war with the British and ourselves will continue after the war and will be a guarantee of a lasting peace. I do not believe Stalin can forego the material as well as the psychological value of this association without causing grave concern among the Russian people. On the other hand it seems evident that there are powerful groups within his immediate circle who are unwilling to give up right of independent action where Russian’s interests are affected and to see Russia depend solely on an untried world organization with associates none of whom do they fully trust. As Stalin traditionally likes to have two strings to his bow, it has not appeared to him inconsistent to pursue these two methods at the same time to obtain security for the Soviet Union and to advance its national interests as he sees them.”

Harriman

12  Vol. iv, p. 991; see also telegram 3600, September 20, from Moscow, ibid., p. 992.

13 Telegram of September 14, p. 806 [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463].

14 Not found in Department files.

15 I. M. Maisky, Soviet Assistant Commissar for Foreign Affairs.

16 For correspondence on this subject, see vol. iii, pp. 1216 ff.

17 See vol. v, pp. 306 ff.

18 See ibid., pp. 814 ff.

19 September 4, 1944; see telegram 3321, September 5, from Moscow, vol. iii, p. 396.

20 September 12, 1944; see vol. iv, pp. 133 ff.

21 For correspondence regarding this subject see Foreign Relations, 1943, China, pp. 614 ff.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./27

[Document 477]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 20, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Twenty-eighth Day

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee

The Joint Steering Committee met this afternoon to consider the revised draft of the proposals prepared by the joint formulation group and to take up matters on which agreement had not yet been reached. The Committee completed its consideration of the proposals, which were cabled tonight to Moscow and London. The principal changes agreed upon, other than matters of verbiage, were as follows:

(a) Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms

The paragraph under Chapter II. Principles, relating to human rights and fundamental freedoms has been eliminated.23 We have requested the Soviet and British to send special messages to their Governments expressing our hope that this point can be included briefly somewhere in the document.

(b) Initial Members

Agreement was reached to confine the Chapter on Membership to the single statement that membership in the organization would be open to all peace-loving nations. Reference to initial members was eliminated since agreement could not be reached that the nations which are associated with the United Nations but are not actual belligerents should be among the initial members.

(c) Non-Permanent Members of the Security Council

A provision which made the contribution of non-permanent members to peace and security a qualification for election to the Council was omitted upon our insistence.

(d) Voting in the Council

All substantive points relative to voting in the Council were eliminated in view of the proposed agreement to continue consideration of this subject.24

(e) Matters Within Domestic Jurisdiction

A bracketed provision excluding from the application of procedures for peaceful settlement matters within domestic jurisdiction was eliminated due to inability to reach agreement.

(f) Sites for Bases

Agreement was reached to eliminate the last remaining reference to the Russian proposal that smaller states should provide sites for bases.

(g) Air Force Contingents

Our provision for the immediate availability of national air force contingents was accepted and the British alternative providing for future study of something akin to an international air force was eliminated.

(h) Amendments

The chapter relating to amendments was eliminated due to inability to reach agreement.

Meeting of the American Group

The American group considered the changes in the draft proposals made by the Joint Steering Committee and the joint formulation group. Most of the group felt that it would be satisfactory to omit reference in the document to non-intervention, but the group as a whole urged that some reference to the promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms be included in the draft proposals. Most members felt that the Russian proposal concerning Fascist or fascist-type states should not be included. Other changes were regarded as satisfactory.

The group agreed upon a memorandum to the President and the Secretary25 offering a suggested course of procedure as an alternative to continuing the conversations with the Soviet group in the hope of reaching early agreement on the question of voting.

23 “2. It is the duty of each member of the Organization to see to it that conditions prevailing within its jurisdiction do not endanger international peace and security and, to this end, to respect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all its people and to govern in accordance with the principles of humanity and justice. Subject to the performance of this duty the Organization should refrain from intervention in the internal affairs of any of its members.” (Joint Formulation Group’s draft of September 20; draft not printed.)

24 Agreement was reached to accept the proposal of the Formulation Group to include under the section on Voting in the Security Council in the final draft of the Proposals the following statement: “Note:—The question of voting procedure in the Security Council is still under consideration.” (Minutes of meeting of Joint Steering Committee, September 20.)

25 Dated September 21, p. 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480].

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./28

[Document 478]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 21, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Twenty-ninth Day26

During the night the secretariat prepared copies of the final draft of the agreed provisions of the document incorporating the final decisions made at the meeting of the Joint Steering Committee yesterday. Copies of this final draft, which is dated September 20,27 were sent to the British and Soviet Embassies last night about 9:00. Additional copies were distributed to the members of the American group this morning.

Meeting of the American Group at 10:30 A.M.

I reported to the members of the American group the substance of the conversation which Secretary Hull and I had had with the President earlier this morning28 and, in particular, informed the members of the group that both the Secretary and the President are in full accord with the proposal that the Russian phase of the conversations be adjourned on the understanding that the text of the document as agreed to will be published soon together with the statement that questions of voting procedure in the Council and certain other matters are still under consideration and will be the subject of further negotiations among the Governments.29

Consideration was given to the procedure to be followed during the Chinese phase of the conversations and to the methods by which the Latin American countries would receive advance copies of the agreed-upon text shortly before the date of publication.

In view of the anticipated delay in the receipt of replies by the British and Soviet groups based upon the final text of the document as communicated to London and Moscow by those groups last night, it was decided to cancel the regular Friday and Saturday meetings of the American group. The group was asked to stand by for any emergency call over the weekend, particularly Sunday afternoon. The next regular meeting was scheduled for Monday at 9:30 a.m.

Continuing Activity by the Secretariat

The secretariat was occupied during the remainder of the day with preparation of minutes and other documents.

26 No official meetings were held from September 20 through 27, while Sir Alexander Cadogan and Ambassador Gromyko awaited their instructions on the proposal that the conversations be terminated with the publication of the draft document so far as agreed upon, together with a statement that other matters would receive further consideration among the Governments. (Progress report, September 25.)

27 Not printed; for subsequent revisions of this draft, see progress report of September 27, p. 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482].

28 See extract from Mr. Stettinius’ Diary, September 21, infra.

29 Discussions were in process at this time for a meeting of President Roosevelt with Prime Minister Churchill and Marshal Stalin, but this did not take place until February 1945 at Yalta. For correspondence on preparation for consideration at this Conference of the United Nations Organization, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, 1945, pp. 44 ff.

Extract from the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[Document 479]

Extract from the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Twenty-ninth Day, Thursday, September 21, 1944.

9:30 Meeting in the President’s Bedroom with the President and the Secretary

I met the Secretary, [and] Messrs. Dunn and Pasvolsky met Admiral Willson and General Embick, downstairs in the White House promptly at 9:30. Mr. Hull and I were invited upstairs first.

I presented to the President the document as it stands this morning, reflecting the changes agreed upon at yesterday’s Joint Steering Committee meeting and told him that this was the complete draft and that it had been cabled last night to London and Moscow. I said that he and the Secretary were the only two on the American side who could suggest further changes but that we would of course be glad to take up with the other Governments any amendments which either of them might wish to suggest.

I then handed to the President the memorandum outlining the changes which had been made in this final draft from the September 15th draft30 which he had. He took this memorandum and promised to study it.

I then presented to the President the memorandum which the American Group had prepared in their all-day session yesterday31 which he went over carefully and then inquired, “Where are we at?” In answering this question, I referred to our conversation on Sunday32 in which I had outlined the formula for a possible recess, for publication of the document, and simultaneous announcements by the four governments stating that their representatives would meet again at a later date to settle the open questions. The President said he recalled the conversation. I then said, “You have a decision to reach and in making it there are important political and military considerations which should be taken into account”. I told him that General Embick and Admiral Willson, representing the Joint Chiefs, were downstairs and wished to make a statement to him on the military considerations. The President immediately commented that he did not think there were serious domestic political implications in the matter. He said this was in reality a preliminary working paper and that it was natural that it should take considerable time to work out such an important matter, and that it would naturally need to be reviewed in detail by the chiefs of the other major powers. He added that the whole subject was one to which Churchill had not yet given his attention and that he knew, from his recent conversations with him, that he would take some time to make up his mind on some of these issues. The President said that he would be glad to see the General and the Admiral.

The President and Mr. Hull then exchanged views on the whole subject. The President expressed the tentative opinion that the only course to pursue was to follow the recommendation of recessing as quickly as possible. I made it clear to him, however, that we could not do this until we heard from the British and Russian Governments and that Gromyko did not expect to hear until Monday. They discussed in some detail future plans for special meetings and the like. I found that there were no plans for an immediate meeting. This brought up the question as to whether we should mention a date in the communiqué for another meeting or leave the question entirely open. The President and Secretary seemed to feel that it would be all right to state November 15 or soon thereafter. The feeling seemed to be that it would be most difficult to settle the major open question except at a meeting between chiefs of states or between foreign ministers.

During this discussion, I told the President pointblank that I heard a rumor that he and Churchill had sent or were planning to send a joint cable to Stalin relating to world security and other matters and that it would be most helpful to us in the Department to know if such a message had been sent. He replied that a general wire of this nature had been sent, mainly on strategic military questions,33 but that it had mentioned that there were certain very vital matters on the world organization which would have to be settled between the three of them. He added that nothing in the way of a compromise or any new formula had been suggested. He said he would ask Admiral Leahy to send us a copy. (This was never received.) In view of this discussion, I did not bring up the question of his sending a further wire to Stalin today. At this point, I again referred to the group waiting downstairs and suggested it would be helpful for them to join us. However the President and the Secretary were so engrossed in their discussion that they continued it for a while. I finally managed to get the group up and before taking them in reviewed quickly and generally the course which the discussion had taken. I then told the President that I thought he would be interested in hearing a statement on this matter from the Joint Chiefs of Staff. General Embick made a very direct and satisfactory statement, expressing General Marshall’s view that it was important that whatever course was followed it be handled in a harmonious and workable way so that there would be no prejudice to cooperation with the Soviet Union. He said that the President’s idea of postponing consideration of the major open question to a later meeting was agreeable. Admiral Willson expressed his concurrence in the General’s statement.

In the course of the meeting I again called the President’s attention to the latest draft of the document and said that as there had been changes from the draft which he had previously reviewed I thought it was important for him to look over it. He indicated that he was pressed with a speech scheduled for Saturday which he hadn’t yet written, but I feel that he will read the document and let us hear from him on it. I suggested to the President that in one of his major campaign addresses he might wish to cover certain aspects of the world security developments. He agreed that this was important and asked me to communicate with Judge Rosenman34 on the matter. He asked me to send the Judge a memorandum immediately saying that he had suggested this and that he felt the Judge should talk it over with us. (I called Judge Rosenman on the phone and arranged for him to see Pasvolsky and Ben Cohen.)

I mentioned to the President how disappointed we were that we had not yet succeeded in getting the human rights and fundamental freedoms statement in the document but that we had and would continue to press the matter as hard as we know how. I told him that we had obtained agreement that Cadogan and Gromyko would raise this as a special matter with their Governments and he was gratified by that. On leaving I told the President that I hoped that we would not have to bother him again on this.

During the conversation, the President repeated that Eden is thoroughly familiar with the plan and that he was pleased with Eden’s understanding of it and approach to it. Eden had told him that he had told the Prime Minister that the matter was in good shape and that he would have a copy for him to study on his return to England. Eden told him that he hoped that shortly thereafter they could both take it up with their War Cabinet. The President also repeated what he had told me Sunday—the fact that he had been unable to arouse the Prime Minister’s interest in this question at any time when they were together. The Prime Minister kept saying to him that he had not reached this yet and that it would have to be discussed with the War Cabinet. The President was impressed by Cadogan’s attitude and approach to it as he was with Eden’s.

I told the President and the Secretary that I felt we must publish the plan even if the Russians and British should not agree. The Secretary and the President both felt this was very important.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

30 See progress report of September 20 for outline of changes, p. 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477].

31  Infra.

32 See progress report of September 17, p. 816 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 471].

33 Presumably the telegram of September 19, 1944, from President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill to Marshal Stalin (Stalin’s Correspondence, vol. ii, p. 161). This message dealt only with military operations, however. It is scheduled for publication in a subsequent volume of Foreign Relations.

34 Samuel I. Rosenman, Special Counsel to President Roosevelt.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt and the Secretary of State 500.CC/9–2144

[Document 480]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt and the Secretary of State

Washington, September 21, 1944.

In the conversations with the Russians and British we have reached agreement except as to: 1. Procedure of voting in the Security Council;

2. Determination of initial members;

3. Treatment of matters within the domestic jurisdiction of member states;

4. Provision for amendment of the Charter; and

5. If present efforts for agreement fail, promotion of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.

The problem with which we are most concerned is whether a permanent member of the Council should vote on matters relating to a dispute to which it is a party and, in consequence of the unanimity rule, have the power of veto. The Soviets insist that they should have this right and that permanent members should have the power of veto on all questions, except procedural matters, including the question of whether a dispute may be considered in the Security Council. The British maintain that no state party to a dispute should be entitled to vote. In the document we presented on July 1835 we stated that a special procedure for voting in such cases should be worked out. During the conversations we have, under instructions, taken a position similar to that of the British.

Confronted by the choice between continuing the conversations in the hope of getting an early compromise on this issue, which appears unlikely at the technical level, or of adjourning, the American group has considered, among other serious questions, the following: 1. Whether adjournment without agreement on this issue could be placed in such a light as to avoid unfortunate domestic repercussions and unfavorable international consequences, both military and political;

2. Whether the consequences of such adjournment would adversely affect present and future military cooperation between the United States and the Soviet Union;

3. Whether such adjournment would make necessary a public statement by this Government of its position on the voting question;

4. Whether the ensuing public debate would make more difficult subsequent acceptance of a compromise formula by this Government;

5. Whether the repercussions of such debates in other countries would make more difficult subsequent agreement between their governments and ours;

6. Whether the resulting delay would undermine public support for an international organization and jeopardize our participation through the building up of isolationist and other opposition here; and

7. Whether postponement of agreement, with opportunity for world debate, might in fact lead to a strengthened public support of a, satisfactory compromise and to less difficulties with small states, or whether the need for a compromise might so dissatisfy the small states as to be injurious to the establishment of the proposed organization, and to our Inter-American relations.

Having in mind the foregoing consideration, the American group, on balance, suggests that, subject to agreement among the three powers: 1. The conversations with the Soviets and British should be adjourned;

2. At that time a communiqué should be issued stating that the draft proposals have been submitted to the Governments who in due course will make a statement;

3. Conversations with the Chinese should start promptly;

4. At the conclusion of the conversations with the Chinese, any additional points requiring consideration should be submitted to the Soviet Government;

5. The proposals so agreed upon should thereafter be published as soon as possible and identic statements be made by the four Governments pointing out that these proposals cover most of the principal matters and that the Governments are continuing their consideration of remaining points; and

6. Since an acceptance of either extreme position on voting in the Council now appears highly improbable, an effort should be made at a higher level to reach agreement upon a compromise formula at the earliest moment, if possible before a public statement on the subject becomes necessary. Such a compromise might be along the lines of the formula projected on September 13, with possible improving amendments. Copy attached.36

E[dward] S[tettinius]

35  Ante, p. 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 402].

36  Ante, p. 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462].

The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt 500.CC/9–3044

[Document 481]

The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt 37

[London,] September 25, 1944.

785. You will wish to read the following telegram I have received from Smuts.38

Begins: I feel deeply perturbed over deadlock with Russia in World Organisation Talks. This crisis in any case comes at a most unfortunate moment before final end of the war. I fear we are being rushed at break-neck pace into momentous decisions and not in this case only. International aviation, Telecommunications etc. all tell the same fate. Here however consequences may be particularly disastrous. I may therefore be pardoned for sending a warning note about this impasse.

At first I thought Russian attitude absurd and their contention one not to be conceded by other great Powers and inevitably to be turned down by smaller Powers also. But second thoughts have tended the other way. I assume that the Russian attitude is sincerely stated by Mr. Molotov and correctly interpreted by Moscow38a and Cadogan as one involving honour and standing of Russia amongst her Allies. She asks whether she is trusted and treated as an equal or is still an outlaw and Pariah. A misunderstanding here is more than a mere difference. It touches Russian amour propre and produces an inferiority complex and might poison European relations with far-reaching results. Russia conscious of her power may become more grasping than ever. Her making no attempt to find a solution shows her reaction and sense of power. What will be her future relations with Germany and Japan and even France, not to mention lesser countries? If a World Organisation is formed with Russia out of it she will become the power centre of another group and we shall be heading for World War 3. If no such organisation is formed by the United Nations they will stand stultified before history. The dilemma is a very grave one and the position into which we may be drifting should be avoided at all costs.

In view of these dangers smaller Powers should be prepared to make concessions to Russian’s amour propre and should not on this matter insist on theoretical equality of status. Such insistence may have most devastating results for the smaller Powers primarily. Where questions of power and security are concerned it would be most unwise to raise theoretical issues of sovereign equality, and the United Kingdom and the United States should use their influence in favour of common sense and safety-first rather than status for the smaller countries.

On merits there is much to be said for unanimity amongst the Great Powers at least for the year [years?] immediately following on this War. If in practice the principle proves unworkable the situation could be reviewed later when mutual confidence has been established and a more workable basis laid down. At the present stage a clash should be avoided at all costs. If unanimity for the Powers is adopted even including their voting on questions directly concerning their interests, the result would be that the United Kingdom and the United States will have to exert all their influence on Russia, to be moderate and sensible and not to flout world opinion. And in this they are likely to be largely successful. If Russia proves impossible the World Organisation may have to act but the blame will be hers. At the worst the principle of unanimity will only have the effect of a veto, of preventing action where it may be wise or even necessary. It will be negative and slow down action but it will also make it impossible for Russia to embark on activities disapproved of by the United Kingdom and United States.

Where the people are drunk with newly-won power, it may not be so bad a thing to have a brake like unanimity. I do not defend it, I dislike it, but I do not think it at present so bad that future world peace and security should be sacrificed on this issue.

The talks have so far been on an official advisory level although no doubt there may have been intervention on a higher level. I think before definite decisions are reached on highest level the whole situation should be most carefully reconsidered in all its far-reaching implications and some modus vivendi, if only of a temporary character, should be explored among the Great Powers which would prevent a catastrophe of the first magnitude. We simply must agree and cannot afford to differ where so much is at stake for the future. Ends.

37 Paraphrased copy of telegram transmitted by the British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State in his letter of September 30, 1944 (not printed).

38 Jan Christian Smuts, Prime Minister of the Union of South Africa.

38a The text printed in Churchill, Triumph and Tragedy, pp. 212–213, reads “Clark Kerr” instead of “Moscow”. Other Variations are due to paraphrasing.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt 500.CC/9–2744

[Document 482]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt

Washington, September 27, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Thirty-fourth Day

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee

Ambassador Gromyko called this morning to inform me that he had received final instructions from Moscow and asked that a meeting of the Joint Steering Committee be held at 10:30. The meeting was accordingly called and the Ambassador proceeded to state the position of his Government with respect to the September 20 draft of the document38b and with respect to the proposed procedure for adjourning the conversations.

(a) The Text of the Document

The Ambassador said his Government was generally agreeable to publication of the full text of the document as agreed upon.39 He went on to say that his Government had accepted the Chapter on amendments and, accordingly, this Chapter had been inserted in the document. He then said that his Government had also agreed to the insertion of the provision relating to the promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the end of the first sentence under Chapter IX which concerns economic and social arrangements. He then also expressed his Government’s agreement to the insertion of a paragraph, which had been proposed by the British, to the effect that the section on pacific settlement of disputes should not apply to matters of domestic jurisdiction.40

It was then agreed that in addition to the statement in the body of the text that the question of voting procedure in the Council is still under consideration, there should be appended to the document as published a brief note stating that several other questions are still under consideration.

(b) Issuance of the Communiqués

After some discussion it was agreed that the brief communiqué announcing the conclusion of the Soviet phase of the conversations would not be released to the press until 10:00 Friday morning in order to permit simultaneous publicity in the three capitals. However, the final plenary session of the British, American, and Soviet groups will be held Thursday at 3:30 p.m. A copy of the communiqué as agreed to is attached.41 (Perfecting changes in language which appear in the draft of this communiqué and of the longer communiqué referred to in the next paragraph were omitted at Ambassador Gromyko’s suggestion in order to avoid delay which would be involved in his communicating these changes to his Government.)

Agreement in principle was then reached on the form of the longer communiqué. Sir Alexander Cadogan, under instruction, insisted that reference to the date of November 15 be omitted. Ambassador Gromyko has not yet heard finally from Moscow as to paragraphs 2 and 4, which were added at the request of the British only two days ago. A copy of this communiqué in its present form is also attached.42

(c) United Nations Conference

Ambassador Gromyko, in the course of the meeting, said that he wanted to make it plain that his Government’s agreeing to a general conference of the United Nations being held in the future is dependent upon (a) whether the British and American Governments will meet the Soviet proposals as to voting in the Council and (b) whether the British and American Governments will accept the Russian proposal that the Soviet republics be initial members of the Organization. As to the former point the Ambassador said that his Government considers that the principle of the unanimity of the four great powers must be carried out unconditionally.43

Meeting of the American Group

After the conclusion of the meeting of the Joint Steering Committee a brief meeting was held of the members of the American group at which they approved the changes in the document referred to above, the texts of the proposed communiqués, and the proposed time schedule for terminating the Russian phase and beginning the Chinese phase of the conversations.

Vice Admiral Russell Willson informed me that it was important that he be absent on official business next week. After discussing this matter with him I authorized him to be absent from the conversations during that time.

Chinese Conversations

It was understood that we would begin the Chinese phase of the conversations Friday afternoon at 3 o’clock.

At 3 o’clock this afternoon Mr. Grew and I called upon Dr. Koo, Chairman of the Chinese group, and made arrangements, in conformance with the above developments, for the procedure to be followed in the Chinese phase of the conversations.

Final Text

Later in the day, as soon as available, I shall forward to you a copy of the final, agreed-upon document.

E[dward] S[tettinius]

[Annex 1]

Draft Communiqué

Conversations between the United States, United Kingdom, and Soviet Union delegations in Washington regarding the establishment of a World Security Organization have now been completed. These conversations have been useful and have led to a large measure of agreement on recommendations for the general framework of the Organization, and in particular for the machinery required to maintain peace and security. The three delegations are making reports to their respective Governments who will consider these reports and will in due course issue a simultaneous statement on the subject.

[Annex 2]

The Government of ___________ has now received the report of its Delegation to the conversations held in Washington between August 21–September ___ with the Delegations of ___________ ___________ on the subject of an international organization for the maintenance of peace and security.

There is annexed hereto a statement of tentative proposals indicating in detail the wide range of subjects on which agreement has been reached at the conversations.

The Governments which were represented in the discussions in Washington have agreed that after further study of these proposals they will as soon as possible take the necessary steps with a view to the preparation of complete proposals which could then serve as a basis of discussion at a full United Nations Conference.

Meanwhile the three (or four) Governments are resolved to work together, and with all other Governments jointly engaged in the suppression of the forces that have disturbed the peace of the world, for the future enforcement of the terms of surrender to be imposed on the common enemy.

38b Draft of September 20 not printed.

39 The draft of proposals embodying revisions of the September 20 draft, as agreed upon at the September 27 meeting, not printed.

40 Reference is to paragraph 7 of the section on pacific settlement of disputes. Another insertion was made in this same section, in the last sentence of paragraph 4, indicating that the Security Council should in each case referred to it decide whether the Council “should deal with the dispute, and, if so, whether it” should take action under paragraph 5.

41 Annex 1.

42 Annex 2. Mr. Stettinius was informed of the President’s approval of the two communiqués on the morning of September 28.

43 No further comment was made on either of these matters at this meeting.

Extract From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[Document 483]

Extract From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Thirty-fourth Day, Wednesday, September 27, 1944.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Conversation with Dr. Koo

At 3:00 I called Dr. Koo’s suite at the Shoreham Hotel, accompanied by Mr. Grew and Mr. Hiss, to discuss arrangements for the Chinese phase of the conversations. I opened the meeting by apologizing profusely for the delay in keeping the Chinese waiting but indicated it was caused by conditions beyond our control. I promised to have Mr. Grew hand him early Friday morning several copies of the final document agreed to by the British, Soviets and American group so the Chinese would have an opportunity to study it. I suggested that perhaps at the first general meeting of the Chinese phase, Dr. Koo might wish to give his general views on the document and that then we could go over the text in later sessions in some detail.

I handed Dr. Koo a memorandum45 listing points to be settled in connection with the arrangements and Dr. Koo asked for a little time to study the suggestions. He wished to defer setting a definite time for the first business meeting until after he had studied the questions involved. It was therefore agreed that the Chinese be given the weekend for study and not to hold meetings on Saturday.

I then broke the news to Dr. Koo that Cadogan had been called back to London and might not be able to participate in the Chinese phase. I explained he had already been here twice as long as he had expected to be away from London. I explained while I did not wish to rush the Chinese I felt it was important we proceed with appropriate despatch and try to cover the ground as rapidly as possible. Dr. Koo was sympathetic with this approach but said that until they had been over the document he did not feel he could agree to wind up for publication on the 9th. I stressed to Dr. Koo the desirability in our judgment of having as much work as possible during the Chinese phase done at plenary meetings. I also explained how helpful we had found the small group known as the Joint Steering Committee during the first phase and explained that if much drafting was necessary we had found our formulation group procedure helpful. Dr. Koo also agreed to holding our dinner for the Chinese on Monday evening. In answer to Dr. Koo’s inquiry I told him we expected the Chinese representative to speak first following Mr. Hull at the opening session. It was agreed that Mr. Liu of the Embassy and Mr. Hiss would confer as to technical arrangements covering menus, seating, etc.

Meeting with the President

I called at the White House at 4:55 and General Watson told me the President was waiting for me in his study. Mr. Hopkins was with him and he remained with us while I gave my report to the President. I handed him the progress memos of the past two days and pointed out we had obtained agreement at the last meeting on including paragraphs on amendments and on human rights, fundamental freedoms, and on domestic jurisdiction. He seemed gratified by these developments and felt the inclusion of the human rights sentence was extremely vital. He seems rather surprised that the Soviets had yielded on this point. He apparently felt that its inclusion would aid much in the success and acceptance of the plan.

I then reviewed for him the five major issues which would remain open probably for consideration by him with the other Chiefs of State: 1. Voting in the Council

2. Statute on the International Court of Justice

3. Initial membership

4. Trusteeships

5. Liquidation of the League

The President indicated he was not too concerned about the voting question and that he thought a formula could be found. I said I was hopeful something along the lines of our informal compromise plan would eventually be found acceptable by all. He was satisfied to leave the initial membership question in the present document on the basis of all peace-loving nations.

He seemed surprised we had not discussed territorial trusteeships and I explained we had not done so at the specific and strong request of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. I explained at this point that the Navy was not sympathetic to his point of view on trusteeships and that he would have to go into this matter thoroughly with them.

I did not review the question of the liquidation of the League but the President said he would be happy to have a memorandum on this for study at some later date.

I then told the President I held a press conference at 4:15 this afternoon and explained that we expected to end with the Soviets tomorrow, issue a joint communiqué and that we hoped to finish with the Chinese and publish the document on the 9th. He seemed very satisfied with this. I then explained to the President Gromyko’s two reservations in the Steering Committee meeting, one on the voting and the other on the X matter. He continued not to be alarmed on the voting question but was disturbed on the X matter. Much to my surprise he said he had reviewed this matter with the Brazilian Ambassador.46

I then inquired what he had in mind for the next step after we finished up on the 9th, whether there should be a meeting of the Foreign Ministers or what procedure he preferred. He indicated he thought it would be best to await developments and see how the plan was received on publication. He indicated he might like to handle it at a meeting with the other chiefs of state.

He seemed to feel there was no great hurry on getting a final plan to the Senate for ratification. He said if a top meeting could be held in November, it would still be possible to hold a conference of the United Nations along about January and get a plan to the Senate in the spring. Mr. Hopkins complimented us on a magnificent job, done at Dumbarton Oaks. The President also seemed tremendously pleased and expressed great confidence in the job which had been done. He was especially pleased that agreement had been achieved on publication on October 9.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

45 Not printed.

46 Carlos Martins.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./33

[Document 484]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 28, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Thirty-fifth Day

Final Plenary Session of American, British and Soviet Groups

(a) Approval of Text of Proposals

The final plenary session of the Russian phase of the conversations was held this afternoon at 3:00.47 The three groups gave their approval to the final draft of the proposals (draft of September 27), a copy of which was sent to you last night. The three chairmen then authenticated, in triplicate, official copies of the proposals for the files of their respective Governments.48

(b) Failure to Agree on October 9 Communiqué

I then read the two Communiqués,48a which cover, respectively, the adjournment of the Soviet phase of the conversations and the publication of the agreed proposals. The first of these two Communiqués is to be issued at 10:00 a.m. tomorrow49 and it is tentatively planned that the second communiqué will be issued by the respective governments, together with the text of the proposals, at 12:00 noon, Washington time, Monday, October 9.50

The texts of these two Communiqués were also approved, except for the last paragraph of the second communiqué. Ambassador Gromyko was unable to agree to Sir Alexander Cadogan’s proposal that this paragraph be broadened to include a reference to the lesser Allied governments as participating in the enforcement of surrender terms. It was subsequently agreed that this matter will have to be settled by direct exchange of views between Moscow and London. I made an earnest plea that agreement be reached promptly so as not to delay publication of the text of the agreed proposals.

(c) Concluding Remarks

I then made a few concluding remarks in which I said that I felt that because of the cordial cooperation of all the delegates much had been achieved in the brief period of six weeks. I expressed my appreciation for this cooperation and for the spirit of harmony and goodwill which has prevailed throughout the conversations. I further stressed the importance of early agreement among the three Governments on the few points that remain open. Ambassador Gromyko and Sir Alexander Cadogan then responded with similar and equally cordial concluding statements on behalf of their groups.

At the instance of the press officers of the respective groups, these concluding statements are being released to the press tomorrow along with the brief communiqué.

Arrangements for Chinese Phase of Conversations

(a) Opening Meeting Tomorrow

It has now been arranged that the opening session of the Chinese phase of the conversations will be held at 3:00 p.m. tomorrow, at which time Secretary Hull, Dr. Koo, and Sir Alexander Cadogan will make brief statements: As in the case of the opening of the Soviet phase of the conversations, on August 21, members of the press will be present.

(b) Next Meeting on Monday

At Dr. Koo’s suggestion there will be no meetings on Saturday. We are arranging to hand to Dr. Koo tomorrow for his preliminary examination several copies of the agreed proposals as they have emerged from the Soviet phase of the conversations. Dr. Koo informed me that he would like to use the weekend to consider the document and would not wish to express any views before Monday. Accordingly, there have been scheduled (a) for 10:00 a.m. Monday a meeting of the Joint Steering Committee (reconstituted with Chinese members substituted for Soviet members) to discuss procedure and (b) for 11:00 a.m. the first plenary business session of the three groups.

47 For remarks by Under Secretary Stettinius, Ambassador Gromyko, and Sir Alexander Cadogan, see Department of State Bulletin, October 1, 1944, pp. 341–342.

48 The ninth and final draft of the proposals, September 27, signed by all three Chairmen of the three Delegations, American, British, and Soviet, on September 28, not printed; the text is identical with that authenticated and signed on October 7 by the three Chairmen of the American, British, and Chinese Delegations, p. 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 506].

48a Annexes 1 and 2, ante, p. 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 482].

49 Department of State Bulletin, October 1, 1944, p. 342.

50 For text of the second communiqué released to the press by the Department of State together with the text of the proposals on October 9, see p. 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506].

Extract From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) Lot 60–D 224, Box 59: Stettinius Diary

[Document 485]

Extract From the Personal Diary of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Thirty-fifth Day, Thursday, September 28, 1944.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Meeting of the Three Chairmen

Gromyko, Cadogan and I had a meeting in my office immediately following the close of the final plenary session to discuss the longer communiqué. I stressed that I felt that it was most important that agreement be reached so as not to prejudice publication on October 9th. Both Gromyko and Cadogan indicated that they had no authority to recede from their positions on the matter. Finally, at Cadogan’s suggestion, it was agreed to leave the matter for direct settlement between Moscow and London. Jebb, who was present, commented that the British suggestion was in line with the Moscow Declaration, to which Dr. Pasvolsky expressed agreement.51 Both agreed to communicate promptly with their governments on the question.

Conversation with Mr. Hull

I called the Secretary at 4:45 and reported that we had finished with the Soviets. I reported that we expected to go through with the plan of publication on October 9th, with transmission to other governments a little ahead of time so that the courteous thing would be done. I said we were thinking about 48 hours. I arranged to call for him at his apartment at 2:45 tomorrow afternoon to take him to the opening of the Chinese phase. I sent Mr. Hull an authenticated copy of the Dumbarton Oaks memorandum signed by the respective chairmen of the three delegations, for the Department’s archives.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

51 For Stettinius’ further comment on this subject in his Diary of October 5, see footnote 78, p. 870 [Pg. 870 is part of Doc. 496].

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State 500.CC/9–2844

[Document 486]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State 52

[Washington,] September 28, 1944.

Mr. Sobolev53 lunched with me and we had a long talk about Dumbarton Oaks. He expressed great satisfaction with the course of the conversations and with the results achieved. He reiterated a remark which he made to me several days ago to the effect that our document is far better than they had hoped would be possible. He said that they had found it easier to work with us than with the British because British thinking seemed to be much more rigid in terms of the League experience than was their thinking or ours. He thought, however, that on the whole the British behaved very well with the result that what we are now projecting is a very great improvement over the League.

He said that he and the other members of the Soviet Delegation were very much impressed by the thoroughness of our preparation and asked me if I would tell him something of the way we went about the matter. I gave him a rather detailed description of our work over the past two years.54 He was intensely interested and remarked that if anybody in Moscow had attempted to start work of this kind in 1942 he would have been the laughing stock of the place. He asked me if there would be any objection to his reporting in Moscow rather fully on what I had told him about our method of work. I said that I should be delighted to have him do so.

We came then to what appeared to be the three questions that are still open, namely: voting in the Council; initial membership, including the questions of the Soviet Republics; and trusteeship. He said that the voting problem is a real issue which will have to be settled at the highest political level, possibly by the chiefs of state. The question of initial membership he thought was one of a diplomatic character. The trusteeship problem should not prove to be too difficult.

In connection with voting, I asked him what he himself thought of the tentative proposal which emerged out of our four-hour meeting devoted to that subject. He would not commit himself as to his own ideas, merely saying that his colleagues here did not like it too well. I did not feel that I should press him, but he left me with the impression that the proposal was very sketchily submitted to Moscow, if at all.

As regards initial membership, he also shied away from any discussion of the Soviet Republics, in rather marked contrast to the emphasis which he put on the importance of the voting problem.

As regards trusteeship, he said that it was a pity that we did not discuss the question in the course of our conversations. He said that the Soviet Government is interested in the problem, even though the Soviet Government has very little to contribute to a discussion since the Soviet Union has no colonies and no experience in colonial administration. He said that the document on dependent areas which the Secretary placed before the Moscow Conference55 was very favorably received by the Soviet Government but, as he understood, had not been liked by the British. In connection with that, he asked me what was the origin of the idea of regional commissions and expressed considerable surprise when I told him that the British themselves had suggested the idea.56

He went on to say that there isn’t any doubt that the international organization will be an incomplete structure unless some machinery is provided for trusteeship purposes and inquired as to what our plans were for handling the matter; that is to say, whether it is our thought that the whole subject should be held in abeyance until the big conference or whether some preliminary steps might be taken before the conference. I replied that we have not as yet given thought to that. The question could obviously be left open until the conference convenes, or alternatively, we could have an exchange of papers and even some exchanges of views before the conference. He said that, in his opinion, his government would prefer to have an exchange of views before the big conference and would be particularly glad to receive our documents because, he repeated, they themselves have done very little in this field and are waiting for a further lead from us.

He asked me what our plans were for the conference as regards timing. I replied that, because of the projected publication of our document, a relatively short time could elapse between the issuing of invitations to the conference and the conference itself. He said that he wondered whether or not this was too optimistic, because, in his opinion, we ought to go to a conference with the charter of the organization fully drafted and rather thoroughly discussed among ourselves. I told him that in our thinking the drafting of the charter should not present great difficulties; that obviously we and they and the British would in the meantime be working on a possible formulation; and that, if necessary, it would be possible to have a preliminary drafting group meet for a couple of weeks before the conference in the same way that we are projecting a similar meeting for the drafting of the Court statute.

Mr. Sobolev then gave me his personal ideas on the location of the headquarters of the new organization. He felt that the seat should be in Europe and that it should not be in any of the large countries. This narrows the choice down to very few places. Prague might be a good possibility. I said that I personally agreed with his first two propositions, but that my preference would be Geneva. I then repeated a suggestion which I tried out on him about a month ago about internationalizing a portion of Geneva around the present League and ILO buildings. He said that they are thinking about that suggestion.

Leo Pasvolsky

52 Copy obtained from the Library of Congress, Manuscripts Division, papers of Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State.

53 A. A. Sobolev, Minister Counsellor of the Soviet Embassy in the United Kingdom; Deputy Chairman of the Soviet Delegation to the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations.

54 See bracketed note, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 1050–1053.

55 Conference document No. 44, ibid., p. 747.

56  The first regional commission to be set up as an intergovernmental body on social and economic matters for the member governments and their non-self-governing territories was the Anglo-American Caribbean Commission whose creation was announced by a joint communiqué issued on March 9, 1942, following an exchange of notes between the British and the United States Governments (Department of State Bulletin, March 14, 1942, p. 229). This Commission, according to Secretary Hull (Memoirs, vol. ii, p. 1236), was conceived by President Roosevelt’s representative, Charles W. Taussig.

The British proposal on the establishment of regional commissions (not printed) was submitted to Secretary Hull on February 4, 1943 (see bracketed note, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 1050, 1051). A proposed declaration, “The Atlantic Charter and National Independence” (not printed), submitted to President Roosevelt on November 17, 1942, was the basis of the draft “Declaration by the United Nations on National Independence”, submitted to President Roosevelt on March 17, 1943. The latter draft included the suggestion that regional commissions be set up to accomplish the five ends outlined therein; for text of this draft, see ibid., p. 747.

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/9–2844

[Document 487]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

No. 598 Washington, September 28, 1944.

Sir: I have the honour to inform you, with reference to my note number 473 of August 1st., under instructions from His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, that Sir Alexander Cadogan, G.C.M.G., K.C.B., Permanent Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, is expected to leave Washington shortly for the United Kingdom, accompanied by Sir William Malkin, G.C.M.G., C.B., K.G., Mr. Peter Loxley, Colonel Capel Dunn, Mr. A. H. Poynton, and Mr. Paul Falla.

After their departure the Delegation to continue talks with the United States and Chinese Delegations57 will consist of the following, with myself in charge:58 Admiral Sir Percy Noble,59

Lieutenant General G. N. Macready,

Air Marshal Sir William Welch,60

Sir George Sansom61

Mr. Gladwyn Jebb

Professor C. K. Webster

Mr. Paul Gore-Booth

Mr. A. It. K. Mackenzie (Press Officer)

57 For lists of American and Chinese representatives during the Anglo-American-Chinese phase of discussions, see announcement to the press by the Acting Secretary of State on August 1, and letter of August 21 from the Chinese Ambassador, pp. 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409] and 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], respectively.

58 The British Ambassador informed the Secretary of State on September 28 and 30 of the two following additions to the list of United Kingdom Delegation: Maj. Gen. Grove-White and Berkeley Gage, a member of the British Foreign Office.

59 He was succeeded shortly by Commodore A. W. Clarke.

60 He was succeeded shortly by Air Vice-Marshal H. P. Willock.

61 Minister, Adviser on Far Eastern Affairs, British Embassy in the United States.

President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill) [Document 488]

President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill)62

[Washington,] 28 September, 1944—1:25 p.m.

624. Your 785.63 I have read with great interest your telegram from Field Marshal Smuts, and I think we are all in agreement with him as to the necessity of having the U.S.S.R. as a fully accepted and equal member of any association of the great powers formed for the purpose of preventing international war.

It should be possible to accomplish this by adjusting our differences through compromise by all the parties concerned and this ought to tide things over for a few years until the child learns how to toddle.

Roosevelt

62 Copy of telegram obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.

63 Dated September 25, p. 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481].

B. Anglo-American-Chinese phase: September 29–October 7, 1944B. Anglo-American-Chinese phase: September 29–October 7, 1944

[489] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 29, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./34

[490] Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 2 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 4, p.m., October 2, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, October 2, 1944, 4 p.m.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 58: D.O./Canv.B/JSC Mins.

[491] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] October 2, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./35

[492] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, October 2, 1944—6 p.m.

500.CC/10–244: Telegram

[493] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] October 3, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./36

[494] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] October 4, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./37

[495] Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 3 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 11:15 a.m., October 4, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, October 4, 1944, 11:15 a.m.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 58: D.O./Conv.B/JSC Mins.

[496] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] October 5, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./38

[497] Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 4 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 3 p.m., October 5, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, October 5, 1944, 3 p.m.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 58: D.O./Conv.B/JSC Mins.

[498] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, October 6, 1944—5 p.m.

500.CC/10–644: Telegram

[499] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] October 6, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./39

[500] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, October 6, 1944—6 p.m.

500.CC/10–644: Telegram

[501] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, October 6, 1944—7 p.m.

500.CC/10–344: Telegram

[502] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] October 7, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./40

[503] Informal Record of the Fourth Meeting of the Joint Formulation Group

October 7, 1944, 10:35 a.m.–11:10 a.m.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 58: D.O./Conv.B/JFG Record 4

[504] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, October 7, 1944—6 p.m. [Received 7:15 p.m.]

500.CC/10–744: Telegram

[505] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 7, 1944—8 p.m. [Received October 7—4:07 p.m.]

500.CC/10–744: Telegram

[506] Press Release Issued by the Department of State, October 9, 1944

October 9, 1944

500.CC/10–944

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./34

[Document 489]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State 64

[Washington,] September 29, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Thirty-sixth Day

Ceremonial Opening Session of the Conversations With the Chinese

At 3:00 this afternoon the ceremonial opening session of the Chinese phase of the conversations was held in the large assembly room in the presence of representatives of the press. Secretary Hull, Dr. Wellington Koo, and Sir Alexander Cadogan delivered brief addresses.65 Copies of these addresses were made available to the press and the proceedings were photographed by the newsreel photographers and by the regular press photographers. Additional photographs of the Chinese, British and American groups were taken on the terrace outside the building after which the three groups returned to the assembly hall and were photographed in a simulated working session.

As stated in yesterday’s progress report no further meetings are scheduled until Monday.66 This was done at the request of Dr. Koo who desired to devote the intervening time to a study of the agreed text of the proposals, copies of which were handed to him today.

Copies of Proposed October 9 Statement Given to Dr. Koo

Dr. Koo was also given today the first three paragraphs of the proposed communiqué67 which is to accompany the publication of the agreed proposals. It was explained to Dr. Koo that final agreement on the language of the fourth paragraph of this communiqué has not yet been reached between ourselves and the British and Soviet Governments. We felt it desirable, nevertheless, in order to save time, to hand to Dr. Koo those passages of the proposed communiqué as to which final agreement has already been reached, in the event that he should wish to communicate those passages to Chungking.

64 An identical memorandum was submitted to President Roosevelt on the same date. As during the previous phase, Secretary Hull and President Roosevelt were kept informed of the progress of the Conversations by memoranda from the Under Secretary. The Secretary, however, compelled by illness to leave his desk three days after opening the Chinese phase, was no longer available for as full or frequent discussions as theretofore. (Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, p. 332.)

65 Department of State Bulletin, October 1, 1944, pp. 342–344.

66 This last phase of the Conversations lasted but nine days. Rapid progress was possible since the Chinese views had already been taken carefully into account during the Soviet phase and, after the earlier phase had exceeded expected limits, several informal American talks had been held with the Chinese representatives (who had arrived on August 25) on the basis of the American Tentative Proposals and the Chinese “Essential Points”. The American Group as a whole had studied the Chinese views over the past four weeks and considered plans for the coming Conversations with the Chinese. A copy of the Chinese paper which had arrived on August 23 was given to President Roosevelt on August 31. Only a weekend of study of the final text of proposals resulting from the earlier phase was therefore necessary after September 29 before discussion of the Chinese points could begin. (Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, pp. 328–329.) For text of tentative Chinese proposals, see p. 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422].

67 Annex 2, p. 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 482].

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 2 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 4, p.m., October 2, at Dumbarton Oaks Lot 60–D 224, Box 58: D.O./Canv.B/JSC Mins.

[Document 490]

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 2 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 4, p.m., October 2, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, October 2, 1944, 4 p.m.

Present: Dr. Koo, Dr. Hoo, and Dr. Liu of the Chinese group;

Mr. Jebb and Professor Webster of the British group;

Mr. Stettinius, Mr. Dunn, Mr. Grew, and Mr. Pasvolsky of the American group.

Mr. Hiss also present, as secretary.

(This meeting of the Committee was called in order that Dr. Koo might be given an explanation of the status of the matter of voting in the Council and of other open items.)

In calling the meeting to order, Mr. Stettinius said that he would be glad to go into details on the subject of the status of the question of voting in the Council. He suggested that he might state the matter briefly and then give Dr. Koo an opportunity to ask any questions as to details. He said that the matter had been given a great deal of consideration and study. The reason that agreement had not been reached was that the Soviet group had felt that one of the great powers should at all times be entitled to vote even if involved in a dispute. The British and American groups took a contrary view. Various approaches to the question had been tried but had not been successful.

Mr. Stettinius went on to say that consideration of this matter had, of course, not been the sole cause of the delay in conclusion of the Soviet phase of the conversations. A great deal of the delay was due to routine difficulties of communication between Washington and Moscow and to the delays incident to translation from English into Russian and vice versa. As a result of consideration given to the subject of voting in the Council it had been decided that this subject would be left open for further consideration.

Mr. Stettinius said that a further aspect of the voting question was whether decisions of the Council should be on the basis of a simple majority or of a two-thirds majority. He said that because of inability to agree on the major issue of the right of a party to a dispute to vote, no definitive consideration had actually been undertaken of the question of the majority which should be required for action by the Council. He said that the American group would approach the question of the appropriate majority with an entirely fresh mind.

Mr. Stettinius then asked Mr. Jebb if the latter wished to supplement the statement which had been made. Mr. Jebb said that he might add that in regard to the question of a two-thirds as opposed to a simple majority, the British prefer the two-thirds formula as more likely to be favored by the smaller nations, whereas the Russians had favored a simple majority and he had understood that the American position was somewhat undecided. He added that as to the question of unanimity, his group had felt that it might be desirable to provide that unanimity of the great powers would be necessary except in cases where one of the great powers was involved in a dispute.

Mr. Pasvolsky said that the discussion as to the unanimity rule had indicated the general feeling that unanimity of the great powers would be required on all substantive questions, but would not be required on procedural questions. He added that there had been an attempt to define the functions of the Council for which unanimity would be required and that the general consensus had been that it would be best to state the principle of unanimity in general language.

At this point, Dr. Hoo inquired whether unanimity would be destroyed if one of the permanent members of the Council were to abstain from voting. Mr. Pasvolsky replied that consideration had been given to providing for voluntary abstention which would not affect the decisions of the Council. In other words, the abstaining member would be bound by the decision taken by the Council. Mr. Pasvolsky said that the principle of unanimity made it impossible to provide that either the majority or the two-thirds formula, whichever might be finally adopted, would apply to “those present and voting.” However, it seemed possible to provide that voluntary abstention by one of the permanent members might be a recognized exception to the principle of unanimity.

Dr. Hoo asked whether the abstaining member would be bound to provide military forces if the Council decided to authorize the use of military forces. Mr. Jebb and Mr. Pasvolsky replied in the affirmative. Mr. Pasvolsky added that the reference in the agreed proposals to agreements which are to be negotiated on the subject of the provision of military forces might contain reservations in case of voluntary abstention. However, the general proposition would be that an abstaining member would be bound by the decision of the Council. Dr. Hoo said that in that event he thought there would be no point to abstention. Mr. Pasvolsky said he thought there might well be a case in which a power would have no objection to proposed action being taken but would not wish to go on record as favoring such action. Mr. Jebb said that the British group is inclined to take the same view that Dr. Hoo had expressed, namely, that there would be no point in providing for voluntary abstention. Mr. Pasvolsky observed that it might be found desirable to have a provision for voluntary abstention so that it might be applicable to the question of a permanent member being a party to a dispute.

Mr. Webster stated that the matter of voluntary abstention affects the whole question of a majority, especially if a two-thirds majority is decided upon. Mr. Pasvolsky said that he felt that for such purposes the abstaining member would have to be counted as if it had voted in the affirmative.

Dr. Koo asked whether the present status of the matter of voting in the Council could properly be summarized by the statement that no aspect of the matter had been agreed to and that the entire matter remains open. Mr. Stettinius answered in the affirmative.

Dr. Koo then inquired whether when the Russian representatives spoke of the necessity of a party to a dispute being able to vote they referred only to the permanent members on the Council. Mr. Jebb and Mr. Stettinius replied in the affirmative. Mr. Jebb added that that aspect of the matter constituted one of the British objections to the Soviet point of view. He said that it meant that there would be one rule for the great powers and another for the small powers. Mr. Pasvolsky observed that the arrangement could be made to apply both to small and large powers but that it really made little difference whether a non-permanent member engaged in a dispute would be permitted to vote or not since such a member would not have the power of veto. Dr. Hoo observed that if the non-permanent member’s vote is required to make up a majority its inability to vote might make a difference. The others present expressed their agreement with Dr. Hoo’s observation.

Dr. Hoo then said that he was not quite clear as to whether the present document, which authorizes member states not represented on the Council to participate in discussions affecting their interests, authorizes such members to vote in the Council in such cases. The others present replied that it had not been intended that such members would be entitled to vote in such cases. Mr. Jebb said that their votes would be precluded by the rule that parties to a dispute should not vote. Dr. Hoo remarked that there might be discussions in the Council affecting the interests of such members which did not involve an actual dispute. The others present replied that even in such cases it had not been intended that members specially attending sessions of the Council would be entitled to vote. Dr. Hoo observed that this was quite different from the provisions of the Covenant of the League. Mr. Jebb thought that in practice the League procedure was not very different.

Mr. Dunn said that he thought it might be helpful if it were made clear that the basis of the Soviet position is their insistence on the importance of the principle of the unanimity of the permanent members of the Council. Mr. Jebb agreed that this was the basis of the Soviet position. He said that the Soviets thought is that without the unanimity of the great powers the Organization would collapse.

Dr. Koo inquired as to the position of the American group on this matter. Mr. Pasvolsky replied that the American group had initially thought that it might be possible to enumerate those functions of the Council as to which unanimity would be required. They had found upon further consideration that that was not feasible. Apart from the question of voting in disputes the American group had been tending to take the position that a mere majority vote would be sufficient on procedural matters and that unanimity of the great powers would be called for on substantive matters.

Dr. Koo then asked what the British position is on the subject of voting in the Council. Mr. Jebb replied that the British group supports the rule of unanimity, without prejudice to the British position, which he had described earlier, as to voting by states involved in disputes. Mr. Pasvolsky said that no differences at all had arisen in the earlier phase of the conversations as to the principle of unanimity except in the case of disputes involving one of the permanent members. Mr. Jebb agreed that all the groups had seen eye to eye on the question of voting in the Council in all respects except that of voting by parties involved in a dispute and except possibly as to the question of a majority as opposed to a two-thirds vote.

Dr. Koo said that earlier in the meeting there had been mention of various formulae which had been considered. Mr. Stettinius replied that the joint formulation group had endeavored to find some common answer to the question. Mr. Dunn pointed out that these efforts of the joint formulation group have never been considered by the chairmen of the respective groups and Mr. Jebb remarked that the formulae had not received encouragement from any quarter.

Mr. Pasvolsky said that the joint formulation group had explored the possibility of separating those functions as to which unanimity would be required from those in which parties to a dispute should not vote. He said that an attempt had been made to draw a distinction between those functions stated in section A of Chapter VIII and those functions stated in section B of the same Chapter. He said that under such a distinction all questions of a juridical or of a semi-juridical character, in other words, all phases of pacific settlement, would call for exclusion from voting by parties to a dispute. On the other hand, the use of force, which is not a juridical or quasi-juridical matter, but a political question, would call for application of the rule of unanimity of the great powers. He said that such a distinction was a possible line of approach. Dr. Koo inquired whether he understood clearly that such a distinction would exclude the votes of parties to a dispute up to the stage at which enforcement action would be taken. The others present answered in the affirmative. Mr. Pasvolsky said that under such a view the Council could take all steps except those relating to enforcement, without the party to the dispute being able to vote but that after an actual recommendation had been made by the Council and had not been carried out by the parties to the dispute, the matter would then have reached the stage of political and military considerations. He emphasized the fact that this was not a considered formula but the result of exploratory discussions.

Mr. Jebb pointed out that this distinction had not found favor in any high quarter.

Dr. Koo asked whether any other formulae had been considered. Mr. Dunn and Mr. Jebb said that consideration had been given to other formulae but that they had not had much merit. Mr. Pasvolsky mentioned a possible formula whereby the Council might be authorized to request a party to a dispute not to vote. He said that after consideration of this possibility the joint formulation group had rejected it and had fallen back on the idea of an automatic rule for excluding a party from voting.

Mr. Jebb and Mr. Webster mentioned another formula which had been considered, namely, requirement of the unanimity of the entire Council except for a member which was a party to a dispute. They said that this formula, also, had not seemed to have much merit.

Dr. Koo then asked whether the formula which Dr. Pasvolsky had described at some length was the main compromise formula. Mr. Jebb said that he did not feel it could be called even a main compromise formula. Mr. Stettinius observed that the formula under reference had never been officially presented to him or to the other two chairmen. He said that he had mentioned this formula to the President and to the Secretary when he had reported that the groups were searching for some formula, but he doubted whether the President or the Secretary would even remember the terms of this formula at the present time.

Dr. Koo said that his group regards the question of voting in the Council as of very great importance. He said that in a certain sense it considers it to be the root of the whole question of an organization.

Dr. Koo then inquired as to the other points which remain open. Mr. Stettinius mentioned the subjects of territorial trusteeship, the liquidation of the League of Nations, and the statute of the court. Mr. Pasvolsky added that the question of initial membership also remains open. He said that the subject of trusteeship, which involves the matter of succession to the mandate system, had not been discussed at Dumbarton Oaks. He said that perhaps in the near future it might be possible to arrange for an exchange of papers on this important subject. He went on to say that in addition to the topics mentioned there will be questions of amplification and clarification of the present document when the stage of the actual drafting of the Charter of the Organization is reached. He pointed out that in the drafting of the present document there had been a conscious attempt to reduce all questions to their barest essentials. He mentioned the fact that the present document contains no preamble, although one will be needed for the Charter itself. He suggested that perhaps there might be incorporated in the preamble to the Charter some of the points which Dr. Koo had brought up at the plenary session this morning. He emphasized the fact that the present document had been deliberately limited to setting forth the essential machinery and procedure of an organization.

Mr. Jebb said that Sir Alexander Cadogan understood the phrase “several other questions are still under consideration”, as used in the note at the end of the present document, includes only the statute of the court and the question of initial membership. He said that the other things which had been referred to by Mr. Stettinius and Mr. Pasvolsky have not so far been considered, and, therefore, are not now under consideration. Mr. Pasvolsky said that the language of the note could be interpreted either narrowly, as Mr. Jebb had indicated, or more broadly.

Dr. Koo inquired as to whether the question of initial membership means the countries which will be invited to the general conference. Mr. Jebb answered in the affirmative and added that there had not been entire agreement on this question. Mr. Pasvolsky said that there had been complete agreement that the initial members should include all of the United Nations but that question had arisen with respect to those nations which are usually known as the “Associated Nations” and some question had also arisen as to the possibility of adding to this latter group. He felt that the question of initial membership would have to be settled at the diplomatic level. Mr. Stettinius mentioned Turkey as one particular country which had been considered. He said that the British and American position favors the inclusion of the United Nations and the Associated Nations whereas the Soviet position had favored restricting the initial members to the United Nations. Mr. Dunn felt that this matter could more advantageously be settled in the future in the light of the circumstances that will exist at the time when the general conference is called. The others present seemed to agree with this view.

Dr. Koo said that this group had been glad to see the provision in the document which specifies that France is to be brought in as a permanent member in due course. He said that this is entirely in harmony with the view of the Chinese group. He inquired as to the meaning of the phrase “in due course”. Mr. Stettinius replied that this means as soon as the French people are able to elect a government which is plainly one of their own choosing. Mr. Dunn said that in the previous phase of the conversations no specific formula on this matter had been developed. Mr. Pasvolsky said that he felt that this point, too, would require diplomatic discussion. Mr. Dunn said that he thought that the phrase “in due course” means as soon as it is possible to realize the objective of adding France as a permanent member.

Professor Webster pointed out that in the prior phase of the conversations there had been some question as to whether the determination of the time when France should be admitted to permanent membership should be by the four permanent powers or by some other procedure. Mr. Pasvolsky said that of course the whole question might be settled before the Council came into existence. Mr. Stettinius said that the informal understanding arrived at during the previous phase of the conversations had been that the four powers will have to agree before any action on this matter is taken, although such agreement might be either before or after the Organization is set up.

Dr. Koo said that he noticed that the very first page of the agreed proposals states that the Organization should be established under the title of “The United Nations”. He asked whether this means that it is proposed that the Organization be called “The United Nations”. The others present answered in the affirmative. Mr. Pasvolsky observed that, of course, throughout the Charter itself the word “Organization” could be used in most cases in order to avoid awkwardness of drafting.

Dr. Hoo then referred to the question of the liquidation of the League of Nations and asked if any consideration had been given to the question as to where the seat of the new Organization would be. Mr. Stettinius replied in the negative. He said that this matter had not been discussed at Dumbarton Oaks. However, he said, there had been some private discussions of this matter and that he thought that the respective chiefs of state might wish to exchange views on this subject so that they could be informed of each other’s opinions on the matter by the time the general conference is held. He thought that the conference itself would have to decide this matter and that the chiefs of state would only be in a position to make suggestions for the consideration of the conference.

Dr. Hoo then said that he assumed that some of the organizations of the League would have to be taken over by the new Organization. This, he felt would be a matter which would have to be discussed. The others present expressed their agreement with this view. Mr. Pasvolsky added that there would also have to be discussed the question of the renegotiation of treaties relating to the League. Mr. Stettinius said that this entire question had not been discussed at Dumbarton Oaks. Mr. Pasvolsky observed that the liquidation of the League raises very difficult legal questions. He said that there are no precedents for such action. Dr. Hoo thought that the Bank of International Settlement presented somewhat similar problems. He added that he felt that various of the social and hygiene sections of the League, the Opium Office, and other bodies should be preserved and would have to be taken over by the new Organization. Mr. Jebb observed that just prior to the departure of the British group the British Foreign Office had set up a committee to study the question of the liquidation of the League and that those studies will now be pursued. He suggested that perhaps the other countries interested might undertake similar studies. Mr. Pasvolsky expressed his agreement with this suggestion and added that it might perhaps be possible to exchange papers on this subject in the future.

Mr. Webster pointed out that there are two separate questions involved. First, there is the question of taking over the assets of the League. Secondly, there is the question of the numerous treaties relating to the League. He thought that the first question might prove to be a comparatively simple one, but he felt that the other one is a more difficult juridical problem. He wondered whether it would prove possible to settle the second question by some general formula. He pointed out that some of the treaties have lapsed and that some involve the enemy powers. He thought that the jurists of the various nations will have to study this question carefully.

At this point Mr. Stettinius returned to the subject of the location of the seat of the Organization. He suggested that when Dr. Koo sees President Roosevelt the matter might be discussed informally. He remarked that he thought that in general President Roosevelt would like to explore the possibility of some mobility in this connection.

Mr. Pasvolsky then inquired whether there were any questions which Dr. Koo would like to bring up. Dr. Koo said that he had been about to ask what the schedule of business would be for tomorrow. Mr. Stettinius said that he had had in mind that Dr. Koo might wish to make a general statement at the plenary session scheduled for tomorrow and that he might wish to bring up specific points which the Chinese group feel have not been adequately covered in the present document. Mr. Jebb suggested that such questions might then be referred to some smaller committee. Mr. Stettinius expressed his agreement with this suggestion and Dr. Koo said that this was also in accord with the views of the Chinese group. He thought that perhaps the suggested small committee might consider these matters tomorrow afternoon. Mr. Stettinius said that he would wish Mr. Dunn, Mr. Grew, and Mr. Pasvolsky to represent him on any such committee. Mr. Jebb said that he, Mr. Webster, and Sir George Sansom would represent the British group, with Mr. Gage as secretary. Dr. Koo said that he thought he might like personally to attend the initial meetings of such a committee and that he would wish to have Dr. Hoo with him. Mr. Stettinius said that if Dr. Koo planned to attend the meeting he would also hope to be present.

Dr. Koo then proceeded to list certain points which he hoped might be discussed further. He said that in the first place he would like a discussion of certain general principles which he thought it would be very useful to insert in the Charter of the Organization for the general guidance of the Assembly and the Council in the settlement of disputes. Secondly, he thought that it would be helpful to define in some manner the three terms “breaches of the peace”, “threats to the peace”, and “acts of aggression”. He thought that it would be desirable to give some indication of the kind of acts or situations which are obviously breaches of the peace or acts of aggression. This, he thought, would make it plain to the world that if any power were to take this or that action it would thereby subject itself to action by the Council. He did not propose that such a list be exhaustive. He noted in this connection that the American paper had set forth instances of this kind. Third, he thought that it might be desirable to add some assurance in regard to the maintenance of the political independence and of the territorial integrity of member states. He said that the Chinese group thinks that such an assurance would be very useful in promoting confidence in the Organization on the part of the smaller states. Fourth, he said that the Chinese group would like to submit its views on the subject of voting in the Council. Fifth, he would like to raise the question of an international air force, present the Chinese views on this subject and obtain the reaction of the other groups. Sixth, he would like to bring” up the question of what is usually referred to as peaceful change. He said that he had noted that this principle seemed to be embodied in the present document.

Mr. Stettinius said that he thought it would be helpful if Dr. Koo could set forth these, and any other questions he may wish to raise, in tomorrow morning’s plenary meeting and that then these matters might be referred to a smaller group or groups for more detailed discussion. Dr. Koo said that he proposed at the morning plenary session merely to state his views in general without much detail. Mr. Stettinius said that in that event he thought it would be appropriate for the American and British groups to make their own comments on the Chinese views in the later, more detailed discussions.

Mr. Stettinius then asked Dr. Koo whether there seemed any likelihood that toward the end of the week questions might be encountered which would result in delay. Dr. Koo said that he is already in communication with Chungking and that this group is desirous of avoiding delay. He said that he would like to complete the conversations at an early date, perhaps by Saturday. In any event, he was hopeful of prompt progress.

With respect to the question of an international air force, Mr. Jebb thought that a special military group might be appointed which could meet tomorrow afternoon at the same time that the joint formulation group would have its meeting.

Mr. Pasvolsky then inquired as to whether the mechanics of publication had been worked out so as to permit publication of the agreed proposals on October 9. Mr. Jebb said that he did not think it would be necessary to publish at the same time the present document and any document that developed out of the current phase of the conversations. However, Mr. Dunn and Mr. Pasvolsky thought that it would be most desirable to have both papers published simultaneously.

Dr. Koo said that if the present phase of the conversations can be concluded by, say, Saturday, he might perhaps communicate the results of the conversations to Chungking by means of the American Army facilities to which Mr. Stettinius had referred at the first meeting of the Joint Steering Committee. Mr. Stettinius inquired whether the Chinese group had yet forwarded to Chungking the text of the agreed proposals. Dr. Liu said that only a summary had been sent to Chungking. Dr. Koo added that it was, however, a rather complete summary. Mr. Stettinius said that he would be glad to make available the Army communication facilities for transmission of the complete text if Dr. Koo so desired.

Mr. Jebb then said that if a supplemental statement is to be published on Monday, October 9, he would have to consult London about the matter.

After some further discussion it was agreed that the smaller committee which is to discuss in detail the points raised by Dr. Koo should meet tomorrow afternoon and that it should be called the joint formulation group. Mr. Stettinius said that he would wish Mr. Hackworth to be brought in as a member of this group whenever his services might be needed. Mr. Dunn said that he hoped that the joint formulation group might have something to report to the Joint Steering Committee by Wednesday morning.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./35

[Document 491]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] October 2, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Thirty-seventh Day

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee at 10:00 a.m.

(a) Procedural Arrangements

We held the first meeting of the Joint Steering Committee (with Chinese members substituted for the Soviet members68 ) and agreed upon matters of procedure. Dr. Koo and Mr. Jebb (representing the Earl of Halifax) insisted that I continue as chairman.

(b) Emphasis on Publishing the Document on October 9

I impressed upon Dr. Koo our desire to publish the agreed proposals on Monday, October 9, as scheduled. Dr. Koo was hopeful that it will be possible to meet this schedule but asked to defer any commitment, adding that by tomorrow evening he might be in a position to comment further.

(c) Tentative Agreement to Publish Present Document

Mr. Jebb and I made clear to Dr. Koo the desirability of publishing the present text without changes, since any changes would necessitate consultation with the Soviet Government and consequent delay. We suggested that any additional points which might develop during the Chinese conversations could be incorporated in a separate document for release at the same time. While Dr. Koo did not wish to commit himself to make no recommendations for change in the present document, he tentatively agreed with our proposal.

The First Plenary Business Session 69

The first plenary session was devoted to clarification of certain points in the document. Dr. Koo’s questions showed the care with which the Chinese group had studied the document. Among points of interest raised by Dr. Koo were the following:

(a) Absence of Detailed Statement of Principles

Dr. Koo commented that the stated principles of the proposed organization are quite general, but expressed some satisfaction with the explanations as to the desirability of dealing with these matters in general terms.

(b) Council’s Authority to Deal with Breaches of the Peace

Dr. Koo noted that the document refers in several passages both to “acts of aggression” and to “breaches of the peace”. He seemed satisfied with the explanations that the latter term is regarded as the more inclusive and that the council would have full authority to deal both with acts of aggression and with other breaches of or threats to the peace.

(c) Chinese Apprehension About Unilateral Use of Force

Dr. Koo asked whether it would be possible under the document for either member or non-member states to use force unilaterally tinder the claim that such action was not inconsistent with the purposes of the Organization. He seemed satisfied with the explanation that, except in cases of self-defense, no unilateral use of force could be undertaken without the approval of the council. In this connection Mr. Victor Hoo, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs, desired explicit assurance that use of force in self-defense would not be regarded as inconsistent with the purposes of the Organization.

(d) Chinese Interest in Reconsideration of Treaties

In reply to an inquiry by Dr. Koo it was made clear that the authority of the Organization to consider situations affecting the peace would include situations arising out of existing treaties.

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee at 4:00 p.m.

Dr. Koo was given full information as to the present status of the question of voting in the council and of other open matters.70

68 The Joint Steering Committee, occupying much the same position as during the previous phase, was composed of Mr. Stettinius, accompanied by Messrs. Dunn, Grew, and Pasvolsky; Dr. Koo, accompanied by Dr. Hoo and Dr. Liu; and Lord Halifax, accompanied by Mr. Jebb and Professor Webster. As before, Mr. Hiss was secretary, acting in an international capacity. This Committee held four meetings between October 2 and October 5. (Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, p. 331.)

69 The discussions in the plenary sessions of the full delegations in this phase were fuller in character than their earlier counterparts; in addition to the formal opening plenary, three plenary sessions were held between October 2 and October 7. (Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, p. 331.)

70 See minutes of meeting No. 2 of the Joint Steering Committee, p. 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 500.CC/10–244: Telegram

[Document 492]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, October 2, 1944—6 p.m.

2340. Personal for the Ambassador. Please deliver promptly to Mr. Molotov the following message from me: 1. We consider it a matter of prime importance in connection with plans which we have made here that the agreed proposals reached at Dumbarton Oaks be published on Monday, October 9. I am sure that Ambassador Gromyko has already made plain to you our interest in this matter, but we consider it of sufficient importance to bring the matter directly to your attention.

2. In this connection you will already have been informed by Ambassador Gromyko that definitive agreement has not yet been reached on the fourth paragraph of the proposed identic statement to be issued at each of the four capitals at the time of the publication of the agreed proposals. At the last meeting of the Soviet phase of the Dumbarton Oaks conversations it was agreed that this matter would have to be adjusted by direct interchange between London and Moscow. I trust that prompt agreement on this point will be reached and that you will be good enough to communicate to me the agreed upon paragraph. It would be most unfortunate if failure to dispose expeditiously of this collateral point were to result in any delay beyond October 9 of the publication of the agreed proposals.

3. I am sending a similar message to Mr. Eden.71

Hull

71 Telegram 8044, October 2, 10 p.m., not printed.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./36

[Document 493]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] October 3, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Thirty-eighth Day

Second Plenary Session of Conversations With the Chinese

Dr. Koo presented for the first time the views of the Chinese group on the present document. He commended the proposals highly and expressed satisfaction that so many points in the Chinese memorandum had been included. He stated, however, that the Chinese group wished to raise several points for consideration. While these points might be implicit in the document, and were in no sense contradictory to it, the Chinese felt that explicit provisions concerning these matters would strengthen the Organization and enlist for it broader support.

The seven points raised by Dr. Koo were as follows:

(a) Law and Justice in the Settlement of Disputes

Dr. Koo suggested that reference be made to a body of law or principles of justice as criteria for the pacific settlement of disputes, on the grounds that such reference would expedite settlement, reinforce confidence, and offer assurance that the Organization would not degenerate into an instrument of power politics.

(b) Respect for Independence and Territorial Integrity

Dr. Koo stated the Chinese view that a provision concerning respect for the political independence and territorial integrity of member states would foster the sense of security, particularly among the smaller states, and would give moral content to the stated purposes of the Organization.

(c) Definition of Aggression

The Chinese group would prefer to see “aggression” defined, preferably by means of an illustrative, but not comprehensive, list of acts. More explicit definition would, they felt, facilitate swift action by the Council, inspire confidence, restrain potential aggressors, and enable world opinion to recognize an aggressor immediately.

(d) An International Air Force

The Chinese favor an international air force under the direct control of the Council as a means of enabling the Council to act quickly and as a symbol of the Council’s authority. Dr. Koo felt that the principle of such a force, as suggested in the present document, might provide a basis upon which details could be worked out by military experts.

(e) Codification of International Law

The codification of international law is regarded by the Chinese as of great importance to the promotion of security under law. They favor the development of new rules of law through study, and through action by the Assembly.

(f) Compulsory Jurisdiction of the International Court

The Chinese favor extending the compulsory jurisdiction of the international court over justiciable disputes, and prefer to have this provided in the charter of the Organization rather than by amendment of the statute of the present Court.

(g) Cultural Cooperation

The Chinese recognize that cultural cooperation is already within the scope of the Organization under the present document, but wish to give greater emphasis to it.

Meeting of the Special Military Group

Military representatives of the three Governments72 discussed at length this afternoon the matter of an international air force. The Chinese were personally satisfied that the present provision would adequately take care of what they have in mind and are wiring Chungking to this effect.

Meeting of the Joint Formulation Group 73

The joint formulation group met this afternoon to review the present document and to consider the additional points raised by Dr. Koo.

72 For China, Generals Shang and Mow, Admiral Liu, and Mr. Pu Hsueh-feng with Dr. Tan and Dr. Chen as counselors and secretaries; for the United Kingdom, Air Vice-Marshal Willock, Commodore Clarke, and General Grove-White; and for the United States, Generals Strong and Fairchild and Admiral Train, with Messrs. Donald C. Blaisdell and Clyde Eagleton, Col. Paul W. Caraway, and Capt. John M. Creighton as advisers and secretaries. (Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, p. 332.)

73 The Joint Formulation Group in this phase was larger and more formal in its conduct of discussion than in the preceding period; it met four times between October 3 and October 7. See Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, pp. 331–332.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./37

[Document 494]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] October 4, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Thirty-ninth Day

Meeting of the Joint Formulation Group

The joint formulation group, with Dr. Koo present, considered yesterday afternoon the points raised by Dr. Koo at the plenary session yesterday morning, with the exception of the Chinese proposal for an international air force, which was considered by the special military group. The discussion resulted in the following disposition of these items:

(a) Justice and Law in the Settlement of Disputes

The Chinese group’s desire for reference to justice and international law in the settlement of disputes led to the drafting of a supplementary statement74 to the effect that the charter should provide specifically for settlement “with due regard for principles of justice and international law”.

(b) Political Independence and Territorial Integrity

The Chinese felt that the charter should make clear that member states should respect political independence and territorial integrity. We and the British explained that these principles are clearly inherent in the sovereign equality of states, the first principle of the present document, and the Chinese accepted this interpretation.

(c) Definition of Aggression

The Chinese restated their wish to define aggression. We and the British pointed out the great difficulties of reaching satisfactory definitions, either of aggression or of breaches of and threats to the peace. Dr. Koo then withdrew this point, with a suggestion that all three groups give it further thought.

(d) Codification of International Lam

At the request of the Chinese a supplementary statement was prepared stating that the Assembly should be responsible for studies and recommendations concerning the development and revision of international law.

(e) Compulsory Jurisdiction of the Court

We and the British pointed out that any statement concerning the jurisdiction of the court should await the court’s establishment and that provision for compulsory jurisdiction over justiciable disputes would more appropriately belong in the statute than in the charter of the new Organization. This was acceptable to the Chinese.

(f) Cultural Cooperation

Agreement was reached upon a supplementary statement to the effect that the economic and social council should provide for the promotion of educational and other forms of cultural cooperation.

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee, 11:15 a.m.

We had a full and frank discussion of the preferences of the Chinese to publish, simultaneously with the principal document, a supplementary statement containing the additional items agreed upon in this phase of the conversations. Lord Halifax and I stressed the importance of ensuring that the agreed proposals will be regarded as the unanimous view of the four participating groups. Dr. Koo and his associate, Dr. Victor Hoo, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs, were impressed with the force of the arguments presented, and agreed to withdraw their proposal.

It was understood that the three points to which the Chinese attach most importance (specific reference to principles of justice and international law, development and revision of international law, and promotion of cultural cooperation) are agreed upon by the three groups, and will be included among the points remaining under consideration. At an appropriate time they will be discussed with the Soviet Government in the hope that these points can be incorporated in the charter at the United Nations conference.

Accordingly, unless Dr. Koo receives contrary instructions from Chungking, the agreed proposals will be published in identical form in the four capitals.

74 See draft statement of October 3 by the Formulation Group, p. 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496].

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 3 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 11:15 a.m., October 4, at Dumbarton Oaks Lot 60–D 224, Box 58: D.O./Conv.B/JSC Mins.

[Document 495]

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 3 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 11:15 a.m., October 4, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, October 4, 1944, 11:15 a.m.

[Extracts]

Present: Lord Halifax, Mr. Jebb, and Professor Webster of the British group;

Dr. Koo, Dr. Hoo, and Dr. Liu of the Chinese group;

Mr. Stettinius, Mr. Dunn, Mr. Grew, and Mr. Pasvolsky of the American group.

Mr. Hiss also present, as secretary.

In opening the meeting, Mr. Stettinius said that the meeting had been called for the purpose of receiving a report from the joint formulation group which, he understood, had made most encouraging progress in its session yesterday afternoon. Mr. Stettinius then asked Dr. Koo whether he would be good enough to present to the Committee the results of the efforts of the joint formulation group.

Dr. Koo said that the joint formulation group had gone over the seven points which he had described briefly at the plenary session held on Tuesday (October 3) at 10:30 a.m. He said that the conclusion had been reached in the joint formulation group that four of these seven points might for the present be put to one side so that each group, and subsequently the respective governments, might give further consideration to them in the anticipation that they might be brought up at the general conference of the United Nations. He emphasized that no conclusions had been reached with respect to these four points.

As to the other three points, Dr. Koo said that the joint formulation group had arrived at definite conclusions and had formulated proposals relating to each point.

(At this point there were distributed to the members of the Committee copies of a paper entitled “Formulation Group, October 3 1944”.75 )

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

At this point Mr. Stettinius said that he wished to refer to a rather delicate subject which had come up in the prior phase of the conversations. He reminded Dr. Koo that yesterday the President had inquired about the number of the Chinese provinces and had gone on to say that the Soviet group had made a proposal which the President characterized as “absurd”. Mr. Stettinius said that he wished to make a full statement of what had occurred during the prior phase of the conversations on this subject and that he would ask that this be treated in the strictest confidence as it might cause great difficulties if it were to appear in the press. He said that during the preceding phase of the conversations the Russian Ambassador, in the course of a discussion, had said that he was instructed to express the desire of the Soviet Government that each of the sixteen Soviet republics have a seat in the Assembly and be among the initial members of the Organization.76 Mr. Stettinius said that the British and American representatives had stated reasons why such a course would be unwise and had said that the matter would have to be discussed by the respective Governments. He said that he felt that this subject is going to be a very delicate question. He said that in all probability it will never be possible to agree to the Soviet proposal. At some later time the Generalissimo, the Prime Minister and the President may have to take this matter up with Marshal Stalin. It will have to be pointed out that the whole civilized world would be shocked by such a proposal. He said that the Soviet republics are, of course, not autonomous but are comparable to the states of the United States or to provinces within any given country. He felt that if this subject were not handled properly and if it were to appear in the press as a matter of gossip, it would lead to attacks upon the Soviet Union and it might jeopardize the success of the movement for an international organization. He said that he hoped the matter could be kept strictly within the limits of the members of the Committee and General Shang, who had been present when the President referred to this subject. Mr. Stettinius concluded by saying that his request indicated how seriously the danger of publicity is regarded by the American Government.

Lord Halifax said that he agreed entirely with Mr. Stettinius’ statement of the matter and that he agreed that it is of vast importance that the matter remain locked in the minds of those who are familiar with it.

Dr. Koo said that he appreciated very much the confidence which Mr. Stettinius had placed in him and his associates and that he also appreciated fully the delicacy of the question. He said that it was his understanding that this same question had presented a problem when Soviet participation in the War Crimes Commission had been under consideration.77 He said that he was glad that in this latter connection the issue had not been aired in the press and that he was fully prepared to keep in strictest confidence the whole subject mentioned by Mr. Stettinius.

[Annex]

Formulation Group

October 3, 1944.

In addition to the foregoing proposals recommended to their respective governments by all four delegations, the following proposals were formulated during the second phase of the Washington Conversations by the delegations of the United States, the United Kingdom, and China for submission to their respective governments. They have been communicated to the Government of the Soviet Union.

The Charter should provide specifically that adjustment or settlement of international disputes should be achieved with due regard for principles of justice and international law.

The Assembly should be responsible for initiating studies and making recommendations with respect to the development and revision of the rules and principles of international law.

The Economic and Social Council should specifically provide for the promotion of educational and other forms of cultural cooperation.

75 Printed as annex to this document.

76 See minutes of meeting No. 6 of the Joint Steering Committee, August 28, p. 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], and footnote 24, p. 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429].

77 For correspondence concerning the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes, see pp. 1265 [Pg. 1265 includes portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817] ff.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./38

[Document 496]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] October 5, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Fortieth Day

Status of Arrangements for Publication on Monday, October 9

(a) Conversation with Ambassador Gromyko

I telephoned to Ambassador Gromyko this morning and he repeated to me his assurance that his Government is fully agreeable to the plan for simultaneous publication in the four capitals of the agreed proposals on Monday, October 9, at noon, Washington time, provided that agreement is reached in the meantime as to the fourth paragraph of the accompanying communiqué. In this connection I informed him that the Chinese group had agreed to the publication of the agreed proposals without modification and without a supplementary statement of additional proposals.

(b) Instructions Telephoned to Ambassador Winant

Ambassador Winant was informed by telephone that it is of the utmost importance that the British agree promptly to the proposed publication on October 9 and that, to this end, we are most desirous that they and the Soviet Government reach agreement as to the proposed communiqué. Ambassador Winant was requested promptly to inform the Foreign Office that because of our desire to avoid delay we would be prepared to agree to either the text of the fourth paragraph preferred by the Russians or the text preferred by the British.78 He was also asked to suggest to the Foreign Office that, in order to ensure expedition, consideration should be given to omission of the disputed paragraph altogether, in view of the fact that this paragraph merely reaffirms that portion of the Moscow Declaration which relates to solidarity in the enforcement of the surrender terms.79

(c) Statement of the British Group

The British group informed me that they had today talked to Sir Alexander Cadogan by telephone. He had said that the entire question of publication would have to be passed upon by the Cabinet tonight but had felt that it was pretty well settled that the decision would be in the affirmative, provided the British proposal as to the fourth paragraph was adopted. I informed the British and Chinese groups of our position in the matter as communicated to Ambassador Winant.

(d) Chinese Position

The Chinese were most cooperative, and assured me that they are prepared to publish the proposals on Monday, noon.80 They also gave every indication that they would go along with any decision reached in respect to the disputed fourth paragraph of the communiqué.

(e) Circular Telegram to our South American Missions

We are tonight cabling our South American Missions81 to be prepared, at the moment of release to the press, to present copies of the agreed proposals informally and as a matter of courtesy to the Foreign Ministers or Presidents to which they are accredited.

Meeting of the Joint Steering Committee at 3:00 p.m.

At Dr. Koo’s request we held an interesting meeting of the Joint Steering Committee. Dr. Koo gave us a full expression of his views as to matters relating to voting in the Council. In this connection he and his associate, Mr. Victor Hoo, Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs, made a number of interesting and helpful suggestions. Dr. Koo stated that on the fundamental question of the right of a permanent member to vote in matters relating to a dispute in which it is involved, the Chinese position coincides with ours and that of the British. Lord Halifax again attended the meeting and took an active part in the discussion.

78 The Soviet draft emphasized merely that the governments “which are already directly and jointly engaged” in the war together, were resolved to work together in enforcing surrender terms on the enemy. The British wanted such enforcement to he imposed not only by such governments but “with all the other governments jointly engaged in the suppression of the forces that have disturbed the peace of the world.” (Diary, October 5, p. 3.)

79  The pertinent language of the Moscow Declaration of Four Nations (paragraph 5) reads as follows:

“That for the purposes of maintaining international peace and security pending the reestablishment of law and order and the inauguration of a system of general security, they will consult with one another and as occasion requires with other members of the United Nations with a view to joint action on behalf of the community of nations.” ( Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 756.)

Ambassador Winant wired from London on October 6, 6 p.m., in telegram 8402, that immediately on getting the Department’s telephone call he pressed the need of clearing the Dumbarton Oaks statement with Sir Alexander Cadogan, that the Cabinet had cleared the statement the night before with a reservation to await Moscow’s reply, and that the British Embassy in Washington would communicate with the Department when an answer had been received from Moscow (500.CC/10–544).

80 Mr. Grew pointed out at the afternoon meeting of the Joint Steering Committee that if publication could be made October 9, noon, Washington time, simultaneous publication in China would, because of the difference in time, be on October 10, the Chinese anniversary known as the Double Tenth. (Minutes of meeting of Joint Steering Committee, October 5.)

81 Circular telegram, October 7, 7 p.m., p. 930 [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514].

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 4 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 3 p.m., October 5, at Dumbarton Oaks Lot 60–D 224, Box 58: D.O./Conv.B/JSC Mins.

[Document 497]

Informal Minutes of Meeting No. 4 of the Joint Steering Committee Held at 3 p.m., October 5, at Dumbarton Oaks

Washington, October 5, 1944, 3 p.m.

[Extract]

Present: Dr. Koo, Dr. Hoo, and Dr. Liu of the Chinese group;

Lord Halifax, Mr. Jebb, and Professor Webster of the British group;

Mr. Stettinius, Mr. Dunn, Mr. Grew, and Mr. Pasvolsky of the American group.

Mr. Hiss also present, as secretary.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

At this point Mr. Stettinius said that the first purpose of today’s meeting had been to permit Dr. Koo to present his views on the question of the voting procedure to be followed in the Council and to permit a general discussion of this subject.

In response Dr. Koo said that on the question of voting in the Council his group had found the clarifications and explanations given at the second meeting of the Joint Steering Committee (October 2, 4:00 p.m.) most helpful in understanding the status of this subject as a result of the preceding phase of the conversations. He said that the view of the Chinese group is that there are several questions of principle which deserve consideration. For example, there is the question of whether there should be some general formula as to what questions will require a simple majority or a two-thirds majority. A related question is whether there should be any distinction drawn between substantive and procedural questions. He said that one method of approach might be to specify that certain kinds of functions would be exercised by the Council on the basis of a two-thirds majority vote and others on the basis of a simple majority.

He said that his group had thought the matter over and had found that there were certain advantages to each of the alternative means of procedure which they have so far considered. He said that if the categories of questions to be dealt with by a simple majority and those categories of questions to be dealt with by a two-thirds majority should be described in general terms there could thereby be avoided a good deal of effort in attempting to specify the two categories in detail. On the other hand, it appeared that there would be some advantage in stating at least certain kinds of functions which would fall within one or the other of these two categories.

He recalled that in the Council of the League disposition of the question of whether or not the International Court at the Hague should be asked for advice had been blocked because one state which was a party to the dispute under consideration would not admit that this was merely a procedural question. He said that he was inclined to think that it might be desirable to attempt to combine, if possible, the two approaches to this question and that he would like to raise for consideration the possibility of specifying certain kinds of functions which would call for one or the other type of majority vote. For example, a recommendation as to the admission of new members and perhaps the question of reference of cases to the International Court might be mentioned. He recognized, of course, that it would not be possible to specify all kinds of questions which might be likely to arise. This aspect of the problem could be met by adopting a general provision that substantive questions would require a two-thirds majority but that procedural questions could be disposed of on the basis of a simple majority.

Secondly, Dr. Koo said, he felt that the general principle of the unanimity of the permanent members is a very desirable one. He said that he thought that it might simplify the understanding of this problem if it could be provided that the rule of unanimity should prevail except in cases where one of the permanent members is involved in a dispute. He thought that a general provision to that effect might perhaps facilitate the parliamentary proceedings of the Council.

In the third place, Dr. Koo said, he believed that it would be desirable to have some understanding as to whether abstention from voting is to be permitted and, if so, what the effect of such abstention should be.

In the fourth place, he felt that when reference is made to a simple majority, or to a two-thirds majority vote, and to unanimity of the permanent members except when one or more of them is involved in a dispute, it should be made clear that the particular majority decided upon is an absolute one, i.e., is a majority of the total membership of the Council. He recalled that on several occasions when a delicate question had come before the Council of the League, some members did not wish to indicate their attitudes on the question and had absented themselves from meetings of the Council.

Lord Halifax inquired whether Dr. Koo meant that the prescribed majority, whether a simple majority or a two-thirds majority, should relate to the entire membership regardless of whether certain members voted or not. In reply, Dr. Koo said that he was inclined to believe that his chief interest is in seeing that there is some definite provision on this matter so that there should be no doubt as to the procedure to be followed.

Mr. Stettinius said that he thought Dr. Koo’s observations on the subject of voting were most interesting. Mr. Pasvolsky observed that the American group had tended also in its thinking to take the position that the required majority should be of the total membership of the Council.

Mr. Dunn asked Dr. Koo whether the Chinese group had developed in more detail its thought on the question of abstention from voting. He said that the American group had run into some difficulties on this question which he thought might be avoided if it were made clear, as Dr. Koo had suggested, that the prescribed majority would be in terms of the entire membership of the Council. However, Mr. Dunn felt that some difficulty might still be anticipated, in this regard, if two or three members were to abstain from voting. He said he also wished to ask Dr. Koo whether the latter intended that an abstaining member would be bound to contribute forces to carry out a decision reached by the Council.

Dr. Koo said that he felt that if it were to be provided that the prescribed majority were to be an absolute one, that is in terms of the entire membership, it would be difficult to introduce the principle of abstention unless it were to be specifically provided that such abstention would not invalidate the decision of the Council. Otherwise, he felt that there would be difficulty in determining whether a majority had been obtained.

Professor Webster said that he thought that an abstaining member’s vote would have to be regarded as a negative one. Mr. Pasvolsky thought that for purposes of determining whether or not a majority had been obtained it might be feasible to provide that an abstaining member’s vote should be counted as a positive one. However, Professor Webster continued to feel that if a member were to abstain from voting, its vote could not be counted on the majority side of the question and, therefore, it must be counted on the negative side. Lord Halifax said that if as many as three members should abstain from voting and the required majority were to be two-thirds, the result might be that adoption of the proposed action would require complete unanimity of the remaining members. This, he was inclined to feel, would be unworkable. Mr. Jebb agreed that in effect an abstention would be a negative vote.

Lord Halifax inquired as to what objection there might be to providing that the required majority related to those present and voting. In reply, Dr. Koo said that a member might, in order to avoid having to make a decision, absent itself from the meeting and thus reduce the force and authority of the meeting at which the proposed action was taken. Mr. Pasvolsky felt that a provision for an absolute majority of the total membership also constitutes a protection to the permanent members who will, in the main, have to supply the military forces required to carry out action decided upon by the Council. He thought that the permanent members should not be exposed to the risk of being bound by action taken in their absence.

Lord Halifax thought that it should be possible to maintain the principle of the unanimity of the permanent members while still providing that in other respects the required majority relates to those present and voting. Mr. Pasvolsky observed that the protective feature of the other procedure would extend also to non-permanent members of the Council. He felt that each member should have protection of the kind he referred to, namely, that no decision should be taken without its vote unless it specifically desired not to vote, in which case it would have to be treated as if it had voted in a positive sense.

Professor Webster and Mr. Jebb thought that the ordinary procedure of deliberative meetings should afford sufficient protection to the member states. Professor Webster observed that it is not possible to make a state vote if it does not wish to. Mr. Dunn pointed out that the matter of absence from a meeting is taken care of by the provisions for continuous sessions of the Council and for continuing representation by each member at the seat of the Council.

Professor Webster raised a query as to why a state should not be permitted to abstain from voting on a doubtful proposition. Mr. Dunn thought that it would be very difficult to provide for such abstention. Mr. Stettinius said that he felt that each member should be required to show its true colors and to take a definite stand.

Dr. Hoo pointed out that it would not be possible to say that abstention should be treated as a positive vote for the reason that any proposition can be so phrased that, although stated in positive terms, its effect would actually be negative. Mr. Pasvolsky said that if the Charter were to be silent on the question of abstention and were at the same time to provide that the required majority should be an absolute one, it would be equivalent to providing that abstention would not be permitted. He added that it seemed to him that so long as the required majority is obtained it should not matter how the remaining votes are considered. He felt that the basic responsibility for action by the Council must fall upon the permanent members and such non-permanent members as are required to make up the prescribed majority.

Dr. Hoo said that if there were to be too many abstentions it would be impossible to obtain the required majority. The others present expressed their agreement with this observation and seemed to feel that it constituted an argument against the policy of abstention.

Lord Halifax felt that there would be great difficulty in combining the unanimity principle and the principle that all members of the Council are supposed to vote on each question. He still felt that it should be feasible simply to provide that the prescribed majority should be of those present and voting, subject always to the requirement of the unanimity of the permanent members. However, Mr. Pasvolsky felt that such a formula might make it possible for action to be taken as a result of the affirmative votes of the permanent members only. This, he felt, would be undesirable. He felt that it is necessary to provide that action by the Council has to be on the basis of the affirmative votes of the permanent members plus the number of nonpermanent members required to meet the prescribed majority. He felt that the question of a particular type of majority is of less importance than is the requirement that action must be based upon votes of the permanent members and of some non-permanent members as. well. He remarked that in the preceding phase of the conversations there had been some discussion of the possibility of splitting the difference between a two-thirds majority and a simple majority and providing that action by the Council would require seven of the eleven votes, including among the seven all of the permanent members.

Professor Webster said that he believed that there existed no precedent for preventing abstention from voting. He felt that if a member did not attend a meeting it would mean that that member did not desire to vote on the question at issue and if it had voted would have voted in the negative. He added that it had been quite common practice in the Council of the League for states to refrain from voting. Mr. Pasvolsky said that he continued to prefer a provision stated in terms of the actual number of votes which would be required for action by the Council. He agreed with those who felt that it would not be desirable to permit abstention from voting by the great powers unless there were to be an additional and rather meaningless provision that powers which abstained from voting would nevertheless be bound by the decision reached. Mr. Dunn thought that provision for abstention plus a provision for unanimity of the great powers might indicate that the votes of the non-permanent members were not desired. Mr. Pasvolsky agreed that the participation of the non-permanent members is of great importance. He felt that one of the mitigating features of the principle of the unanimity of the permanent members is that it is effective in a negative rather than in a positive sense in as much as no action can be taken by reason of the votes of the permanent members alone.

Lord Halifax thought that although it would probably not be likely to arise, it would be most unfortunate if there could develop a situation in which the five permanent members were all in agreement but found that the action which they desired to take was blocked by unwillingness on the part of the other Council members to commit themselves to a decision. Mr. Pasvolsky, however, suggested that if action agreed upon by the five permanent members cannot command the support of at least one of the non-permanent members the presumption would be that the proposed action is undesirable.

Dr. Koo inquired whether the other groups saw any objection to prohibiting abstention. Mr. Jebb and Mr. Pasvolsky replied in the negative. However, Professor Webster thought that it would be extremely difficult to adopt any such prohibitory provision. He thought it quite likely that a great power might not be able to say that it agreed to the proposed action but at the same time, having as it did a veto, it might not wish to vote in the negative. Mr. Jebb thought that in such a situation the power concerned would be able to make its position clear in a statement made before the Council.

Mr. Stettinius pointed out that the document stresses the continuous functioning of the Council and also stresses the fact that the Council acts on behalf of all member states. He felt that each member of the Council should recognize its world obligation to act as a trustee for other states and should be prepared to cast its vote accordingly.

However, Dr. Hoo felt that there might be cases where one of the smaller powers might not dare to vote either positively or negatively. He thought it might be helpful to determine first whether the non-permanent members would be bound by any action against which they had voted. Dr. Liu said that he understood that it is intended that non-permanent members would be bound in such a case and that, apart from the rule of unanimity, this would be true of the permanent members as well. The other members expressed their agreement with Dr. Liu’s understanding.

Dr. Hoo then suggested that it might be desirable to provide that voting of non-permanent members would be by secret ballot. He said that the significant question is whether or not a majority has been obtained. It is not necessary to know what members make up that majority in as much as all members will be bound by the decision reached. He thought that provision for such a secret ballot would help many of the smaller powers and that with such a provision it might be practicable to preclude them from abstaining from voting. Mr. Jebb thought that if all five of the great powers voted for a particular proposal the small powers which joined with them would not be likely to have much anxiety about their responsibility for such votes. Mr. Stettinius thought that Dr. Hoo’s proposal was very interesting and has considerable merit.

Dr. Hoo added that under the proposal which he had suggested it would be appropriate to provide simply for a fixed number of votes, rather than for a majority, as required for the taking of action by the Council. Mr. Pasvolsky expressed his agreement and said that he thought the suggestion which he had mentioned before that the required number of votes be fixed at seven, had considerable merit. Mr. Jebb was inclined to agree, provided the question were not complicated by permitting abstention from voting. Mr. Dunn agreed that Dr. Hoo’s proposal constituted an improvement over previous formulae.

There then ensued a discussion as to the voting rights of those members of the Organization not members of the Council which may be invited to attend sessions of the Council when matters of special interest to them are under consideration. Mr. Stettinius said that he thought that it would confuse the voting procedure if these nonmembers were to be permitted to vote in the Council on such occasions. Mr. Grew pointed out that there might be a bloc of several such countries involved in a particular dispute or other case before the Council.

Dr. Koo then referred again to the problem of distinguishing between substantive and procedural questions. He said that he was inclined to think that it might be wise to limit the area of discussion in the Council as much as possible and to this end it would be wise to specify what kind of questions would call for a simple majority and then to provide generally that other questions would require a two-thirds vote. In this way, he felt, the Council could avoid having first to devote considerable time to determining whether a particular question is a procedural or a substantive matter. He felt that it would be desirable to try to eliminate debates on such points.

Mr. Jebb said that there had been an attempt to specify just what the voting procedure would be under the proposal made by the Soviet group and what it would be under the alternative proposal. Mr. Dunn pointed out that in the provision relating to voting in the Assembly there had been some spelling out of the topics which would require a two-thirds majority. Mr. Pasvolsky added that in the provision to which Mr. Dunn had referred it had been provided that all other matters, including the question of the determination of additional categories of questions to be decided by a two-thirds majority, should be determined by a simple majority vote. He thought that careful consideration should be given to the possibility of enumerating the functions which would require a two-thirds or a simple majority vote. Professor Webster and Mr. Pasvolsky pointed out that the formula provided in the section on voting in the Assembly is a novel one. Mr. Pasvolsky added that another novel formula is set forth in the chapter on amendments which, unlike the Assembly formula, combines the principle of unanimity and in addition provides for a majority slightly larger than a simple majority of the total membership.

Dr. Koo inquired as to whether there would be any objection to adopting the same procedure with respect to voting in the Council as had been adopted for the Assembly. Mr. Pasvolsky pointed out that the only problem which came up in connection with voting in the Assembly was that of distinguishing between those matters which would require a two-thirds majority and questions which would require only a simple majority. The question of the unanimity of the permanent members of the Council did not arise with respect to the Assembly. For this reason the question of voting in the Council is a more difficult one than that of voting in the Assembly. Dr. Koo wondered whether the problem of voting in the Council could not be simplified by merely adopting the provision on voting in the Assembly and adding to it the requirement of the unanimity of the permanent members except in the event that one or more of the permanent members is a party to a dispute.

Mr. Pasvolsky said that this raises the whole question of whether it is desirable to provide for two types of majority action by the Council and, in this connection, whether the two types of action should be distinguished by a listing of categories. He said that the British proposal as to voting in the Council is that procedural matters should be disposed of by a simple majority and that substantive matters should require a two-thirds majority for action. The American and the Russian proposals had been for a simple majority as to all questions, with the proviso that substantive questions would require the unanimity of the permanent members. Mr. Pasvolsky said that no final conclusion had been reached as to the two types of majority, i.e., a simple majority or a two-thirds majority. Professor Webster pointed out that the British group had constantly favored a requirement that substantive questions be settled only by a two-thirds majority. He thought that perhaps too much importance can be given to the question of voting, apart from the very important question of the rule of unanimity. He felt that experience shows that where the great powers are united on a particular question there would be no problem as to voting. So far as he could recall there had only been two instances in the League’s experience where despite the united attitude of the great powers there had been a voting problem. Mr. Pasvolsky and Dr. Hoo expressed their agreement with Professor Webster’s statement.

Mr. Pasvolsky pointed out that the Soviet group had proposed a general formula as to the rule of unanimity, with an exception for procedural matters which would not be specifically defined.

At this point Dr. Koo said that the view of the Chinese group is that the rule of the unanimity of the permanent members is desirable except when one of the permanent members is involved in a dispute. Mr. Jebb and Mr. Pasvolsky added that they felt that the unanimity rule should in addition not apply to procedural questions. Dr. Koo replied that in the Chinese view the rule of unanimity should be applied to all questions, including procedural ones, except for cases where one of the permanent members is involved in a dispute. At this point Mr. Dunn read the provision on the subject of voting in the Council which is contained in the Russian document.

Dr. Koo then said that with respect to the question of initial members of the Organization he would like to inquire as to the meaning of the phrase “associated nations”. Mr. Stettinius replied that this phrase describes those countries which, although not adherents to the Declaration of the United Nations, had nonetheless been invited to the recent United Nations conferences. He explained that the adherents to the Declaration of the United Nations include only those countries which have actually gone to war against the Axis states. The associated nations include certain countries which have merely broken relations with the Axis. He pointed out that all of the four powers had approved the invitation lists to the recent conferences before the invitations had been issued. He thought it would be most unfortunate if any of these countries were to be eliminated from the list of initial members of the new Organization. In reply to an inquiry by Dr. Koo, Mr. Pasvolsky said that the associated nations include France, Egypt, Iceland, and six Latin American countries. Mr. Stettinius said that some of these countries might quite possibly have been persuaded to declare war had it been deemed desirable to have them do so. Mr. Dunn pointed out that all of these countries are cooperating in the prosecution of the war. He mentioned particularly Venezuela, Chile, Peru, and Ecuador. Dr. Koo said that he thought the attendance of these countries at the United Nations conference would be very useful. Mr. Stettinius observed that this question would subsequently have to be discussed more fully with the Soviet representatives.

In response to an inquiry by Lord Halifax, Mr. Dunn explained that some countries which had broken relations with the Axis, for example Argentina and Turkey, are not yet actually associated in the prosecution of the war. He pointed out that in addition to this special category of states there remain, of course, the neutral states and the enemy states. Mr. Pasvolsky observed that Turkey had been neutral when the invitations were issued for the United Nations conferences thus far held. Mr. Jebb pointed out that there is still another category of states, the co-belligerents.

Dr. Koo again asked whether it is intended that states not members of the Council will not be entitled to vote at sessions of the Council to which they are invited. The others present replied in the affirmative.

Dr. Liu said that he wanted to be sure, with respect to the question of the time of publication of the agreed proposals, that the proposal now under consideration is that of publication at noon on Monday, October 9, Washington time. Mr. Stettinius answered in the affirmative and in reply to a further inquiry from Dr. Liu, Mr. Jebb said that this would mean 5:00 p.m. Greenwich time.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 500.CC/10–644: Telegram

[Document 498]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, October 6, 1944—5 p.m.

2373. As you probably heard from the British Ambassador the British Government is endeavoring to get the Soviet Government to agree to a changed version of the last paragraph of the proposed communiqué to be issued on Monday, October 9 at the time of the release of the document of the proposals for an international organization. The last paragraph of the communiqué as drafted at Dumbarton Oaks in effect merely reaffirms the substance of paragraph 5 of the Moscow Declaration without however mentioning other members of the United Nations. The British revision brings in the reference to consultation with other members of the United Nations.

We have just heard from the British that they will be unable to agree to the publication of the document on October 9 until this point is settled with the Russians and the reference to the United Nations included.

In so far as this Government is concerned, either version is acceptable and we would in fact have no objection in the event that the Russians and British cannot agree, to dropping the entire paragraph since the Moscow Declaration speaks for itself. However, we are most anxious to be able to proceed with publication on October 9 as agreed and you are therefore authorized to bring the above views of this Government on the question to the attention of the Soviet Government emphasizing the importance of proceeding with publication on the agreed date.

Hull

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./39

[Document 499]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] October 6, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Forty-first Day

Meeting of the Joint Formulation Group

The joint formulation group, under the chairmanship of Dr. Wellington Koo, met at 10:30 and 2:30 for the purpose of examining the draft proposals in detail. Dr. Koo explained that it would be very helpful to the Chinese delegation to have the views of the United States and British delegations on a number of points which were not entirely clear to the members of his group.

The entire document was read through and at the request of the Chinese delegation meanings were clarified on a large number of minor points. The explanations given by the American and British delegates appeared to satisfy the Chinese delegation which seemed to feel that no important textual changes would be required. They reserved the right, however, to bring up certain points in the forthcoming United Nations conference.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 500.CC/10–644: Telegram

[Document 500]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, October 6, 1944—6 p.m.

2375. Please deliver immediately the following personal message from the Secretary to Mr. Molotov:

“As you know from my message of October 283 all arrangements have been completed for the publication on October 9 of the joint communiqué and the text of the proposals for an international organization. We feel that any delay in the publication would only result in misunderstanding and speculation, and I therefore urge that, if you have not been able to agree with the British Government on a satisfactory wording for the last paragraph of the communiqué, you consent to the publication of the communiqué omitting the last paragraph entirely in order that we may publish the text and documents on October 9 as agreed. I am sending a similar message to Mr. Eden.”84

Hull

83 See telegram 2340, p. 863 [Pg. 863 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493].

84 Telegram 8181, October 6, 9 p.m., not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 500.CC/10–344: Telegram

[Document 501]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, October 6, 1944—7 p.m.

2376. Reurtel 3777, October 3, 4 p.m.85 At the end of the second phase of the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations which we expect to terminate the end of this week, the question of voting along with a few other questions will be left open for further consideration of the four Governments. The published document, which we expect to release on Monday, October 9, as you know, will state that the question of voting in the Council and other unspecified questions are left open for further consideration. As this question of voting has been referred for consideration on the highest level we are not in a position to say at this time what the final agreement as to voting will be.

Throughout the Conversations our official position was that parties to a dispute should not vote in the Council. The British agreed with us while the Russians consistently maintained the position that a permanent member of the Council even though involved in a dispute should retain both the right to vote and its veto power.

The informal compromise referred to in our Inorg No. 586 was never officially advanced by this Government. In view of the foregoing we feel that if possible you should avoid any discussion on this point with Soviet officials in order not to prejudice subsequent consideration at the highest level.

Hull

85 Not printed.

86 Circular informational telegram of September 21, not found in Department files; for text of informal compromise drafted by the Formulation Group, September 13, see p. 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462].

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State Lot 60–D 224, Box 55: D.O./P.R./40

[Document 502]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] October 7, 1944.

Subject: Progress Report on Dumbarton Oaks Conversations—Forty-second Day

Meeting of the Joint Formulation Group 87

The joint formulation group held a brief meeting this morning to consider the problem of transition from the League of Nations to the new Organization. Mr. Pasvolsky explained that of the 45 members of the League, 28 are members of the united and associated nations; of the 44 united and associated nations, 15 are not members of the League; 17 members of the League are neither united nor associated nations. After some discussion as to how the problem could be resolved it was agreed that all three delegations would prepare research papers for exchange at an early date, preparatory to discussions on this subject, in order to present the forthcoming conference with some agreed proposals of the four delegations. It was agreed that Russia would be invited to prepare similar papers if she so desired.

Final Meeting of the American Group at 11:0088

The final meeting of the members of the American group was held in the American room. As chairman of the group I thanked the delegates for their conscientious and always helpful cooperation. I said that I felt sure that all of us would stand by for any future calls that might be made upon us by the President or the Secretary of State. In reply, Mr. Henry P. Fletcher was good enough to thank me, on behalf of his colleagues, for my efforts as chairman of the group and as chairman of the conference.

Final Plenary Session

The three delegations gave their approval to the text of the agreed proposals and to the brief communiqué, which is to be issued later today, announcing the termination of the conversations.89 Official copies of the proposals were thereupon endorsed for authentication by the three chairmen.

I then made a few brief closing remarks in which I emphasized the cooperative spirit which had marked our conversations and the importance to the peace of the world of the project in which the four nations represented at the conversations are participating. Dr. Koo and Lord Halifax responded with suitable remarks. The remarks of all three chairmen are to be made public.90

The Chinese delegation seemed particularly pleased that both Lord Halifax and I in our concluding remarks paid special tribute to China as a gallant ally, to the distinction of the Chinese delegates, and to their contribution to the work of the conversations.

Final Clearance on Date of Publication

You will recall that the British had not finally agreed to publication of the document on Monday and that they had, in addition, unyieldingly insisted upon the inclusion in the proposed identic communiqué of a fourth paragraph containing a reference to the part of the other United Nations in enforcing the surrender terms. They maintained their position until after the final adjournment today and this matter therefore was, at that time, left undecided. The British Embassy later informed us that the British Government had finally agreed with our proposal that the fourth paragraph be omitted altogether.

Harriman has today informed us by telephone of Soviet agreement to omission of the fourth paragraph from the communiqué and we are awaiting the imminent arrival of formal Soviet clearance of Monday publication.91

The Chinese have agreed to omission of the fourth paragraph and to Monday publication.

87 For further details of meeting, see informal record, infra.

88 For press release of October 7 on the final meeting of the American Delegation, see Department of State Bulletin, October 8, 1944, p. 376.

89 For joint statement by Heads of American, British, and Chinese Delegations, see Department of State Bulletin, October 8, 1944, p. 376.

90 For remarks by the Under Secretary of State, Ambassador Koo, and Lord Halifax, see ibid., pp. 374–376.

91 Formal Soviet clearance was received in a note dated October 9 from the Soviet Ambassador, enclosing a message by Mr. Molotov; not printed.

Informal Record of the Fourth Meeting of the Joint Formulation Group Lot 60–D 224, Box 58: D.O./Conv.B/JFG Record 4

[Document 503]

Informal Record of the Fourth Meeting of the Joint Formulation Group

October 7, 1944, 10:35 a.m.–11:10 a.m.

Present: Dr. Koo, Presiding

China: Dr. V. K. Wellington Koo, Chairman; Dr. Victor Hoo; Dr. Liu Chieh. Advisers: Dr. Liang.

United Kingdom: Mr. Gladwyn Jebb, Acting Chairman; Major General M. F. Grove-White; Professor C. K. Webster.

United States: Mr. Pasvolsky, Acting Chairman; Mr. Dunn; Mr. Grew. Advisers and secretaries: Mrs. Brunauer; Mr. Gerig; Mr. Notter; Mr. Sandifer.

1. Liquidation of the League

Membership Problem in Transition From the League of Nations to the New General International Organization

At the request of the Chairman, Mr. Pasvolsky presented the problem of arranging for liquidation of the League of Nations and assignment of its assets and liabilities to the new Organization. He pointed out that there are still 45 members of the League of which 29 are United Nations or Associated Nations (including France in this category). The following 16 nations are not United or Associated Nations: Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina, Austria, Bulgaria, Denmark, Eire, Esthonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, and Turkey.

In the course of the discussion it was brought out that 4 of the 16 are enemy states: Austria, Bulgaria, Finland, and Thailand; and that three—Esthonia, Latvia, and Lithuania—constitute a special case. Thus 9 states whose rights as League members should be considered are left outside the list of United and Associated Nations and will therefore not be among the initial members of the new Organization.

Professor Webster emphasized the importance of making the transition in a decent and orderly fashion, with due regard for the rights of the League members that are not among the United and Associated Nations. Mr. Jebb suggested that there would be very little difficulty if such states were to become members of the new Organization immediately. Otherwise, they might be reluctant to have the League dissolved.

The Chairman thought that some procedure could be worked out that would leave no loopholes for claims or recriminations, especially since a large majority of the states members of the League are United or Associated Nations.

Procedures Suggested for the Transition

A Special Protocol. Mr. Pasvolsky said that as a possible procedure, a protocol might be drawn up at the conference for the new Organization, to be signed by the 29 members of the League. This protocol might cover their agreement to liquidate the League or to assign their rights and privileges as League members to the new Organization.

In the discussion of this method of procedure it was emphasized by Professor Webster and Mr. Jebb that the states not invited to the conference should not be presented with a document which they would be expected to sign without having had any part in its negotiation.

Conference of Signatories to the Versailles Treaty. Professor Webster raised the point that the League of Nations had been set up by a treaty and that the signatories of the treaty might perhaps legally liquidate it.

It was generally agreed that this would be a cumbersome procedure and not very satisfactory. Mr. Pasvolsky thought it might not be right for a signatory of the treaty that is not a member of the League to act on its dissolution.

Action by the United Nations Conference or the Organization. The Chairman suggested as a possibility that the conference for the new Organization might appoint a committee with authority broad enough not only to devise ways and means of carrying out whatever principles might be adopted by the Conference for the purpose but to approach the League of Nations and negotiate an agreement for its liquidation.

Mr. Pasvolsky said that the matter might not have to be taken up until the Organization had actually come into operation. Professor Webster and Mr. Dunn thought that the general conference or the Organization should probably take the initiative and should state what it was prepared to do in assuming the obligations and functions of the League. There seemed to be general agreement that the initiative could suitably be taken by the United Nations Conference or the Organization itself.

Action by the League of Nations. Another possibility suggested was that the Council or Assembly of the League of Nations might meet and consider the problem. The Chairman thought that it would not be too difficult for the Council to meet and act. Mr. Pasvolsky suggested that it might be preferable for the Assembly to take action on this question. Dr. Hoo added that the Council or Assembly could assign to the secretariat the task of devising a solution.

Previous Agreement by the Four Governments. Dr. Hoo asked whether the four governments that had participated in the Washington Conversations should not agree on a plan to present to the general conference.

Mr. Jebb suggested that the four governments might study the problem and exchange papers within the next two or three months. Professor Webster said that the British Government was already making some informal studies. Pie thought that at this stage only research papers could be exchanged. Mr. Pasvolsky thought the suggestion a very good one. The Chairman said that the Chinese had not done any substantial work on the problem but would be willing to take it up more definitely now.

Other Problems Involved in Liquidation and Transition

Mandates and Minorities. The Chairman pointed out that there were certain special problems connected with transition that should be considered, for example, arrangements with respect to the mandates system and the minorities agreements.

Professor Webster stated that there were important differences between mandates and minorities, especially since the Covenant, in Article 22, set up machinery for dealing with mandates. Arrangements for the protection of minorities rested upon agreements made outside the League. Mr. Pasvolsky said that the mandates system also rested partly on agreements outside the League, referring particularly to the treaties of peace at the end of the last war. He suggested that there would need to be a consideration of the problem of the mandates before the general United Nations Conference.

Assets and Liabilities. Mr. Dunn and Professor Webster emphasized that the new Organization should offer to take over the liabilities and responsibilities of the League as well as its assets. Dr. Hoo mentioned the League Library as a valuable asset. Mr. Pasvolsky thought that the adjustment would be fairly simple provided the League members agreed to the basic proposition.

Treaties Assigning Duties and Powers to the League of Nations. Professor Webster stated that it would be very useful if a blanket protocol could be drawn up to transfer to the new Organization the duties and powers assigned to the League Council in hundreds of treaties. He pointed out that in many cases it had been agreed that certain types of disputes should be referred to the Council; in others, the Council had been authorized to appoint certain commissions and other bodies that were not League organs.

Dr. Hoo doubted that the transfer could be made automatic in all cases, because of differences in function between the League Council and the Security Council of the new Organization. Professor Webster believed that most of the duties and powers assigned under these treaties would be suitable for the new Council.

2. Informal Exchange of Papers Among the Four Governments

Mr. Pasvolsky proposed that Mr. Jebb’s suggestion of an informal exchange of papers on the problem of liquidation of the League of Nations should be followed. Professor Webster emphasized that the governments could not be committed to any policies at this stage. He suggested that if informal discussions were to be held they should be in London, where the representatives of a number of League members; were easily accessible and where the Secretary-General of the League might be brought in. Mr. Pasvolsky thought that it was proper that any discussions of this question should not take place in a country that was not a member of the League.

Mr. Pasvolsky said that the Soviet Government should be informed of this plan and invited to submit any ideas it might have about arrangements with regard to the League. This was agreed to.

It was agreed that the proposed exchange should be carried out with no specific time limits set. As soon as any Government had its papers prepared they should be communicated to the other governments.92

The meeting adjourned at 11:10 a.m.

92 See memorandum of November 21, p. 915 [Pg. 915 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508].

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/10–744: Telegram

[Document 504]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, October 7, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received 7:15 p.m.]

3841. ReDepts 2373 and 2375, October 6. I have just received a communication from Molotov dated October 6 acknowledging with thanks the Secretary’s message of October 2 and transmitting a copy of a letter of the same date which he had addressed to Clark Kerr concerning the last paragraph of the proposed communiqué to be issued on October 9. In the letter to Clark Kerr, Molotov states that: (1) The Soviet Government considers paragraph 4 of the draft inadmissible as referring to a question not discussed at Dumbarton Oaks and not directly related to the work of that conference. He points out that article 5 of the Moscow Declaration made no mention of the question of the enforcement of surrender terms. (2) Paragraph 4 seems unnecessary since paragraph 3 mentions forthcoming United Nations conference which will discuss Dumbarton Oaks proposals, and thereby covers fully the interests of small countries in participation in discussions on international security. This also obviates possibility of criticism by small allies that the great powers are depriving them of their part in the preparation and execution of a new security system. (3) He hopes that the British Government will not insist on including paragraph 4 in the Communiqué and will in this way make it possible for the first three points, as agreed, to be published at the date considered desirable by the United States Government.

This letter of Molotov crossed the communication I had sent to him this morning in pursuance to Department’s 2373 and 2375 of October 6. This letter however does in fact fully answer the Secretary’s message of October 6.

Harriman

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/10–744: Telegram

[Document 505]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 7, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received October 7—4:07 p.m.]

8483. For the attention of Jack Hickerson.93 I have just received the following secret communication from the Foreign Office: “I am replying on behalf of the Secretary of State to Your Excellency’s letters of 3d and 7th October about the Dumbarton Oaks Communiqué.

We have received a telegram from Moscow which makes it clear that the Soviet Government will not agree to anything on the lines of paragraph 4 of the Communiqué as drafted and in the circumstances we agree that the best course is that suggested in your letter of 7th October. We have now heard from our Ambassador at Moscow that the Soviet Government agrees to publication of the first three paragraphs of the Communiqué on 9th October and it will, therefore, issue as proposed.”

My letter of October 7th referred to above conveyed to Mr. Eden the Secretary’s personal message quoted in Department’s 8180 [8181] of October 6th.94

Winant

93 John D. Hickerson, Chief, Division of British Commonwealth Affairs.

94 See footnote 84, p. 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501].

Press Release Issued by the Department of State, October 9, 1944 500.CC/10–944

[Document 506]

Press Release Issued by the Department of State, October 9, 1944

October 9, 1944

The Government of the United States has now received the report of its Delegation95 to the conversations held in Washington between August 21–October 7, 1944 with the Delegations of the United Kingdom, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Republic of China on the subject of an international organization for the maintenance of peace and security.

There is annexed hereto a statement of tentative proposals indicating in detail the wide range of subjects on which agreement has been reached at the conversations.

The governments which were represented in the discussions in Washington have agreed that after further study of these proposals they will as soon as possible take the necessary steps with a view to the preparation of complete proposals which could then serve as a basis of discussion at a full United Nations Conference.

[Annex]

Proposals for the Establishment of a General International Organization 96

There should be established an international organization under the title of The United Nations, the Charter of which should contain provisions necessary to give effect to the proposals which follow.

Chapter I.—Purposes

The purposes of the Organization should be: 1. To maintain international peace and security; and to that end to take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace and the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful means adjustment or settlement of international disputes which may lead to a breach of the peace;

2. To develop friendly relations among nations and to take other appropriate measures to strengthen universal peace;

3. To achieve international cooperation in the solution of international economic, social and other humanitarian problems; and

4. To afford a center for harmonizing the actions of nations in the achievement of these common ends.

Chapter II.—Principles

In pursuit of the purposes mentioned in Chapter I the Organization and its members should act in accordance with the following principles: 1. The Organization is based on the principle of the sovereign equality of all peace-loving states.

2. All members of the Organization undertake, in order to ensure to all of them the rights and benefits resulting from membership in the Organization, to fulfill the obligations assumed by them in accordance with the Charter.

3. All members of the Organization shall settle their disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security are not endangered.

4. All members of the Organization shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force in any manner inconsistent with the purposes of the Organization.

5. All members of the Organization shall give every assistance to the Organization in any action undertaken by it in accordance with the provisions of the Charter.

6. All members of the Organization shall refrain from giving assistance to any state against which preventive or enforcement action is being undertaken by the Organization.

The Organization should ensure that states not members of the Organization act in accordance with these principles so far as may be necessary for the maintenance of international peace and security.

Chapter III.—Membership

1. Membership of the Organization should be open to all peace-loving states.

Chapter IV.—Principal Organs

1. The Organization should have as its principal organs: a. A General Assembly;

b. A Security Council;

c. An international court of justice; and

d. A Secretariat.

2. The Organization should have such subsidiary agencies as may be found necessary.

Chapter V.—The General Assembly

Section A

Composition

All members of the Organization should be members of the General Assembly and should have a number of representatives to be specified in the Charter.

Section B

Functions and Powers

1. The General Assembly should have the right to consider the general principles of cooperation in the maintenance of international peace and security, including the principles governing disarmament and the regulation of armaments; to discuss any questions relating to the maintenance of international peace and security brought before it by any member or members of the Organization or by the Security Council; and to make recommendations with regard to any such principles or questions. Any such questions on which action is necessary should be referred to the Security Council by the General Assembly either before or after discussion. The General Assembly should not on its own initiative make recommendations on any matter relating to the maintenance of international peace and security which is being dealt with by the Security Council.

2. The General Assembly should be empowered to admit new members to the Organization upon recommendation of the Security Council.

3. The General Assembly should, upon recommendation of the Security Council, be empowered to suspend from the exercise of any rights or privileges of membership any member of the Organization against which preventive or enforcement action shall have been taken by the Security Council. The exercise of the rights and privileges thus suspended may be restored by decision of the Security Council. The General Assembly should be empowered, upon recommendation of the Security Council, to expel from the Organization any member of the Organization which persistently violates the principles contained in the Charter.

4. The General Assembly should elect the non-permanent members of the Security Council and the members of the Economic and Social Council provided for in Chapter IX. It should be empowered to elect, upon recommendation of the Security Council, the Secretary-General of the Organization. It should perform such functions in relation to the election of the judges of the international court of justice as may be conferred upon it by the statute of the court.

5. The General Assembly should apportion the expenses among the members of the Organization and should be empowered to approve the budgets of the Organization.

6. The General Assembly should initiate studies and make recommendations for the purpose of promoting international cooperation in political, economic and social fields and of adjusting situations likely to impair the general welfare.

7. The General Assembly should make recommendations for the coordination of the policies of international economic, social, and other specialized agencies brought into relation with the Organization in accordance with agreements between such agencies and the Organization.

8. The General Assembly should receive and consider annual and special reports from the Security Council and reports from other bodies of the Organization.

Section C

Voting

1. Each member of the Organization should have one vote in the General Assembly.

2. Important decisions of the General Assembly, including recommendations with respect to the maintenance of international peace and security; election of members of the Security Council; election of members of the Economic and Social Council; admission of members, suspension of the exercise of the rights and privileges of members, and expulsion of members; and budgetary questions, should be made by a two-thirds majority of those present and voting. On other questions, including the determination of additional categories of questions to be decided by a two-thirds majority, the decisions of the General Assembly should be made by a simple majority vote.

Section D

Procedure

1. The General Assembly should meet in regular annual sessions and in such special sessions as occasion may require.

2. The General Assembly should adopt its own rules of procedure and elect its President for each session.

3. The General Assembly should be empowered to set up such bodies and agencies as it may deem necessary for the performance of its functions.

Chapter VI.—The Security Council

Section A

Composition

The Security Council should consist of one representative of each of eleven members of the Organization. Representatives of the United States of America, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the Republic of China, and, in due course, France, should have permanent seats. The General Assembly should elect six states to fill the non-permanent seats. These six states should be elected for a term of two years, three retiring each year. They should not be immediately eligible for reelection. In the first election of the non-permanent members three should be chosen by the General Assembly for one-year terms and three for two-year terms.

Section B

Principal Functions and Powers

1. In order to ensure prompt and effective action by the Organization, members of the Organization should by the Charter confer on the Security Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security and should agree that in carrying out these duties under this responsibility it should act on their behalf.

2. In discharging these duties the Security Council should act in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Organization.

3. The specific powers conferred on the Security Council in order to carry out these duties are laid down in Chapter VIII.

4. All members of the Organization should obligate themselves to accept the decisions of the Security Council and to carry them out in accordance with the provisions of the Charter.

5. In order to promote the establishment and maintenance of international peace and security with the least diversion of the world’s human and economic resources for armaments, the Security Council, with the assistance of the Military Staff Committee referred to in Chapter VIII, Section B, paragraph 9, should have the responsibility for formulating plans for the establishment of a system of regulation of armaments for submission to the members of the Organization.

Section C

Voting

(Note—The question of voting procedure in the Security Council is still under consideration.)

Section D

Procedure

1. The Security Council should be so organized as to be able to function continuously and each state member of the Security Council should be permanently represented at the headquarters of the Organization. It may hold meetings at such other places as in its judgment may best facilitate its work. There should be periodic meetings at which each state member of the Security Council could if it so desired be represented by a member of the government or some other special representative.

2. The Security Council should be empowered to set up such bodies or agencies as it may deem necessary for the performance of its functions including regional subcommittees of the Military Staff Committee.

3. The Security Council should adopt its own rules of procedure, including the method of selecting its President.

4. Any member of the Organization should participate in the discussion of any question brought before the Security Council whenever the Security Council considers that the interests of that member of the Organization are specially affected.

5. Any member of the Organization not having a seat on the Security Council and any state not a member of the Organization, if it is a party to a dispute under consideration by the Security Council, should be invited to participate in the discussion relating to the dispute.

Chapter VII.—An International Court of Justice

1. There should be an international court of justice which should constitute the principal judicial organ of the Organization.

2. The Court should be constituted and should function in accordance with a statute which should be annexed to and be a part of the Charter of the Organization.

3. The statute of the court of international justice should be either (a) the Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice, continued in force with such modifications as may be desirable or (b) a new statute in the preparation of which the Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice should be used as a basis.

4. All members of the Organization should ipso facto be parties to the statute of the international court of justice.

5. Conditions under which states not members of the Organization may become parties to the statute of the international court of justice should be determined in each case by the General Assembly upon recommendation of the Security Council.

Chapter VIII.—Arrangements for the Maintenance of International Peace and Security Including Prevention and Suppression of Aggression

Section A

Pacific Settlement of Disputes

1. The Security Council should be empowered to investigate any dispute, or any situation which may lead to international friction or give rise to a dispute, in order to determine whether its continuance is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security.

2. Any state, whether member of the Organization or not, may bring any such dispute or situation to the attention of the General Assembly or of the Security Council.

3. The parties to any dispute the continuance of which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security should obligate themselves, first of all, to seek a solution by negotiation, mediation, conciliation, arbitration or judicial settlement, or other peaceful means of their own choice. The Security Council should call upon the parties to settle their dispute by such means.

4. If, nevertheless, parties to a dispute of the nature referred to in paragraph 3 above fail to settle it by the means indicated in that paragraph, they should obligate themselves to refer it to the Security Council. The Security Council should in each case decide whether or not the continuance of the particular dispute is in fact likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, and, accordingly, whether the Security Council should deal with the dispute, and, if so, whether it should take action under pararaph 5.

5. The Security Council should be empowered, at any stage of a dispute of the nature referred to in paragraph 3 above, to recommend appropriate procedures or methods of adjustment.

6. Justiciable disputes should normally be referred to the international court of justice. The Security Council should be empowered to refer to the court, for advice, legal questions connected with other disputes.

7. The provisions of paragraph 1 to 6 of Section A should not apply to situations or disputes arising out of matters which by international law are solely within the domestic jurisdiction of the state concerned.

Section B

Determination of Threats to the Peace or Acts of Aggression and Action With Respect Thereto

1. Should the Security Council deem that a failure to settle a dispute in accordance with procedures indicated in paragraph 3 of Section A, or in accordance with its recommendations made under paragaph 5 of Section A, constitutes a threat to the maintenance of international peace and security, it should take any measures necessary for the maintenance of international peace and security in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Organization.

2. In general the Security Council should determine the existence of any threat to the peace, breach of the peace or act of aggression and should make recommendations or decide upon the measures to be taken to maintain or restore peace and security.

3. The Security Council should be empowered to determine what diplomatic, economic, or other measures not involving the use of armed force should be employed to give effect to its decisions, and to call upon members of the Organization to apply such measures. Such measures may include complete or partial interruption of rail, sea, air, postal, telegraphic, radio and other means of communication and the severance of diplomatic and economic relations.

4. Should the Security Council consider such measures to be inadequate, it should be empowered to take such action by air, naval or land forces as may be necessary to maintain or restore international peace and security. Such action may include demonstrations, blockade and other operations by air, sea or land forces of members of the Organization.

5. In order that all members of the Organization should contribute to the maintenance of international peace and security, they should undertake to make available to the Security Council, on its call and in accordance with a special agreement or agreements concluded among themselves, armed forces, facilities and assistance necessary for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security. Such agreement or agreements should govern the numbers and types of forces and the nature of the facilities and assistance to be provided. The special agreement or agreements should be negotiated as soon as possible and should in each case be subject to approval by the Security Council and to ratification by the signatory states in accordance with their constitutional processes.

6. In order to enable urgent military measures to be taken by the Organization there should be held immediately available by the members of the Organization national air force contingents for combined international enforcement action. The strength and degree of readiness of these contingents and plans for their combined action should be determined by the Security Council with the assistance of the Military Staff Committee within the limits laid down in the special agreement or agreements referred to in paragraph 5 above.

7. The action required to carry out the decisions of the Security Council for the maintenance of international peace and security should be taken by all the members of the Organization in cooperation or by some of them as the Security Council may determine. This undertaking should be carried out by the members of the Organization by their own action and through action of the appropriate specialized organizations and agencies of which they are members.

8. Plans for the application of armed force should be made by the Security Council with the assistance of the Military Staff Committee referred to in paragraph 9 below.

9. There should be established a Military Staff Committee the functions of which should be to advise and assist the Security Council on all questions relating to the Security Council’s military requirements for the maintenance of international peace and security, to the employment and command of forces placed at its disposal, to the regulation of armaments, and to possible disarmament. It should be responsible under the Security Council for the strategic direction of any armed forces placed at the disposal of the Security Council. The Committee should be composed of the Chiefs of Staff of the permanent members of the Security Council or their representatives. Any member of the Organization not permanently represented on the Committee should be invited by the Committee to be associated with it when the efficient discharge of the Committee’s responsibilities requires that such a state should participate in its work. Questions of command of forces should be worked out subsequently.

10. The members of the Organization should join in affording mutual assistance in carrying out the measures decided upon by the Security Council.

11. Any state, whether a member of the Organization or not, which finds itself confronted with special economic problems arising from the carrying out of measures which have been decided upon by the Security Council should have the right to consult the Security Council in regard to a solution of those problems.

Section C

Regional Arrangements

1. Nothing in the Charter should preclude the existence of regional arrangements or agencies for dealing with such matters relating to the maintenance of international peace and security as are appropriate for regional action, provided such arrangements or agencies and their activities are consistent with the purposes and principles of the Organization. The Security Council should encourage settlement of local disputes through such regional arrangements or by such regional agencies, either on the initiative of the states concerned or by reference from the Security Council.

2. The Security Council should, where appropriate, utilize such arrangements or agencies for enforcement action under its authority, but no enforcement action should be taken under regional arrangements or by regional agencies without the authorization of the Security Council.

3. The Security Council should at all times be kept fully informed of activities undertaken or in contemplation under regional arrangements or by regional agencies for the maintenance of international peace and security.

Chapter IX.—Arrangements for International Economic and Social Cooperation

Section A

Purpose and Relationships

1. With a view to the creation of conditions of stability and well-being which are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations among nations, the Organization should facilitate solutions of international economic, social and other humanitarian problems and promote respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. Responsibility for the discharge of this function should be vested in the General Assembly and, under the authority of the General Assembly, in an Economic and Social Council.

2. The various specialized economic, social and other organizations and agencies would have responsibilities in their respective fields as defined in their statutes. Each such organization or agency should be brought into relationship with the Organization on terms to be determined by agreement between the Economic and Social Council and the appropriate authorities of the specialized organization or agency, subject to approval by the General Assembly.

Section B

Composition and Voting

The Economic and Social Council should consist of representatives of eighteen members of the Organization. The states to be represented for this purpose should be elected by the General Assembly for terms of three years. Each such state should have one representative, who should have one vote. Decisions of the Economic and Social Council should be taken by simple majority vote of those present and voting.

Section C

Functions and Powers of the Economic and Social Council

1. The Economic and Social Council should be empowered: a. to carry out, within the scope of its functions, recommendations of the General Assembly;

b. to make recommendations, on its own initiative, with respect to international economic, social and other humanitarian matters;

c. to receive and consider reports from the economic, social and other organizations or agencies brought into relationship with the Organization, and to coordinate their activities through consultations with, and recommendations to, such organizations or agencies;

d. to examine the administrative budgets of such specialized organizations or agencies with a view to making recommendations to the organizations or agencies concerned;

e. to enable the Secretary-General to provide information to the Security Council;

f. to assist the Security Council upon its request; and

g. to perform such other functions within the general scope of its competence as may be assigned to it by the General Assembly.

Section D

Organization and Procedure

1. The Economic and Social Council should set up an economic commission, a social commission, and such other commissions as may be required. These commissions should consist of experts. There should be a permanent staff which should constitute a part of the Secretariat of the Organization.

2. The Economic and Social Council should make suitable arrangements for representatives of the specialized organizations or agencies to participate without vote in its deliberations and in those of the commissions established by it.

3. The Economic and Social Council should adopt its own rules of procedure and the method of selecting its President.

Chapter X.—The Secretariat

1. There should be a Secretariat comprising a Secretary-General and such staff as may be required. The Secretary-General should be the chief administrative officer of the Organization. He should be elected by the General Assembly, on recommendation of the Security Council, for such term and under such conditions as are specified in the Charter.

2. The Secretary-General should act in that capacity in all meetings of the General Assembly, of the Security Council, and of the Economic and Social Council and should make an annual report to the General Assembly on the work of the Organization.

3. The Secretary-General should have the right to bring to the attention of the Security Council any matter which in his opinion may threaten international peace and security.

Chapter XI.—Amendments

Amendments should come into force for all members of the Organization, when they have been adopted by a vote of two-thirds of the members of the General Assembly and ratified in accordance with their respective constitutional processes by the members of the Organization having permanent membership on the Security Council and by a majority of the other members of the Organization.

Chapter XII.—Transitional Arrangements

1. Pending the coming into force of the special agreement or agreements referred to in Chapter VIII, Section B, paragraph 5, and in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5 of the Four-Nation Declaration, signed at Moscow, October 30, 1943, the states parties to that Declaration should consult with one another and as occasion arises with other members of the Organization with a view to such joint action on behalf of the Organization as may be necessary for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security.

2. No provision of the Charter should preclude action taken or authorized in relation to enemy states as a result of the present war by the Governments having responsibility for such action.

Note—In addition to the question of voting procedure in the Security Council referred to in Chapter VI, several other questions are still under consideration.

Washington, October 7, 1944.

95 For text of report, see Department of State Bulletin, October 8, 1944, p. 367.

96 Shortly before their general release to the press, copies of the Proposals were distributed to all American diplomatic missions, all diplomatic missions in Washington, to the Congressional consulting groups, the Senate Foreign relations Committee, the House Foreign Affairs Committee, the Justices of the Supreme Court, and John Foster Dulles, adviser on foreign affairs to Governor Thomas E. Dewey, Republican candidate for the Presidency.

III. Continuing preparations for a Conference of United NationsIII. Continuing preparations for a Conference of United Nations97

97 Questions regarding the establishment of an international organization left unsettled at Dumbarton Oaks were referred by Acting Secretary of State Stettinius to President Roosevelt on November 15, 1944. For documentation concerning this presentation and subsequent handling of the problems at the highest level, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, 1945, pp. 44–66.

[507] Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of International Security and Organization (Gerig) and the Executive Secretary of the Policy Committee (Yost)

[Washington,] November 20, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 57: D.O./Conv.A/UND 183

[508] Memorandum by Mr. Henry Reiff, Legal Specialist on International Organization

[Washington,] November 21, 1944.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 51: ISO 27c

[509] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] December 8, 1944.

500.CC/12–844

[510] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Stimson)

Washington, December 30, 1944.

500.CC/8–344

Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of International Security and Organization (Gerig) and the Executive Secretary of the Policy Committee (Yost) Lot 60–D 224, Box 57: D.O./Conv.A/UND 183

[Document 507]

Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of International Security and Organization (Gerig) and the Executive Secretary of the Policy Committee (Yost)

[Washington,] November 20, 1944.

Subject: The Dumbarton Oaks Conversations (First Phase): The Formulation Group

Introductory

In order to expedite the work of harmonizing the various Proposals made by the American, British, and Soviet Governments, and to present the Steering Committee and the Plenary Committee with concrete proposals, it was decided by the Steering Committee on August 25 to set up a small Formulation Group.

This group consisted of: for the United States—Mr. Pasvolsky, Mr. Dunn, and Mr. Hackworth; for the Soviet Union—Mr. Sobolev and Mr. Berezhkov; for Great Britain—Mr. Jebb, Professor Webster, and Colonel Capel-Dunn. On specific questions Admiral Willson, General Strong, and Admiral Train participated for the United States; General Grove-White, Air Marshal Welch, and Sir William Malkin attended for Great Britain. Mr. Notter was generally present, and Mr. Gerig and Mr. Yost served as Secretaries for the group.

A Top Drafting Committee had also been designated by the Steering Committee on August 22 to consist of Sir William Malkin, Mr. Hackworth, and Mr. Sobolev. This Committee was intended to streamline the document and obviate any duplication, unclear passages, or inconsistencies, and was not supposed to deal with any matters of substance. In fact, however, the members of this Committee met in the latter stages with the Formulation Group so that only one meeting of the Committee was held. Its particular recommendation was to divide the document into chapters and sections and to remove the topical headings of the section on functions and powers under the General Assembly. A proposal by Sir William Malkin that all paragraphs be numbered consecutively in the document was not agreed to by the United States, on the ground that it would formalize the document, and was therefore dropped.

The Formulation Group met in both morning and afternoon sessions during the middle period of the Conversations and, as its name implies, was mainly responsible for the detailed drafting of the Proposals. Although it had no formal Chairman this office came, in fact, to be exercised by Mr. Pasvolsky who, more than any other single member of the group, was responsible for the precise wording of the document. Many of the articles and paragraphs went through innumerable versions after prolonged discussions until all the members were satisfied that it expressed the common view.

Mr. Gerig and Mr. Yost wrote the various drafts as they were developed in the group, sometimes sketching the evolving thought of the various members as they resulted from the discussion. Such drafts were immediately sent out for typing and were promptly returned to the group for further refinement.

Mr. Pasvolsky, Mr. Jebb, and Mr. Sobolev also attended the regular meetings of the Steering Committee where these texts were reexamined and, in a number of instances, were referred back to the Formulation Group for further revision. The group also took account of the views expressed in the Organization, the Legal, and the Security Subcommittees which met rather infrequently after the first several days of the Conversations.

It is not too much to say that both the substance and form of the Proposals as they were finally adopted in the Plenary Meeting on September 2898 resulted from the long and arduous exchanges of views and weighing of words and phrases in the Formulation Group. It was in this group where the precise choice of words, as well as the logical sequence and arrangement of ideas in the document, were given form.

Chapter I.—Purposes

The four paragraphs of this Chapter represent an amalgam of the views put forward in the three Proposals by the three Governments. Paragraph 1 is a combination of the “primary purposes” as stated in the United States Proposal99 and the British statement of “objects”.1 The phrase “suppression of acts of aggression” was a contribution of the Soviet delegation which was the only one which had this reference in its original Proposal.

The second paragraph was of Soviet origin, taken largely from Section 1, Paragraph 3 of the Soviet Proposal.2

Paragraph 3 was almost entirely a British-American Proposal representing the second primary purpose stated in the United States document together with Point 4, Paragraph 12 of the British document.

Paragraph 4 was of primarily British origin and corresponds with the object stated in Point 3 of paragraph 12 of the British document.

Chapter II.—Principles

The origin of this Chapter was largely British and was based upon their argument that it would give the smaller states some satisfaction to know that the action of the organization would be bound by certain stated principles, thus removing certain possible objections on their part that the principal states might act arbitrarily in exercising their far-reaching responsibilities for the maintenance of security.

Paragraph 1 was taken largely from the Moscow Declaration and was quickly agreed upon by all three delegations.

Paragraph 2 was of British origin and corresponds with Point 3, paragraph 11 of the British document. The revised wording, however, was subject to rather prolonged discussion.

Paragraph 3 was of American and Soviet origin combining ideas found in Section 1, Point 2 of the Soviet document, and Section 5, paragraph 1 of the American document.

Paragraph 4 had its origin in Section 1, paragraph 3 of the American Proposal and was an idea strongly supported by the British as well as the Soviet delegations.

Paragraph 5 had its origin in Section VI, D, 5a of the American Proposal and reflects certain of the Soviet Proposals set down in Section 8 of their document on Methods of Preventing and Suppressing Aggression.

Paragraph 6 had its origin in Section VI, B, 2 of the American Proposal where it applied to all States “whether members of the international organization or not”. The Formulation Group considered that this obligation and the four preceding ones should be stated in terms of obligation of members of the organization, leaving it to an additional paragraph to cover the demands that would be made in these responsibilities on non-member states.

The last unnumbered paragraph of Chapter II states the requirement which the organization should lay down for insuring that nonmember states act in accordance with the foregoing principles so far as may be necessary for the maintenance of peace and security.

Chapter III.—Membership

The Formulation Group originally had 3 paragraphs under this heading; the first as it now stands, the second indicating in general who the initial members should be, and the third indicating how a state not an initial member would be admitted to the organization (see draft of September 13, 19443 ).

As agreement was not reached in the Steering Committee as to whether any states other than the United Nations should be initial members of the organization, owing to the Soviet view on this question, it was decided to drop the two additional paragraphs.

There was no disagreement at any point on the statement that the organization should be open to all peace-loving states.

The Soviet delegation proposed a criterion that “fascist states or states of a fascist character” should not be admitted but this formula was not agreed to by the other delegations.

Chapter IV.—Principal Organs

This Chapter, except for the precise nomenclature, was taken almost entirely from Section I, D of the American Proposal.

The second paragraph of this Chapter was based on the second paragraph of the American Proposal, above referred to, but on the suggestion of the Soviet delegate was left in more general terms.

Chapter V.—General Assembly

The first paragraph of this Chapter reflects the views stated in all three original documents, namely that all members of the organization should be represented in the General Assembly.

In developing the section on functions and powers, Mr. Pasvolsky, in the Formulation Group, drew up the list of the different functions that had been attributed in the three papers to the General Assembly. On the basis of this list the various functions were elaborated by the group.

Paragraph 1 of Section B is based on Section 4, paragraphs 2, 3, and 4 of the Soviet Proposal—combined with Section II, B, 2a of the American Proposal. The British delegate at first objected to the inclusion of the term “disarmament”, but later gave way after a decision in the Steering Committee. The broad scope of the Assembly laid down in this paragraph was agreed to by the American delegation—provided the action of the Assembly was limited to the making of recommendations. The last sentence in this paragraph reflects specifically the American view that the General Assembly should not make recommendations on matters relating to the maintenance of peace and security which are being dealt with by the Security Council. All delegations, however, agreed readily on this provision.

Paragraph 2 on admission of new members follows closely the American and Soviet Proposals.

The first part of paragraph 3 on suspension of the exercise of rights of membership was of American origin and was readily supported by the British delegation but considerably questioned by the Soviet delegate in the Formulation Group. Soviet agreement to this inclusion appeared to be reached when the provision for expulsion in the second sentence was agreed to by the British and American delegates, the Soviet delegation being the only one who had proposed a provision for the expulsion of members from the organization. Both the American and British delegations had been rather strongly opposed to any provision for expulsion. Hence, the retention of this provision must be attributed to the insistence of the Soviet delegate.

The electoral functions of the General Assembly outlined in paragraph 4 follow closely the proposal put forward by the United States delegation and with less precision in the Soviet document. The less precise wording of the second sentence on the election of judges of the International Court resulted from the insistence of the British delegate, Sir William Malkin, that it would not be safe to assign this electoral function to the assembly categorically before the Statute of the Court had been revised.

Paragraph 5 on budgets follows closely the Soviet Proposal and reflects also the wording of the American Proposal though it is less precise in the latter case. The use of the plural form “budgets of the organization” left the question open as to the extent to which the agencies brought within the organization would be dealt with by the Assembly. This was of British origin and readily supported by the other two delegations.

Paragraph 6 is of American origin and follows in its initial phrases Section B, 2a and c. The inclusion of the term “political” together with economic and social fields was a contribution which developed in the course of the discussions in the Formulation Group. It is in addition to the American Proposal.

Paragraph 7 on the coordination of the policies of the specialized agencies was added to this Chapter only after Chapter IX had been developed. The effect of this addition was to state two times in the document that the General Assembly would have this coordinating function. This suggestion seems to have been of British origin and emphasizes the importance which they attached to this function. The decision to make this change took place in the Steering Committee.

Paragraph 8 empowering the Assembly to receive and consider annual reports follows closely the Soviet Proposal in Section 4, paragraph 5 of their document and also Section II, B, 2g of the American Proposal. It was swiftly drawn up and readily agreed to in the Formulation Group.

Section C

Voting

On paragraph 1, there was no difference of view among the delegations in the Formulation Group.

Much discussion ensued on the questions which would require a two-thirds majority and those requiring a simple majority, particularly as it appeared that the Soviet and British delegations wanted the normal vote to be by two-thirds majority, whereas the United States delegation appeared to favor the normal vote being a simple majority, provided certain specific questions were passed by two-thirds vote. After much discussion the Formulation Group finally adopted the Soviet proposal that “important” decisions, which would be enumerated, would be made by two-thirds majority while other questions would be by simple majority. Sir William Malkin was responsible for the wording of the second sentence, which left the decision as to the determination of the additional categories of questions which would have to be decided by a two-thirds majority, to be decided by a simple majority.

Section D

Procedure

This section reflects the provisions laid down in both the American and Soviet proposals. In its paragraph 3, as to the setting up of bodies and agencies, it took paragraph j of the section on Powers of the General Assembly from the American document and placed it under Procedure.

Chapter VI.—The Security Council

Section A on Composition was the subject of prolonged discussion in the Formulation Group and its final phrasing represents the combination of the American and Soviet texts, with the British contribution being largely made in the course of the discussion.

Section B

Principal Functions and Powers

Paragraph 1 of this section is taken very largely from Section III, B, 1 of the American document, including much of the wording, though somewhat simpler and less precise in form. The idea of this paragraph was readily agreed to by all.

Paragraph 2 is of British origin and reverts to their idea that action by the Council should be in accordance with the purposes and principles of the organization in order to safeguard the position of the smaller states.

All members of the Formulation Group agreed that the specific powers of the Security Council should be enumerated elsewhere and not laid down in the Chapter on the Council, hence the reference to Chapter VIII.

No specific origin can be attributed to paragraph 4 but it is implicit in all three proposals and the wording was contributed by a number of members of the group.

Paragraph 5 is largely of American origin and follows almost precisely the wording of Section VII, paragraph 1 of the American draft in its first part, and incorporates the British contribution to the document of the Military Staff Committee.

Section C

Voting

The Formulation Group did not go into any detail of the question of voting in the Council since this was being dealt with by the Steering Committee. At one point the Formulation Group did formulate a series of questions for the Steering Committee’s consideration.

Section D

Procedure

The question of “continuous session” of the Council was one on which the British and American delegations had strongly differing conceptions. The British view was that responsible Ministers should attend, hence the meetings should be infrequent. The American view was that to do its work effectively the Security Council should have permanent representatives located at the seat of the organization so that the Council could be in almost continuous session. This question was discussed at length in the Formulation Group, was made the subject of several drafts by the American Group and was discussed in the Steering Committee and the Organization Subcommittee. The draft as it stands reflects a compromise between the British and American views and was, in its first part, drafted by the Americans, while the latter sentence was drafted largely by the British delegation.

Paragraphs 2 and 3 on subsidiary bodies and agencies led to very little discussion and closely followed the American text.

Paragraph 4 follows in conception and in drafting Section III, A, 4 of the American Proposal.

Paragraph 5, which originally was a part of paragraph 4, was given a separate statement by the Formulation Group in the interest of clarity, it being considered that a party to a dispute should have a different status before the Security Council than a state whose other interests are affected. The proposal to make this distinction was American in origin.

Chapter VII.—An International Court of Justice

This chapter was drafted by the Legal Subcommittee and was adopted almost without discussion by the Formulation Group.

Chapter VIII.—Arrangements for the Maintenance of International Peace and Security Including Prevention and Suppression of Aggression

The Title

The original title of this chapter was simply “Arrangements for the Maintenance of Peace and Security”. At a later stage of the work of the Formulation Group, however, the Soviet delegation insisted on inserting a reference to “aggression” at a number of places throughout the document, including the title of this chapter. In order to balance the reference to “aggression”, the American representatives also obtained the inclusion in the title of “breaches to the peace”. This last reference was ultimately dropped as unduly complicating and lengthening the title.

Section A

Pacific Settlement of Disputes

Since the Soviet document contained only passing reference to the pacific settlement of disputes and the discussion in the British Memorandum B was in general terms, this section is largely based on Chapter V of the U.S. document. This section was drafted and redrafted several times.

Paragraph 1, which gives the Security Council wide investigatory powers, was introduced into the document with the full concurrence of all the delegations. It was drawn, of course, from Chapter V, paragraph 7, of the U. S. document.

The next three paragraphs of this section, which lay emphasis on the obligations of the member states rather than of the organization, were intended to emphasize the intention of the drafters that pacific settlement is a matter which should be dealt with initially by the states concerned and one in which the international organization should normally intervene only if the dispute is of a character likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security and if the parties fail to settle the dispute by means of their own devising. This intention is reflected in paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 with particular reference to disputes which are likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security. It will be seen that disputes not likely to give rise to these dangers are not dealt with in the document.

Paragraphs 2 and 3 and the first sentence of paragraph 4 are drawn from Chapter V of the U. S. document. The last sentence of paragraph 4 was added at the request of the Soviet representatives, although the original form of the sentence as suggested by the Soviets tended more categorically to introduce enforcement action into Section A of this chapter. The Soviets, however, accepted revisions in their language suggested by the British and U. S. representatives.

There was general agreement that the actual powers of the Security Council in regard to the pacific settlement of disputes, as set forth in paragraph 5, should be limited to recommending appropriate procedures and methods of adjustment. It was fully understood and desired by all three delegates that the international organization should not impose a settlement of a dispute upon the parties, except in so far as the imposition of a settlement should prove to be essential to the maintenance of peace and security.

Paragraph 6, in regard to justiciable disputes, was derived from both Memorandum B, paragraph 9, of the British document and from Chapter V, paragraph 10, of the U. S. document and was inserted with the full concurrence of the Soviet delegation.

Paragraph 7 was added at a later stage of the Conversations and primarily at the initiation of the British and U.S. delegations. It met, however, with the full concurrence of the Soviets.

Section B

Determination of Threats to the Peace or Acts of Aggression and Action with Respect Thereto

The comment made above in regard to the title of this chapter applies also in regard to the title of this section.

The first paragraph of this section was originally included in approximately its present form under Section A of this chapter. It was ultimately decided, however, that the paragraph, since it relates to the taking of measures for the maintenance of peace and security, belonged in this section which is concerned with enforcement action rather than in the preceding section, which is concerned with pacific settlement. As will be noted, the paragraph is somewhat stronger than are comparable paragraphs in the British and U. S. documents, which resulted largely from the urging of the Soviet representatives that, if all of the efforts at pacific settlement of a dispute likely to endanger peace and security should fail, the Security Council must be empowered to take the necessary measures to preserve peace. The other delegations readily concurred in this statement.

The second paragraph is derived largely from Chapter VI, A, 1 of the U. S. document. The phrase “in general” was introduced to indicate that, in addition to the power of the Council to take measures necessary to maintain peace and security in the case of failure to settle a dispute likely to endanger peace and security, as set forth in paragraph 1, the Council should also be able to determine the existence of a threat to the peace or a breach of the peace or an act of aggression which may not have arisen from an international dispute. The phrase “act of aggression” was introduced at the request of the Soviet delegation. The United States delegation pointed out that they considered that this term is included within the scope of the phrase “breach of the peace” but the Soviets felt it desirable, in view of the wide currency which the word “aggression” has had in recent years, that the power of the council to deal with aggression should be specifically stated in the document.

There was some discussion as to whether an effort should be made to define the threats to the peace, breaches of the peace, or acts of aggression the commission of which would justify the Council in resorting to enforcement measures. The British delegation was, however, particularly insistent in urging that any effort to define these terms would be likely to limit the scope of the Council’s powers and that it would be wiser to give the Council the fullest discretion to determine whether or not any particular action should be designated as falling within any one of these three categories. The other two delegations readily concurred in the British view.

Paragraph 3 of this section was derived from Chapter VI, C of the U.S. document and from Chapter VIII of the Soviet document. It originally consisted merely of the first sentence but the Soviets later insisted that it would be useful to specify the principal types of non-military enforcement measures to which the Council might resort and the other delegations, while seeing no real advantage and some possible disadvantage in this specification, nevertheless rather reluctantly consented.

The same comment applies to paragraph 4. It was upon the insistence of the Soviet representatives that in the first sentence specific reference was made to “air, naval or land forces”, rather than a mere reference to “armed forces”, and that the second sentence was added to the paragraph.

Paragraph 5 was derived chiefly from Chapter VI, D, paragraphs 2 and 6 of the American document. The other delegations saw no necessity for separating the provision of forces from the provision of facilities. The Soviet delegation for some time urged that there be included, either in this paragraph or in a separate subsequent paragraph, a provision whereunder members of the organization who are unable to provide armed forces adequate for the requirements of the organization should, nevertheless, be bound to provide, upon call by the Council, sites for bases required for enforcement action by the Council. The U. S. and British delegations felt that adequate provision was made for necessary agreements of this sort in the first sentence of paragraph 5 and that it would be unwise either to give the Council such wide powers in regard to taking over sites for bases without the agreement of the states concerned or to make the inability to provide adequate armed forces the criterion for determining whether or not bases or sites for bases should be furnished. After extensive discussion the Soviet delegation finally abandoned this point. The last sentence of the paragraph was introduced by the U. S. representative.

Paragraph 6 represents the conclusion of a long discussion which arose from the desire of the Soviet delegation to have provision made for an international air force corps which should be independent of the member states and completely under the control of the Council at all times. Both the U. S. and British delegations objected strenuously to this proposal for both military and political reasons. It was discussed at length in meetings of a special military group composed of the military members of the three delegations. It was made clear that the U. S. and British delegations were equally desirous with the Soviet delegation of having effective force immediately available upon the call of the Council for use in enforcement action. It was pointed out that the Council would have the power to determine when the contingents and particularly the air contingents provided for by the special agreements referred to in paragraph 5 should be called up and that they could be called up as soon as a threat to the peace developed and in time to have a deterrent effect. Although the Soviets continued to prefer the international air force corps, they reluctantly accepted the present paragraph 6 as being the most the other delegations were prepared to grant.

Paragraph 7 was introduced on the initiative of the Soviet delegation and was derived principally from Chapter VIII, paragraph J–2 of their document. It was intended to make perfectly clear that the Council might delegate enforcement measures in a particular case to one or several members of the organization or that it might call upon all members of the organization for assistance.

Paragraph 8 was adopted without discussion.

The British delegation throughout the Conversations attached the greatest importance to the organization and functions of the Military Staff Committee. There was, however, no important difference of opinion on this question. The word “disarmament” was introduced into the paragraph at the request of the Soviet delegation but the British insisted that it be preceded by the word “possible”. There was some discussion of the second sentence of the paragraph and the general understanding was that the Military Staff Committee should act more or less in the role which the Combined Chiefs of Staff has played in the present war. It was agreed that it would be undesirable to have representatives of any states other than the big four or five permanently represented on the Military Staff Committee but it was recognized that representatives of other states would have to be associated with the Committee from time to time in connection with particular enforcement actions and with the organization of the forces and facilities placed at the disposal of the Council. As to the last sentence of the paragraph the understanding was that the Military Staff Committee would not actually command the forces in the field placed at the disposal of the Council but that the Council would designate the commander, presumably from the forces of the state making the largest contribution to the particular enforcement action.

Paragraph 10 was adopted without discussion.

There was considerable argument in regard to the question dealt with in paragraph 11 and the Soviet representatives were inclined to think that this provision might suggest that the organization was concerned with international relief rather than international security. It was pointed out by the British and U. S. delegations, however, that in some cases it would be impossible to expect full cooperation in economic enforcement measures from states who might be economically dependent upon the state against whom the measures were being taken unless some such provision for the relief of a state suffering undue burdens was included in the Charter. This paragraph of course stemmed from Chapter VI, C, 2d of the U.S. document.

Section C

Regional Arrangements

This subject was dealt with in the final stage of the work of the Formulation Group. None of the documents presented by the three Governments dealt with the subject except in general terms or by brief reference. This section, which was originally drafted as a single paragraph and later broken into three paragraphs, was largely formulated by Mr. Pasvolsky on the basis of the U. S. document on Regional Arrangements (ISO 434 ). The general tendency in the Formulation Group was to play down the importance of regional arrangements. This is reflected by the fact that paragraph 1, instead of stating positively, as did the U. S. document in Chapter I, A, 4 that “the Organization should be so constituted as to make possible the existence of regional organizations”, puts the matter negatively by declaring that “nothing in the Charter should preclude the existence of regional arrangements or agencies”.

Special emphasis was placed on the final clause of paragraph 2 stipulating that no enforcement action should be taken under regional arrangements or by regional agencies without the authorization of the Security Council. There was originally contained in this same sentence an exception applying to enforcement action which might be taken by the victor states toward the defeated nations in the present war, but this exception was later transferred to Chapter XII, Transitional Arrangements. Both the British and the Soviet representatives indicated that they would expect military enforcement action to take place to a large extent on a regional basis, but they seemed to feel that this section as drafted met their desires on this point.

Regulation of Armaments

In the earlier drafts prepared by the Formulation Group, there was a separate chapter dealing with the regulation of armaments. The Soviet representatives were not enthusiastic about this chapter and considered that the reference to this matter in the chapter on the Assembly was adequate for the purposes of the Charter. If, however, there was to be a separate chapter on the regulation of armaments, they insisted that this chapter deal also with disarmament. The British, on the other hand, disapproved of placing emphasis on disarmament, feeling that the disarmament which had taken place among the victor powers after the last war had been a fatal error. The British also insisted that it be specifically provided that any international agreement for the regulation of armaments should provide that each state might maintain not only the forces required to meet its international obligations but also forces necessary to meet its requirements “for local defense and internal security”. When asked to explain the meaning of the words “local defense”, they referred to the northwest frontier of India.

Because of the divergent views of the three delegations on this subject, it was finally decided to omit the chapter entirely and to insert among the functions and powers of the Security Council the provision which now appears as paragraph 5 of Section B of Chapter VI.

Chapter IX.—Arrangements for International Economic and Social Cooperation

When, in the latter period of the Conversations, the Soviet delegation agreed to extending the scope of the organization to include economic and social cooperation, the Formulation Group considered a text which it would present for this purpose. A comparison of the text adopted with the corresponding section of the American Proposals will show that the text is almost entirely identical.

Neither the British nor the Soviet delegations had anything prepared on this subject and therefore the Formulation Group, by common consent, agreed to take the American text as a basis. The text, slightly abbreviated, was adopted almost in its original form.

It will be noted that the powers of the Economic and Social Council in Section C, 1, b are a slightly simplified form of the powers indicated in the American Proposals under B, 1. The new C, 1, e is an amalgamation of the American text B, 1, c and d.

At the suggestion of the Soviet delegation, supported by the British and approved by the American, it was agreed to add certain functions to the Economic and Social Council providing for assistance to the Security Council.

At the suggestion of the British delegation, the number of members of the Economic and Social Council was reduced from twenty-four, as suggested in the American Proposals, to eighteen states.

The American delegation was warmly congratulated for having available such a fully developed plan which the Formulation Group could adopt so readily.

Chapter X.—The Secretariat

The Formulation Group decided that the chapter on the Secretariat should be very brief.

The title of “Secretary-General” had been adopted as a result of a special committee headed by Mr. Fletcher set up by the Plenary Committee. The duties of the Secretary-General follow closely the recommendations of the American Proposals. Upon the suggestion of the British delegation, however, it was decided that he should be elected by the General Assembly upon the recommendation of the Security Council, rather than with the concurrence of the Security Council, as the American plan suggested.

The empowering of the Secretary-General, in paragraph 3, with the right to bring to the attention of the Security Council any matter which in his opinion may threaten international peace and security, was originated by the British delegation. There seemed to be no objection to it, and the text was adopted largely as it stood in the British Proposals.

Chapter XI.—Amendments

The Formulation Group considered that a separate chapter should be devoted to amendments, rather than to list this subject among the powers of the General Assembly, as had been suggested in the American Proposals.

There was considerable discussion as to whether only a majority or a two-thirds majority of the members of the General Assembly should be required to propose amendments. There was also some discussion as to whether such amendments required to be approved by two-thirds of the member states or only a majority, and a compromise was accepted by which it would be a majority, plus the states having permanent membership on the Security Council.

The main outlines of the amendments chapter was considered in the Subcommittee on International Organization and the Formulation Group took relatively little time in discussing the question further. The actual wording of the text was largely the work of the British legal adviser.

Chapter XII.—Transitional Arrangements

The substance of paragraph 1 of this chapter originally appeared in Chapter VIII, but, in view of the contention that it was out of place in the body of a document destined, it was hoped, to endure long after the interim period to which it referred, it was decided that it should appear in a separate chapter at the end of the document. There was some discussion of the paragraph being eliminated altogether, but there was a feeling, which was particularly held by the Soviet representatives, that a proposal relating to the maintenance of peace and security would be incomplete if no provision was made for dealing with this interim period. There was, however, a rather general expectation that this provision would not actually appear in the Charter of the International Organization.

The paragraph was based in general on paragraph D, 4 of the U.S. document. The Soviet representatives, however, suggested that it provide that the four powers “assume full responsibility” for the maintenance of peace and security during the interim period. The U.S. delegation, however, was not willing to go so far and pointed out that under our constitutional procedure the Executive would not have the authority to assume such a wide responsibility prior to the ratification by the Congress of the Special Agreement for the Provision of Armed Forces. It was therefore finally decided to copy the wording of paragraph 5 of the Moscow Declaration.

As stated above in the discussion of the section on regional arrangements, paragraph 2 of Chapter XII was originally included as a final clause in paragraph C, 2 of Chapter VIII. It was finally decided, however, that this too was a transitional arrangement and that it might be unwise to refer to “enemy states” and “the present war” in the Charter of an international organization which it is hoped will endure over a long period, It was felt at the same time, however, that it should be made perfectly clear that the states to whom the enemy states in the present war surrender should have full authority to deal with those states in accordance with the terms of surrender and that this authority should not be limited in any way by the provisions of the Charter of the international organization. It was contemplated, however, that the victor states might ultimately wish to transfer some of these responsibilities to the international organization.

98 Not printed; see October 7 draft proposals, p. 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 506].

99  Ante, p. 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 402].

1  Ante, p. 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404].

2  Ante, p. 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415].

3 Not printed; for United States proposal, see progress report of September 13, p. 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459].

4 Not printed.

Memorandum by Mr. Henry Reiff, Legal Specialist on International Organization Lot 60–D 224, Box 51: ISO 27c

[Document 508]

Memorandum by Mr. Henry Reiff, Legal Specialist on International Organization

[Washington,] November 21, 1944.

Transition From the League of Nations to the New International Organization

I. The Problem

Establishment of a new general international organization in place of the League of Nations will raise three important problems respecting the League of Nations: (1) how the League of Nations may be legally terminated in favor of the new organization; (2) how its properties and any of its functions, aside from those vested in the League by separate agreements, may be transferred to the new organization; and (3) how the functions vested in the League by separate agreements may also be transferred. It is desirable that these problems be clarified and, if possible, steps be taken to avoid uncertainty and confusion when the new organization is established.

The problem arises because the Covenant of the League of Nations still constitutes a binding obligation upon the states members of the League, and unless the League is terminated concurrently with the establishment of the new organization these states may be faced with conflicting legal obligations to two general international organizations. Moreover, there would exist some possibility that a few states might endeavor to maintain the League of Nations, in which event there would be two organizations endeavoring to operate in the same field. Furthermore, there might be confusion with regard to the legal status of several hundred treaties which vest certain powers and functions in the League.

II. Relation of the United States to Problem

The termination of the League of Nations is not a matter of primary concern to the United States in view of the fact that the United States is not a member. It is, however, a matter of concern to the extent that the United States has an interest in or is a party to treaties vesting functions in the League of Nations. It also becomes of concern insofar as the continued existence of the League may complicate the establishment of the new general international organization and to the extent that other governments might consult the United States to ascertain any views which it may hold with regard to the best procedure for the transition to the new organization.

It may also be to the interest of the United States that ways and means be found whereby the new international organization may avail itself of the property and assets of the League of Nations.

The present discussion is in response to the suggestions made in the conversations at Dumbarton Oaks that research papers examining possible solutions of the problem of transition and possible procedures to achieve such solutions be prepared and exchanged. To these ends, two sets of solutions are explored below, the first dealing with the substantive problem of dissolution of the League and transfer of its functions to the new international organization and the second dealing with the problem of discovering ways and means which could lead to the adoption of an appropriate mode of dissolution and transfer.

III. Status of League Membership

The status of membership of the League of Nations in relation to prospective membership of the new international organization is as follows:

1. Twenty-eight of the forty-five present members of the League are United Nations or associated with the United Nations.

United Nations: The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Australia, Canada, India, Union of South Africa, New Zealand, China, Belgium, Bolivia, Colombia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, the Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Greece, Iran, Iraq, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Panama, Poland, and Yugoslavia.

Associated Nations: Ecuador, Egypt and Uruguay.

2. Seventeen of the members of the League of Nations are neither United nor Associated Nations: Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina, Austria, Bulgaria, Denmark, Eire, Estonia, Finland, France, Latvia, Lithuania, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, and Turkey.

3. Fifteen of the United Nations and of the Associated Nations are not members of the League: United Nations: Brazil, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, the Philippines, Soviet Union, and the United States.

Associated Nations: Chile, Iceland, Paraguay, Peru, and Venezuela.

IV. Possible Solutions of the Problem of Transition

A. Protocols

(1) Protocol of Dissolution and Transfer

(2) Protocol of Transfer

(1) A protocol of dissolution and of transfer of properties and of functions of the League, aside from those functions vested in it by separate treaties, could be opened for signature by states members of the League, at the time of signing of the basic instrument of the new organization. Such a protocol could provide, as among the signatory states, for the following:

1. The Covenant of the League of Nations should be terminated as of the date the protocol becomes effective.

2. The continuing functions of the League, with the exception of those related to the Permanent Court of International Justice, should be transferred to the new organization, subject to the provisions of the charter of the new international organization.

3. All archives and records of the League should be transferred to the new organization.

4. All the rights, titles, and interests of the League in property of any kind should be transferred to the new international organization, subject to the fulfillment of existing obligations and commitments.

5. The protocol should be open for signature by all members of the League.

6. The protocol, after ratification by at least all those states members of the League who would become initial members of the new organization, should become effective as between the parties at the moment of entry into force of the basic instrument of the new organization. These parties should thereupon proceed with the liquidation of the League.

The suggestion of such a protocol assumes that in the absence of any provision in the Covenant providing for its own termination, common consent or a general consensus, and not unanimous consent, is adequate to the purpose.

It would be desirable, nevertheless, to secure unanimous consent if possible. Every effort to that end should be made. Among the states members of the League but which would not at the outset become members of the Organization are three enemy states, Bulgaria, Finland, and Thailand, and two states not now represented by recognized governments, Albania and Austria, which would be required to consent to the dissolution as part of the terms of the peace settlement. It can be assumed that now, since recognition of the provisional government, France is in a position and would be disposed to consent to dissolution. The status of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania is doubtful, and it seems likely that they will not be in a position to assert any interest which they may have in this problem.

This leaves only the following “neutral” states: Afghanistan, Argentina, Denmark, Eire, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, and Turkey. The possibility that one or more of these states might adopt an intransigent attitude cannot entirely be ignored. If this should occur the principal practical effect would be a possible delay of the transfer of property rights. The possible number of recalcitrant states is too small and their position acting separately too weak seriously to impede the proposed procedure. Presumably, virtually all of them when given an opportunity will join the new organization, and acquiesce in the liquidation of the League.

If it were planned to proceed by means of such a protocol, it would appear that appropriate provision might have to be made in the basic instrument of the new organization authorizing the acceptance of the properties, powers and functions so tendered, and arranging for proper transitory measures, subject to subsequent assignment by the Organization to its appropriate organs.

(2) Protocol of Transfer

Simultaneously with the opening for signature of the protocol of dissolution and transfer, there might be opened for signature by all states with the appropriate interest a protocol to the following effect: 1. In all treaties or other engagements, excepting the Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice, to which the signatories are parties or in which they have or claim an interest, vesting any rights, powers, authority, or functions in the League of Nations, the new Organization should be substituted for the League, subject to the provisions of the Charter of the new Organization.

2. This protocol, after ratification by at least all those States members of the League who would become initial members of the new Organization, should become effective as between the parties at the moment of entry into force of the basic instrument of the new Organization.

B. Amendment of the Covenant

Article 26 provides a procedure for amendment of the Covenant through favorable action by all members of the League represented on the Council, and a majority of those represented in the Assembly. This procedure could conceivably be used either to substitute the provisions of the Charter of the new Organization for the provisions of the Covenant or to terminate the League and transfer its functions to the new Organization. This use of the amending process could be regarded as the action of the constituent authority of the League. States dissenting from such an amendment would in accordance with the Covenant cease to be members of the League, but it is to be presumed that any member willing to join the new Organization would be willing to support such an amendment. One advantage of this method is that it perhaps constitutes as near an approach to an unimpeachable legal process as could be found, and that it offers a dignified procedure by which the League could terminate its own existence.

It may be argued against this procedure that it would call for meetings of organs of the League whose status is now uncertain. While it may also be argued that there is little precedent for using the amending process for such a purpose, it may be less open to objections on the ground of illegality than some other method. It may further be argued that this method, by preserving formal continuity between the League and the new Organization and making the latter the legal successor of the former, would arouse opposition from some who have regarded the League with disfavor. This objection would have less force if the new Organization were created independently, as it is proposed that it should be, and thereafter accepted by the League through its process of amendment. Aside from any validity which this objection may have in fact, the same objection could be raised against procedure by separate protocol. In either case the validity of the objection would depend upon the effect of the protocol or the amendment.

C. Revision of the Peace Treaties of 1919

Since the Covenant of the League of Nations is a part of each of four treaties of peace of 1919 which became effective, the League might be dissolved and its properties transferred to the new international organization through termination of the appropriate parts of those treaties.

This procedure would be open to the objections: (1) that, under the view that the Covenant is separate or severable from the various peace treaties in which it is found, the consent of the parties to those treaties, respectively, would not be necessary; (2) that, if the Covenant is not separate or severable despite the amendment now ratified by 18 states, the consent of all signatories to those treaties would be ineffective, since the states parties to the four treaties of peace and the states members of the League were not and never have been identical; (3) that this procedure could not dispose of the interests of at least 13 states members of the League but not signatories of the peace treaties.

Since the states parties to the several treaties of peace of 1919 and the States members of the League are not now identical in most cases, the view may be adopted that the Covenant of the League can be terminated only by consent of both the parties to the treaties of peace of 1919 and the present members of the League. If so, an appropriate procedure might be to adopt a protocol of dissolution and transfer signed by both groups of states.

D. Establishment of New Organization Without Reference to Treaties or Covenant

A practical approach which would disregard legal continuity as such, but which might conform to the practice at times resorted to by States, would be for the states desiring to establish the new general international organization to agree to the basic instrument for the new organization without reference to the peace treaties of 1919 or to the Covenant of the League of Nations, and to proceed to act henceforth under the obligations of this instrument. This procedure might more nearly satisfy the requirements of international law, and might further be justified on the ground that the Covenant had lost its force by desuetude, thus leaving states free to set up a new international organization by agreement.

V. Possible Means To Initiate Solution of Transition

With respect to the question of possible ways and means of achieving the adoption of an appropriate solution of the problem of transition, the following possible means are submitted. They could be utilized with respect to the achievement of any of the Possible Solutions explored above except D. Establishment of New Organization Without Reference to Treaties or Covenant.

A. States members of the United Nations, who are also members of the League of Nations, could before or at the time of the forthcoming conference of the United Nations initiate intergovernmental discussions on the formulation of plans looking toward the assumption of the initiative by the League itself with respect to its dissolution.

B. Alternatively, the United Nations, while in conference or preparatory thereto, could initiate the transfer by indicating what functions and responsibilities now exercised and possessed by the League of Nations, they would be willing to assume under the new Charter.

C. A further possibility lies in the setting up of a Committee representing the United Nations and a committee representing the League of Nations, either before or during the forthcoming conference of the United Nations, to confer together with a view to proposing to their respective bodies an appropriate solution to the problem of transition.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State 500.CC/12–844

[Document 509]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leo Pasvolsky, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] December 8, 1944.

Participants: Secretary of State

Mr. Dulles5

Later joined by: Mr. Joseph C. Grew

Mr. James Clement Dunn

Mr. Green Hackworth

Mr. Leo Pasvolsky

Admiral Willson

Mr. Dulles called on the Secretary this morning and had a long conversation with him. They were joined later by Messrs. Grew, Dunn, Hackworth and Pasvolsky. Mr. Dulles went back to New York with the Secretary’s party, and during the trip there was a long conversation between him, the Secretary, Admiral Willson, Mr. Dunn, Mr. Hackworth and Mr. Pasvolsky.

The whole subject of Dumbarton Oaks was thoroughly gone over and Mr. Dulles again expressed his general agreement with the proposals. A large part of the conversation was devoted to the question of voting procedure in the Security Council and the problem of trusteeship.

On the subject of voting procedure, Mr. Dulles was given a comprehensive review of the possibilities that confront us from the point of view of the two extreme positions, as well as some middle ground along the lines of the formula that was discussed at Dumbarton Oaks. His comment was that he had himself thought of some such possibility and had come to the conclusion that the best way to handle the matter would be to provide that permanent members of the Council, when parties to a dispute, should not vote in procedures envisaged in Section A of Chapter VIII, but would retain their vote in procedures involved in Section B of that chapter. In fact, he said that if he himself had been drafting the document, he would have incorporated in it provisions of this type. He also said that that very morning he expressed thoughts along those lines to Senator Vandenberg, who appeared to be horrified by the proposal.

The problem of trusteeship and some of the related problems of dependent areas were thoroughly gone over. Mr. Dulles expressed great satisfaction at the amount of thinking that has been done and his gratification that we are determined to push for the inclusion in the eventual charter of some provisions regarding international trusteeship. He said that such provisions would be absolutely necessary from the point of view of the acceptability of the proposed organization in this country.

In the course of the conversation, Mr. Dulles stated that while he had discussed his trip to Washington with Governor Dewey, he was really calling upon the Secretary in his personal capacity and in part in connection with his work with the Federal Council of Churches. He said that the question is still unsettled as to whether or not he would go on as Governor Dewey’s adviser on foreign affairs, but that he would, of course, inform the Governor of the results of his conversations in Washington.

5 John Foster Dulles, adviser on foreign affairs to Governor Thomas E. Dewey, Republican candidate for the Presidency. For Secretary Hull’s account of a series of conversations with Mr. Dulles beginning August 23, 1944, see his Memoirs, vol. ii, pp. 1689 ff.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Stimson) 500.CC/8–344

[Document 510]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Stimson)

Washington, December 30, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I refer to a letter to me of August 3, 1944 from General Marshall and to my reply of August 5, 19446 on the subject of international trusteeships.

In deference to the wishes of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, we were glad to eliminate this topic from the Dumbarton Oaks conversations. However, the topic was raised at Dumbarton Oaks on a number of occasions by the other participants. Briefly summarized, those occasions were substantially as follows:

The Soviet delegation asked why the subject was not being discussed, expressed their desire to discuss it, and, when informed that we considered it wiser to leave the subject for future consideration, asked whether it would be discussed at the general conference or made the subject of a prior exchange of views. They expressed a desire for the latter procedure. The British delegation raised the question and were told that we had under consideration the possibility of exchanging papers on the subject. They said that they were prepared to participate in such an exchange. The Chinese delegation also raised the question, and they, too, expressed a desire to exchange papers on the subject; In none of the above instances was any question raised as to the particular territories which might be involved. The emphasis was exclusively upon general principles and particularly upon the kind of machinery which might effectively and appropriately be established in conjunction with the international organization.

The question has also been raised many times in public discussion about the Dumbarton Oaks proposals both here and abroad. There has been a considerable amount of criticism that the subject of international trusteeships was omitted from the proposals.

It is clear, therefore, that we are confronted with the need of re-examining the whole matter from the viewpoint of further procedure. In such consideration as we have so far given it, we have come to the following conclusions: 1. It is inescapable that the question of international trusteeships will have to be discussed at least at the general conference, and that in all likelihood a chapter on general principles and machinery will have to be included in the final charter of the United Nations.

2. It is entirely possible, in dealing with this subject, to separate the formulation of general principles and of provisions for machinery from consideration of specific territories, the latter subject to be left for future determination.

We would very much like to have the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the War and Navy Departments participate with us in the preparation general conference to be called for that purpose. This proposal will be limited to expressions of general principles and to provision of appropriate machinery of an international nature. We are giving consideration to the possibility of discussing our proposal with the British, Soviet and Chinese Governments prior to the general conference.

We would very much like to have the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the War and Navy Departments participate with us in the preparation of this proposal, and we hope that you will designate representatives of the Joint Chiefs of Staff for that purpose. As we are hopeful that the general conference can be held sometime this winter we naturally wish to formulate the proposal as promptly as possible.

I am sending a similar letter to Secretary Forrestal.7

Sincerely yours,

E. R. Stettinius, Jr.

6  Ante, pp. 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410] and 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413], respectively.

7 James V. Forrestal, Secretary of the Navy.

Interest of the United States in the reaction of non-participating Governments to the Dumbarton Oaks ProposalsInterest of the United States in the reaction of non-participating Governments to the Dumbarton Oaks Proposals

[511] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Director of the Office of American Republic Affairs (Armour)

[Washington,] September 12, 1944.

500.CC/9–1244

[512] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Caribbean and Central American Affairs (Cabot)

[Washington,] September 15, 1944.

500.CC/9–1544

[513] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Caribbean and Central American Affairs (Cabot)

[Washington,] September 16, 1944.

500.CC/9–1644

[514] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions in the American Republics

Washington, October 7, 1944—7 p.m.

500.CC/10–744: Circular telegram

[515] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 18, 1944—5 p.m.

500.CC/10–1844: Circular telegram

[516] The Chargé in Brazil (Donnelly) to the Director of the Office of American Republic Affairs (Armour)

Rio de Janeiro, October 19, 1944.

500.CC/10–1944

[517] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Eastern European Affairs (Bohlen)

Ottawa, November 5, 1944.

500.CC/11–544

[518] The Acting Secretary of State to Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics

Washington, November 8, 1944.

500.CC/11–844

[519] The Ambassador in Belgium (Sawyer) to the Secretary of State

Brussels, November 25, 1944. [Received December 9.]

500.CC/11–2544

[520] The Acting Secretary of State to Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics

Washington, November 27, 1944.

500.CC/11–2744

[521] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 27, 1944. [Received December 9.]

500.CC/11–2744

[522] The Secretary of State to Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics

Washington, December 15, 1944—9:45 a.m.

500.CC/12–1544: Circular airgram

[523] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Brazil (Donnelly)

Washington, December 18, 1944—7 p.m.

500.CC/12–1844: Telegram

[524] The Chargé in Brazil (Donnelly) to the Secretary of State

Rio de Janeiro, December 27, 1944—8 p.m. [Received 11:50 p.m.]

500.CC/12–2744: Telegram

[525] The Ambassador in the Netherlands (Hornbeck) to the Secretary of State

London, December 27, 1944. [Received January 6, 1945—11 a.m.]

500.CC/12–2744: Airgram

[526] Meeting in Room 285, State Department, on December 29, 3:45 p.m., Including the Secretary, Assistant Secretary Nelson A. Rockefeller, Chiefs of the Diplomatic Missions of the American Republics, Except Argentina and El Salvador, and Certain American Officers

Washington, December 29, 1944, 3:45 p.m.

Lot 60–D 224, Box 54: ISO 243

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Director of the Office of American Republic Affairs (Armour) 500.CC/9–1244

[Document 511]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Director of the Office of American Republic Affairs (Armour)

[Extract]1

[Washington,] September 12, 1944.

The Brazilian Ambassador2 told me that he had just learned of a despatch from Washington published in Brazil to the effect that certain of the American republics had agreed together to have China represent them at the Dumbarton Oaks Conference and that the Ambassadors of Brazil and Peru were present at a meeting at which this was decided. Dr. Martins said that he had tried to run down the origin of this ridiculous report: he had ascertained that neither the AP nor the UP had sent it and he was at a loss to know how such an absurd rumor had started. I told the Ambassador I was afraid I could throw no light on it but I would see if I could find out anything, but in the meantime advised him not to worry about it as I was sure that no one would take it seriously.

The Ambassador then went on to explain his difficulties and those of his government arising from the complete ignorance in which they had been kept as to the progress of the Dumbarton Oaks Conference. While he appeared to understand the problem, he explained that President Vargas and the Foreign Office were considerably embarrassed by having to admit that they knew nothing other than what they had seen in the press regarding the negotiations and that for that matter even the Argentine Government probably knew as much as they did. Dr. Martins said that various journalists and other Brazilians who had come up from Brazil had mentioned this to him and while he did not wish to embarrass the Department by seeming to be too insistent, he would greatly appreciate anything that could be done to inform him at least in a general way as to the course the negotiations were taking.

I told the Ambassador that this was a matter that had given all of us some concern and that the Secretary himself had studied the possibility of some way in which the other American republics and their representatives here in Washington could be kept informed. With that end in view at least two informative telegrams have been sent to our various missions for the information of the governments,3 and I told the Ambassador we would be very glad to see that the information in these messages was brought to his attention. I added that I would also speak to the Secretary as to the possibility of having some further information on this subject communicated to him. I knew that it was the Secretary’s intention later to call in the American chiefs of mission and give them a summary of events to date, but I was not sure just when this meeting would be. Furthermore, I said that once the negotiations had terminated and the document had been approved it would be communicated to the various American governments including his own, and at that time consultations would be initiated and ideas exchanged. To the Ambassador’s query as to whether a meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the American republics would be called, I said that I thought this would largely depend on various factors, including the time set for the general world conference.…

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1 The omitted portion of this memorandum related to cancellation of a meeting between Argentine and Brazilian army officers, and to the resignation of Oswaldo Aranha, Brazilian Foreign Minister, on August 22, 1944.

2 Carlos Martins Pereira e Sousa.

3 Circular telegrams of August 29 and September 6, 1944; neither printed.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Caribbean and Central American Affairs (Cabot) 500.CC/9–1544

[Document 512]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Caribbean and Central American Affairs (Cabot)4

[Washington,] September 15, 1944.

Participants: Secretary Hull

Dr. Gabriel Turbay, Ambassador of Colombia

Mr. Carlos Martins, Ambassador of Brazil

Señor Pedro Beltrán, Ambassador of Peru

Dr. Francisco Castillo Nájera, Ambassador of Mexico

Dr. Juan Carlos Blanco, Ambassador of Uruguay

Dr. Diógenes Escalante, Ambassador of Venezuela

Señor Enrique Gajardo, Chargé d’Affaires of Chile

Mr. Norman Armour,5 ARA

Mr. John M. Cabot, CCA

After some preliminary remarks, particularly with regard to recent successes in the war, the Secretary remarked that the matter of international organization for the maintenance of peace had been the subject of study by many organizations in recent years. He said that these studies all showed a general similarity with regard to the structure of an international organization and were generally similar to the plan which we had submitted at Dumbarton Oaks. He pointed out that the conversations there were preparatory, and on a technical level.

The Secretary then described at some length the background of his talks with Congressional leaders6 and said that he was now convinced that this fundamental matter would be handled on a non-partisan basis. He spoke of the role which economic matters would necessarily play in international relations in the post-war period. He mentioned a few of the many economic matters which would inevitably come up for discussion and said that any international organization must provide a place where they could be discussed.

The Secretary then went on to comment on some of the background of the conversations now being held at Dumbarton Oaks. He pointed out that in these talks we had insisted that the recommendations follow principles already established in the Inter-American community; for example, non-intervention and non-discrimination. He then spoke of the difficulties which had naturally arisen in the conversations; for example, the Russians with their different concepts, had sometimes found it difficult to understand what we were driving at and we what the Russians were driving at. He said that he nevertheless expected that the Russian talks would finish in ten days to two weeks and that the Chinese talks would take some days immediately thereafter. The Secretary said that now that we had won so many victories, we sometimes overlooked the very difficult position in which we found ourselves in 1940. Indicating the Brazilian Ambassador, the Secretary said that his country had then been in peril of German attack, and he said that the German attack on Russia had changed all this. Russia, by an immense sacrifice of blood and treasure, had borne the brunt of the German attack and thereby saved the western hemisphere from invasion.

The Secretary added that after the document drawn up at Dumbarton Oaks had been approved by the four Governments, it would then be transmitted, so we intended, to the United and associated Nations for their consideration. He expressed the wish of inviting the Ambassadors to meet with him again in order that after having ascertained their Government’s views it might be possible to discuss the document together. He hoped that a general conference might be held in November.

The Secretary then spoke of the unfortunate situation which has been created by the failure of one Government to fulfill its commitments. He pointed out that in Montevideo7 he had begun to rebuild our entire policy around the central point of non-intervention in spite of the feelings of other members of the United States Delegation, and that he steadily worked to this end in intervening years. Until 1942 Argentina had cooperated. … The Secretary expressed the firm belief that continental solidarity could not endure if the other republics were to recognize a Government which had thus repudiated its solemn commitments. He emphasized the importance of a continuing policy of non-recognition.

The Secretary then asked whether any of the Ambassadors had any questions. The Mexican Ambassador cleared up one small point in regard to the time schedule.

4 Sent with circular instruction of September 23, 1944, to diplomatic representatives in the American Republics except Argentina; instruction not printed.

5 Acting Director of the Office of American Republic Affairs.

6 See Department of State, Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, 1939–1945 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1949), pp. 258–269 and 315–326.

7 For correspondence on the Seventh International Conference of American States held at Montevideo, December 3–26, 1933, see Foreign Relations, 1933, vol. iv, pp. 1 ff.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Caribbean and Central American Affairs (Cabot) 500.CC/9–1644

[Document 513]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Caribbean and Central American Affairs (Cabot)8

[Washington,] September 16, 1944.

Participants: The Secretary

The Dominican Ambassador9

The Haitian Ambassador10

The Panamanian Ambassador11

The Salvadoran Ambassador12

The Cuban Chargé d’Affaires13

The Bolivian Chargé d’Affaires14

The Guatemalan Chargé d’Affaires15

The Costa Rican Chargé d’Affaires16

The Nicaraguan Chargé d’Affaires17

The Ecuadoran Chargé d’Affaires18

The Military Attaché of the Honduran Embassy19

ARA—Mr. Armour

CCA—Mr. Cabot

The Secretary began by discussing the vital role which cooperation had played in the past in inter-American affairs and must continue to play in the future. He said that at Montevideo he had proposed a program revolving around the doctrine of non-intervention. Upon his return he had insisted to the President upon a number of steps including a withdrawal from the then existing interventions and abrogation of the Platt Amendment.20

The Secretary said that if we had gone to war haphazardly the peace would necessarily have been haphazard and uneasy. Moreover, the danger of attack would have been increased if the American Republics had not been united. Unity and cooperation had saved us from attack. Germany had made the blunder of not seizing the vital North African bases from which it would have been possible to have attacked this hemisphere by plane.

The Secretary stated that without the cooperation for which the foundations had been laid at Montevideo some of the American Republics would have followed the Argentine regime and its German followers. All of the American Republics would then have gone down together. As it is now, however, we are confronted with the choice of whether to cooperate in peace.

One of the questions which we must face is that of post-war organization. Private organizations have been drafting on this subject for some time. We have studied their suggestions. All drafts, including ours,21 include the same fundamental principles, many of which were also embodied in the League Covenant.22 There will be an Assembly, a Council, and a World Court and a Secretariat. There will be provision for discussion of economic and social welfare questions.

The work so far has been done by technicians. These technicians have been discussing and weighing ideas, changing both substance and wording from day to day. It is on this account that nothing is now being made public beyond the general principles embodied in the draft. Some of our friends at the talks are not used to our press. The Russians are in a somewhat difficult position. In the talks we have insisted on the observance of the rights of middle and small sized nations. We recognize that the large and small nations are interdependent. In the recommendations being drafted, the principles established at the Montevideo Conference, for example in regard to non-intervention, are being observed; also those fundamental to the Good Neighbor Policy. We have sought to increase in every possible way the functions of the Assembly in which every Nation will be represented. The Assembly will be able to discuss all matters regarding the preservation of peace, and can make recommendations to the Council. (The Secretary at this point stressed to the group the need for secrecy regarding the points he was making.)

The Secretary said that the conversations were getting along nicely except for the unavoidable delays required for full discussion and the time required for instructions to come from Moscow. The Chinese talks should take only a few days. As soon as the talks are finished we plan to send the document to each of the other nations and to lay it before the public. The Secretary then planned to invite the representatives of all the republics of the Western Hemisphere, to give them the document, to talk it over with them, to answer their questions and to explain any obscure points. He hoped that a general conference might be held not later than November. He said that he welcomed the opportunity to talk to them as we had talked candidly to each other for eleven years at other conferences.

The Secretary then asked Mr. Armour whether he had any further points to make. Mr. Armour said that we might wish to emphasize that the United States felt that the Inter-American System should be maintained and strengthened. The Secretary said that was just what he had been trying to say: that we are trying to preserve on a world wide basis the principles developed in this hemisphere. The countries of the hemisphere must stand together. There is a need for talking these matters out. The Secretary then asked whether anyone wished to ask any questions.

The Salvadoran Ambassador then got up and referred to the newspaper squib this morning saying that the Ambassadors yesterday had merely been talked to. Dr. Castro said that we all knew that this was completely untrue, that never in all of his experience with the Secretary had he failed to have an opportunity to make any comments he might desire. He then praised the Secretary’s work at Montevideo and referred to the change of spirit in inter-American relations after that Conference. He said that he hoped that the general conference on international organization would be held at Washington.

The Secretary said that the seat of the Conference had not been decided, but he indicated the hope that it might be held in this country. He thanked Dr. Castro for his remarks. The Secretary then emphasized the supreme importance of cooperation. He referred to his bitter disappointment that the Argentine Government had been seized by force by Fascists and other dangerous elements at such a critical moment for the hemisphere. He said that we were asked to put our arms around this crowd and to recognize it but that it would not promise better conduct in return. If we who have kept pure the ideals of fair play and cooperation do not continue to refuse to recognize those who have not, it will be the end of Pan Americanism.

8 Sent with circular instruction of September 23, 1944, to diplomatic representatives in the American Republics except Argentina; instruction not printed.

9 Anselmo Capello.

10 André Liautaud.

11 Enrique A. Jiménez.

12 Hector D. Castro.

13 José T. Barón.

14 Carlos D. Chopitea.

15 Enrique López-Hérrarte.

16 Jorge Hazera.

17 Alberto Sevilla Sacasa.

18 Sixto E. Durán-Ballén.

19 Capt. Juan Da Costa.

20 See Foreign Relations, 1934, vol. v, pp. 183–185.

21 For text of the U.S. draft presented at the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations, see p. 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 402].

22 For text of the Covenant of the League of Nations, see Foreign Relations, The Paris Peace Conference, 1919, vol. xiii, p. 69.

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions in the American Republics 500.CC/10–744: Circular telegram

[Document 514]

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions in the American Republics 23

Washington, October 7, 1944—7 p.m.

Recirtels September 30, 6 p.m. and October 5, 6 p.m.24 The document25 transmitted with the circular instruction of September 2926 will be released for publication Monday, October 9th, at noon. Please inform the Foreign Minister as soon as possible of this fact and tell him that you wish to deliver a copy to him in advance of publication and would appreciate an opportunity to call on him for that purpose at 9 o’clock Monday morning.27

In handing the document to the Foreign Minister, you should say that these proposals have been agreed upon by the four delegations to the Dumbarton Oaks conversations and referred to their respective governments who will publish them simultaneously at noon October ninth. Please state that your Government has, as an act of special courtesy, instructed its diplomatic representatives in the other American republics which have actively cooperated in the war effort to deliver these proposals to those governments informally in advance of publication, but that they will not be transmitted formally to any government until further consideration has been given by the four governments to the questions which remain undecided, and until, therefore, a complete set of proposals can be placed before the governments as a basis of discussion at a full conference.

Please impress upon the Foreign Minister my confident expectation that he will keep the receipt of the document and its contents in strictest confidence until the time of publication. You should also tell him that copies will be handed to diplomatic missions in Washington at 9 o’clock Monday.

You are also requested to speak to the Foreign Minister along the following lines:

President Roosevelt and I are keenly aware of his interest and that of his government in the successful establishment of an effective general international organization, and we realize that there will be questions which he wishes to ask and comments he desires to make regarding these proposals, in advance of a general conference to consider them formally. It is my hope therefore that, after he has had an opportunity to study them, he will transmit his views upon them to the chief of his government’s diplomatic mission in Washington, as I should like very much to meet together at a convenient time with all the chiefs of mission of the American republics which have actively cooperated in the war effort in order to have a full and frank exchange of views on the proposals. I shall of course, be glad to receive his chief of mission at any other time to discuss them, if he so desires.

You will, of course, report fully on reactions to these proposals.

Hull

23 Sent to all American Republics, except Argentina, Brazil, Haiti, and Mexico; repeated to Brazil as instruction 6427, to Haiti as instruction 122, and to Mexico with the directive to “inform Cabot”, Chief of the Division of Caribbean and Central American Affairs.

24 Neither printed.

25 “Proposals for the Establishment of a General International Organization”, p. 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 506].

26 Not printed.

27 October 9, 1944. In a circular telegram dated October 8, noon, the Chiefs of Mission in all the other American Republics, except Argentina, were advised to take action in accordance with this telegram of October 7 (500.CC/10–844).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 500.CC/10–1844: Circular telegram

[Document 515]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)28

Washington, October 18, 1944—5 p.m.

For the Ambassador and Schoenfeld.29 Reporting Opinion on International Organization.30 The Department has need for comprehensive information as to the unofficial as well as official reactions in European countries to the Dumbarton Oaks document recently published. For each country these should include the views not only of important officials but also influential private individuals, groups and organizations, including particularly opposition political groups or parties which may now influence or in due course direct the foreign policy of the country.

It is desired to receive information concerning such phases of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals as the following: 1. Provisions relating to the organization and powers of the Security Council and General Assembly.

2. Position of the smaller states in the Organization.

3. Voting provisions.

4. Economic and military sanctions.

5. Provisions as to regional arrangements with respect to the maintenance and enforcement of peace.

6. The international court of justice.

7. Arrangements for international economic and social cooperation, especially the Economic and Social Council.

8. Announced procedure for creating the General International Organization, and in particular any views on membership of the Conference.

9. Whether the Organization should be established now or after the war.

10. Reactions to the omitted section on territorial trusteeship, still under consideration.

11. Attitude toward terminating the League of Nations.

12. Suggestions for supplements to and amendments of the proposals and comments on any other points which, in your judgment, should be referred to the Department.

You should, of course, indicate the influence and importance of the various opinions reported. The Department also desires to know what aspects of the proposals for the General International Organization receive most attention and comment.

In view of the urgent need for this information, the Department will appreciate as prompt and full reporting as possible on the above topics. In the event that inquiries are made during the course of any discussions of the subject, the Department would be glad to have them referred to Washington for comment.

Hull

28 Repeated on the same date to Belgium, France, Iceland, Ireland, Luxembourg, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Soviet Union, and to the Embassy at Cairo, Egypt, for the United States Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk).

29 Rudolf E. Schoenfeld was Chargé at the American Embassy near the Governments in Exile of Czechoslovakia, the Netherlands, Norway, and Poland.

30 A circular airgram of similar purport had been sent to all Diplomatic Officers in the other American Republics, October 16, 1944, 11:30 a.m.; not printed.

The Chargé in Brazil (Donnelly) to the Director of the Office of American Republic Affairs (Armour) 500.CC/10–1944

[Document 516]

The Chargé in Brazil (Donnelly) to the Director of the Office of American Republic Affairs (Armour)

Rio de Janeiro, October 19, 1944.

Dear Mr. Ambassador: Velloso32 continues to stress the importance the Brazilian Government attaches to Brazil’s being elected as a member on the Security Council. He says that Ambassador Martins has informed him that the question was raised by President Roosevelt at the Quebec Conference following Mr. Churchill’s recommendation that France be made a member of the Council.33 Martins is reported to have said that President Roosevelt remarked to Churchill: “If we agree on France, then I must take care of my good friends the Brazilians because they will expect to be included in the Permanent Council.”

The public and press here have been very lukewarm towards the Dumbarton Oaks proposals due chiefly to the omission of any reference to Brazil. They consider Brazil to be by far the most important country in the Americas, outside of the United States.

Sincerely yours,

Walter J. Donnelly

32 Pedro Leão Velloso, Acting Foreign Minister of Brazil.

33 Documentation on the Second Quebec Conference, September 11–16, 1944, is scheduled for publication in a subsequent volume of Foreign Relations.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Eastern European Affairs (Bohlen) 500.CC/11–544

[Document 517]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Eastern European Affairs (Bohlen)

Ottawa, November 5, 1944.

Participants: The American Ambassador, Kay Atherton, Norman Robertson, Undersecretary of State for External Affairs,

Charles E. Bohlen.

On Sunday morning34 Mr. Norman Robertson called at his request at the Embassy to discuss informally and personally with Mr. Atherton and Mr. Bohlen the Dumbarton Oaks proposals.

Mr. Robertson began by asking the Ambassador what in general was his impression of the general feeling of the American public in regard to United States participation in a world organization.

The Ambassador replied that it was his understanding that there was general support for American participation in an international organization provided that organization was world wide in its application and responsibility. He said he felt that neither the American Government nor the American people would consider favorably participation in any form of regional security organization which would be designed to consider only European problems and that it was for this reason that from the President down all American officials connected with the problems of international security had stressed the necessity of any organization being of a world wide nature.

In reply to Mr. Robertson’s question, Mr. Bohlen briefly outlined the considerations involved in the still unresolved question of voting in the Council. He mentioned that at the close of the Dumbarton talks the official Soviet position had been all decisions of the Council should be taken by a majority vote with the concurring votes in all cases of the permanent members; whereas the American and British position had remained that parties to a dispute should refrain from voting when that dispute was under consideration by the Council. Mr. Robertson inquired whether the so-called compromise suggestion,35 with which he seemed entirely familiar, had ever been officially advanced. Mr. Bohlen replied that this formula had merely been discussed informally among the technical experts and had never been officially presented by any one of the three Governments and in fact had never even been submitted to Moscow by the Soviet delegation.

Mr. Robertson then said that after careful study of the proposals Canadian thinking was that, as presented, they did not provide adequate representation for those countries other than the permanent members who would be required to contribute quotas of force to the international organization. He said that the proposals gave somewhat the appearance of attempting to perpetuate in the form of a permanent peace instrument the particular relationships which had grown up during the war between the great powers and their lesser allies. He said that since the Dumbarton Oaks proposals, correctly in his view, recognized the fact that nations possessing greater armed force bore a greater responsibility it would perhaps have been more desirable to have carried this principle through to its logical conclusion and provide for greater representation of those powers ranking immediately below the “great powers”. He mentioned parenthetically that he thought that even during the war it would perhaps be wiser to include the lesser active allies on such joint boards as the Combined Chiefs of Staff.36

Mr. Bohlen remarked that during the Dumbarton talks we had understood from the British that the Canadian Government had suggested that the six non-permanent seats in the Council be limited to those countries which would in fact provide quotas of force.

Mr. Robertson said that he was speaking in terms of general considerations rather than of a specific solution but that he did feel that the proposals as now drafted did not take into account sufficiently the role of the countries which lay between the great powers and those like Guatemala, for example, which possessed no military strength whatsoever.

Mr. Bohlen then remarked that it was his understanding that from the beginning of the studies which were made in the Department of State concerning a world security organization one of the chief problems was to reconcile the necessity for an effective and swift machinery for preserving the peace which could only be done by recognizing the greater responsibilities of the great powers with the principle of the sovereign equality of all nations large and small.37

Mr. Robertson said that personally he thought it would perhaps have been better to have left unstated in the document the principle of the sovereign equality of all nations which the proposals themselves seem to contradict, and that perhaps a wiser solution would have been merely to continue the wartime association based on the leadership of the four principal Allies for the specific purpose of dealing with the defeated enemy countries and not attempt to present the wartime association in the guise of a permanent instrument for a permanent international organization. He continued that if an interim arrangement based on the wartime association had been decided upon, the lesser allies could and should have been drawn into the practical questions involved in the occupation and policing the enemy states and that at some date in the future an entirely fresh start, based on the experience gained, could be made towards producing a general international organization to preserve the peace.

Mr. Robertson dwelt at some length on the present desirability of giving a greater share of responsibility in matters affecting Germany in particular to the lesser continental Allies. He said he thought it had been a mistake not to include in the beginning representatives of the European Allies in the discussions of the EAC,38 and he thought it would be greatly to the advantage of both Great Britain and the United States if these continental Allies were encouraged in every way to take an increasing part in the future occupation of Germany. In this connection Mr. Robertson said that he had felt that both in London and in Washington there was a tendency to refer dealings on what he called the unitary basis; that is that Great Britain would speak for the Commonwealth and the United States for Latin America. He said that last May at the Commonwealth Conference39 in London Churchill had strongly urged that the members of the British Commonwealth should decide among themselves what their joint position was to be and that the British Government should then speak for the whole Commonwealth. Mr. Robertson said that the Canadian Government backed by New Zealand and South Africa had taken strong positions against this suggestion and contended that it was wiser from every point of view for the Dominion Governments to deal directly with other governments even when there was an agreed Commonwealth position. He said that in the end Mr. Churchill had withdrawn his proposals on this point.

Perhaps because of the general feeling that the Dumbarton Oaks proposals as a whole did not give adequate representation to the medium powers, Mr. Robertson did not express any clear views one way or another on the question of voting in the Council, although he did express interest in the possibility of Russian acceptance of the compromise proposal.

In connection with the compromise proposal there was some discussion as to the possible necessity, in order to meet the Russian view, of leaving for an unspecified number of years the European territorial settlements exempt from review or consideration by the international organization. On this subject Mr. Robertson seemed to feel that some of the proposed European settlements such as the extension of the Polish western frontier to the Oder and the Dutch claim to German territory would require strong guarantees from the international organization in order to be maintained.

The conversation, which lasted well over an hour, appeared to reflect Canadian disappointment that Canada, although possessing an appreciable military force, had been placed in the same category as the weakest and most insignificant countries in the world and also Canadian reluctance to be regarded as merely a part of the British Empire.

Charles E. Bohlen

34 November 5.

35 Dated September 13, p. 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462].

36 For documentation relating to the formation of the Combined Chiefs of Staff, consisting of senior United States and British officers, see the records of the First Washington (Arcadia) Conference, December 22, 1941–January 14, 1942, to be published in a subsequent volume of Foreign Relations.

37 See Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, 1939–1945, pp. 24–25, 88–90, 101–102, 108–114, and 266–288, passim; The Memoirs of Cordell Hull, vol. ii (New York, the Macmillan Company, 1948), pp. 1686–1689.

38 European Advisory Commission. The decision to create this body was made at the Tripartite Conference of Foreign Ministers, held in Moscow, October 18–November 1, 1943. For correspondence concerning this Commission, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 801 ff., and ante, pp. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1] ff.

39 The Conference of Dominion Premiers was held in London, May 1–16, 1944.

The Acting Secretary of State to Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics 500.CC/11–844

[Document 518]

The Acting Secretary of State to Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics

Washington, November 8, 1944.

Sirs: With reference to the Department’s circular telegram of October 27, 1944, 3 p.m.,40 there is enclosed herewith for your information and for such discreet use as you may wish to make of them,

(1) A list of the persons present at the second Blair House meeting on October 26, 1944;41

(2) A summary of the discussion;

(3) Draft of the proposed informal remarks to be made by the Acting Secretary in opening the meeting;42 and

(4) An English translation of the remarks of the Uruguayan Ambassador at this meeting.42

You have doubtless already seen the press communiqué issued on October 26 with regard to this proposed meeting.43 A copy is transmitted herewith for your convenience.

Very truly yours,

E. R. Stettinius, Jr.

[Enclosure]

Summary of Discussion With Representatives of the Other American Republics

Second Meeting at Blair House to Discuss International Organization, Thursday, October 26, 1944

The Acting Secretary began the meeting by giving a brief speech of welcome (see attached proposed draft).44 He then introduced the American Ambassadors45 present as well as Admiral Willson46 and General Strong.47 He asked Admiral Willson for his comment on our naval battle against the Japanese.48 Admiral Willson said that our success on the Pacific had been, according to the Navy’s radio reports, even greater than the newspaper accounts indicated. The Acting Secretary then introduced Ambassador Harriman,49 who sketched in the background of the communiqué issued following the Churchill-Stalin meeting50 and indicated the achievements of that meeting. He also commented on the important and useful work which the Ambassadors of the other American republics in Moscow had been doing in interpreting to the Soviet officials the principles underlying inter-American cooperation.

The Acting Secretary then remarked that he and his colleagues in the Department were eager to hear any expressions of views from the Ambassadors on the Dumbarton document, although he realized that they probably had not had time to receive any comments from their governments. Stating that he understood Ambassador of Uruguay wished to make some remarks, he then called upon Señor Blanco, who made the personal statement transcribed in the attached memorandum.51 Following this, the Acting Secretary asked Ambassador Castillo Nájera, as the senior among the Ambassadors present, whether he would like to make any comments.

Señor Castillo Nájera inquired about the relation of the present World Court,52 which is linked by its statute to the League of Nations, to the proposal regarding a court of international justice. Mr. Hackworth53 in his reply said that of course it was recognized that the present court still legally existed. He said that we considered the present statute in general well thought out, and that moreover a body of law had already been built up using it as a basis. It was, therefore, our view that as few changes should be made in the statute as possible. The changes might be made either by amending the existing document or by using it as a basis for a new statute. He pointed out that the London committee54 had recommended cutting the Court to nine members, but that we did not like this idea. We believed that the Court could be cut up in three or five panels. Ambassador Castillo Nájera then asked about the proposed location of the Court, to which the Acting Secretary said that we felt that it should return to The Hague. Ambassador Castillo Nájera then raised the question whether it would be better to have just the one Court, possibly with special chambers, or whether it would not be wise to have regional courts at various appropriate bases which would be immediately available to consider all international questions and which would be able to decide international matters, subject to the right of appeal of either party to the international court as a supreme tribunal. Mr. Hackworth commented that in our view the disputants would have the right to bring any controversy before a panel of the Court, or the full Court, as the disputants might decide. He thought that the panels would be able to travel to the different regions to hold sessions when necessary. It was consequently our present view that one court with such chambers would be more satisfactory than a system of regional courts under the world court. The Acting Secretary said that the Ambassador had expressed a very interesting thought, and he believed that the Ambassador should discuss this matter further with Mr. Hackworth.

Ambassador Turbay then asked regarding voting on the proposed Court. Mr. Hackworth commented that the groups at Dumbarton Oaks had considered it to be presumptuous for representatives of four nations to propose specific changes in a statute which had been signed by so many more, and that therefore they had not undertaken to do so; in his opinion this should be done by representatives of the signatories.

The Acting Secretary asked whether anybody had any questions to ask or suggestions to offer. Ambassador Escalante said that he hoped to have his instructions by the end of next week. After some discussion the Acting Secretary suggested that another meeting be held week after next, November 9, and at the suggestion of the Mexican Ambassador it was agreed that the meeting should be held at 3:00 p.m. in the Department of State. Ambassador Escalante suggested that an agenda be prepared. Ambassador Blanco then suggested, and Ambassador Castillo Nájera concurred, that the Dumbarton Oaks draft might be considered point by point. The Acting Secretary remarked that he thought that an excellent proposal, and said that an agenda would be prepared for each forthcoming meeting.

The Acting Secretary then called upon Admiral Willson and General Strong to express their views regarding security problems. Admiral Willson said that security ultimately depended on force. He said that in our view there should be no international police force but that the Dumbarton Oaks proposals provided that the members of the organization should each furnish quotas which should be immediately available. He pointed out that the Soviet delegates had wanted an international air force, but had been impressed by our arguments regarding the practical difficulty of such a scheme. With respect to the regional aspects of security, he said that, personally, he thought it possible that the maintenance of practical security in certain regions, as for example the Western Hemisphere, could be accomplished by action within the region.

General Strong then said that he had additional comments to offer. He said that with regard to hemisphere security, four major questions were to be borne in mind: (1) The quotas which were to be furnished by the members to the organization.

(2) Regulation of armaments.

(3) The manufacture of and trade in arms.

(4) Regional arrangements.

With regard to the first-named point, he said that this involved not only the forces but also the facilities to be furnished. In regard to the second and third points, he emphasized that they were not to be faced in the forthcoming conference. With regard to the fourth point, he pointed out that it involved such questions as the future of the Pan American Union and Inter-American Defense Board,55 but added that since this was political in character he would not comment further.

40 Not printed.

41  List of persons present not printed.

The first of a series of meetings with the Diplomatic Representatives of the other American Republics had taken place on October 12, 1944. No records of the first meeting have been found in Department files. For the text of a speech made by President Roosevelt on the occasion of the first meeting, see Department of State Bulletin, October 15, 1944, p. 397. For the remarks of the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius), see ibid., p. 399.

42 Not printed.

42 Not printed.

43 For text of press release, see Department of State Bulletin, October 29, 1944, p. 525.

44 Not printed.

45 Those present included the Chiefs of Mission of all the American Republics except Argentina, El Salvador, and Guatemala.

46 Vice Adm. Russell Willson, a member of the Joint Strategic Survey Committee, United States Joint Chiefs of Staff; member of U.S. delegation at the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations.

47 Maj. Gen. George Strong, a member of the Joint Post-War Committee, United States Joint Chiefs of Staff; member of the U.S. delegation at the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations.

48 Reference here is to the Battle of Leyte Gulf, October 22–27, 1944.

49 W. Averell Harriman, Ambassador to the Soviet Union.

50 British Prime Minister Churchill met in Moscow with Soviet Peopled Commissar for Foreign Affairs Molotov and Marshal Josef V. Stalin, Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars of the Soviet Union, from October 9 to 18, 1944. See Winston S. Churchill, The Second World War: Triumph and Tragedy (Boston, Houghton Mifflin Company, 1953), pp. 226–243.

51 Not printed.

52 For text of the Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice, as amended by the Protocol of September 14, 1929, see Department of State, The International Court of Justice: Selected Documents Relating to the Drafting of the Statute (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1946), p. 1.

53 Green H. Hackworth, Legal Adviser, and a member of the U.S. delegation at the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations.

54 See British Cmd. 6531, Misc. No. 2 (1944): Report of the Inter-Allied Committee on the Future of the Permanent Court of International Justice, 10 February 1944.

55 The decision to set up the Inter-American Defense Board was contained in Resolution XXXIX of the Third Meeting of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the American Republics, held at Rio de Janeiro, January 15–28, 1942. For correspondence, see Foreign Relations, 1942, vol. v, pp. 6 ff. The Board was established on March 30, 1942, in Washington.

The Ambassador in Belgium (Sawyer) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/11–2544

[Document 519]

The Ambassador in Belgium (Sawyer) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]57

No. 54 Brussels, November 25, 1944.
[Received December 9.]

Sir:

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Reverting to the Dumbarton Oaks proposals, M. Spaak said that from what he had heard concerning the discussions that had taken place with regard to voting procedure in the Security Council, he feared that any single major power would be in a position to veto the decisions of all the other nations. On the other hand, the smaller powers would be bound to accept the decisions of the major powers as laid down by the Security Council. M. Spaak understood that the major powers would wish to reserve the right to decide, each for itself, whether or not it should become involved in any conflict which might arise. He was willing also to accept the obligation to abide by the decisions of the major powers if that was the price that had to be paid for permanent peace, but he had serious doubts that the organization that had been planned at Dumbarton Oaks would be able to maintain permanent peace.

M. Spaak wondered if the provisions concerning the relative influence of the small and the large powers in questions affecting security might not be taken as a precedent when certain international economic organizations were set up. He indicated that Belgium thought it should have a voice equal to that of any other nation in any economic organization.

M. Spaak was asked if he thought it would be preferable to give each country a vote proportionate to its population. He replied that offhand some such arrangement appeared to him more acceptable.

M. Spaak’s final criticism was that the Dumbarton Oaks papers contained no statement of principles on such fundamental matters as the right of self-determination, the satisfaction of legitimate national aspirations and respect of world public opinion.

M. Spaak did not hide that he considered the Dumbarton Oaks proposals an improvement in certain aspects over the League of Nations Covenant. He cited as examples the provisions with regard to the establishment of a Military Staff Committee58 and permitting decisions to be taken by the Assembly without unanimous agreement.59

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Respectfully yours,

Charles Sawyer

57 The omitted portions of this despatch related to Belgian Foreign Minister Paul-Henri Spaak’s ideas on a possible Western European regional arrangement and a discussion of Belgian war aims.

58 Chapter VIII, Section B, in the Dumbarton Oaks Proposals, p. 896 [Pg. 896 is part of Doc. 506].

59 Chapter V, Section C, in the Dumbarton Oaks Proposals, p. 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 506].

The Acting Secretary of State to Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics 500.CC/11–2744

[Document 520]

The Acting Secretary of State to Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics

Washington, November 27, 1944.

Sirs: There is enclosed herewith a copy of a summary which has been prepared regarding a discussion held in the Department of State on November 9 with respect to international organization. A list of the persons present and a copy of the press release issued in connection with this meeting are also enclosed herewith.60 The latter was approved by the Ambassadors at the meeting.

Very truly yours,

E. R. Stettinius, Jr.

[Enclosure]

Meeting in Room 285, State Department on November 9, 3 p.m. Including the Acting Secretary, Chiefs of the Diplomatic Missions of the American Republics Except Argentina and El Salvador, and Certain American Officials (See Attached List 61 )

The Acting Secretary briefly welcomed the Chiefs of Mission. He mentioned the helpful comments which had been made by various Chiefs of Mission preceding the meeting and expressed the hope that further helpful comments would be forthcoming in this meeting, adding that he understood that various of them had now received instructions from their respective governments. He then said that he understood that some of the Chiefs of Mission who have received comments from their governments wished to present these immediately. He said that of course anyone who wished to read these views in full would be welcome to do so, but he thought that the discussion would perhaps get further if they only read the comments in connection with the several chapters as they were reached. He said that the agenda for today included discussion of the first four chapters of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals,62 and in so far as time might permit the fifth chapter also.

The Acting Secretary then said that a summary had been prepared in the Department of the discussions of the preceding meeting.63 When the Chiefs of Mission expressed interest in this, he ordered copies of the summary to be distributed. He then mentioned that a translator was present to translate the discussions. He next emphasized the importance of discretion regarding the discussions and stated his belief that everyone would feel at liberty to talk more freely if the material did not reach the press. The Acting Secretary mentioned the presence of several of the American group who had been at Dumbarton Oaks and said that with this array of experts he hoped he would be able to answer any questions which the Chiefs of Mission might ask. Finally, he expressed the hope that the Chiefs of Mission would join him at the Blair House for refreshments after the meeting.

Ambassador Blanco of Uruguay then mentioned that he had received an official expression of his Government’s views. He said that a special commission was appointed by the Uruguayan Government to study the matter of post-war organization and emphasized that Uruguay wished constructive work to be undertaken in order to modify and perfect the work which had already been done through the League of Nations.

He stressed the responsibilities of the American republics before the war. He then spoke of the participation of the American nations in the two Hague Peace Conferences. In order to emphasize the desirability of the full participation of the American republics in international organization, he mentioned the occasion on which the American republics had jointly refused to participate in the previous peace conference because certain of them had been excluded.64

The Venezuelan Ambassador then read his government’s comments on the first four chapters of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals.65 This document, although not for publication, is to be distributed among the representatives participating in the discussions.

The Colombian Ambassador said that he expected to receive his instructions in a day or so.

Ambassador Castillo Nájera then made a proposal to simplify and speed up the procedure. He suggested that the Uruguayan and Venezuelan documents, together with any documents which might subsequently be received by the Ambassadors from their respective governments, should be circulated to all the participants in the discussions for their study. In addition, a committee should be appointed to summarize all these views and comments, and to note the differences among them and between them and the several chapters of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals to which they refer. In this way a general agreement in the views of the American republics would be facilitated. The Acting Secretary commented that this seemed to contemplate a united front among the American republics, to which the Mexican Ambassador assented.

The Guatemalan Chargé d’Affaires, while favoring the Mexican Ambassador’s proposal in principle, suggested that the appointment of the committee be postponed until more opinions were available for it to consider.

The Honduran Ambassador66 emphasized that the principal task of the committee should be to make a résumé of the opinions as they were presented. He added that Honduras accepted the principles of the Dumbarton Oaks document, while having certain points it wished to raise with regard to details. He said that a Caribbean or Central American republic should be included on the committee.

Following a further exchange of views the Haitian Ambassador suggested that the committee comprise the five senior Ambassadors and one representative from the Department. The Ecuadoran Ambassador67 then commented that the question of personnel was unimportant, the job to be done was to boil down the several views in order that the group could work effectively. The committee would not discuss; the real discussion would be in the large group.

The Acting Secretary then proposed, and it was agreed, that a committee be appointed consisting of the four senior Ambassadors (Mexico, Brazil, Venezuela and Uruguay) and Mr. Norman Armour. This was approved.

The Chilean Ambassador68 then proposed that the suggestions of the various governments be sent direct to the committee (it was later agreed that the documents should be sent in the first instance to Mr. Armour, who would circulate them to members of the committee). The Honduran Ambassador pointed out that the purpose of the committee should be to coordinate and boil clown. He suggested it be called the Committee of Coordination. This was approved.

The Acting Secretary then asked whether there was any question on the first four chapters of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals. The Colombian Ambassador referred to Article 10 of the League Covenant69 and asked why there was no reference in the Dumbarton Oaks proposals to a guarantee of territorial integrity. Mr. Pasvolsky70 in reply remarked that the question of such a guarantee must be examined in the light of a close study of the first two chapters of the Proposals. He stressed that the emphasis in these is on ways of insuring the security of nations, and said an attempt might then have been made to do this by making a long list of specific guarantees, including one on territorial integrity, but there is danger in such a course as it is hard to make the list complete. If adequate steps were taken to insure security a guarantee of territorial integrity is not necessary. The recognition of the sovereign quality of states and the acceptance of the obligation not to use force and to live up to the principles of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals would be a better guarantee of security and therefore of territorial integrity than any specific mention of the latter could be. The Guatemalan Chargé d’Affaires commented that in other words the document did not represent a retrogression from such past guarantees as Article 10 of the League Covenant. Mr. Pasvolsky emphasized that the guarantees in the Dumbarton Oaks proposals were in his opinion much broader and more effective than those of Article 10.

The Acting Secretary again emphasized the desirability of considering the discussion confidential and requested that the documents regarding the previous meeting which had been stapled together be taken apart, inasmuch as some were marked for the press and others were confidential. He then invited the Chiefs of Mission to adjourn with him to Blair House.

60 List of persons not printed; for text of press release dated November 9, 1944, see Department of State Bulletin, November 12, 1944, p. 565.

61 Not printed.

62  Ante, p. 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 506].

63 Meeting of October 26, p. 937 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 518].

64 See Foreign Relations, The Paris Peace Conference, 1919, vol. i, pp. 223–235.

65 For text of the Venezuelan Government’s proposal of October 31, 1944, see Documents of the United Nations Conference on International Organization, San Francisco, 1945, vol. iii: Dumbarton Oaks Proposals, Comments and Proposed Amendments (London and New York, United Nations Information Organizations, 1945), p. 189.

66 Julian R. Caceres.

67 Galo Plaza.

68 Marcial Mora.

69  Foreign Relations, The Paris Peace Conference, 1919, vol. xiii, pp. 69, 83.

70 Special Assistant to the Secretary of State, and a member of the U.S. delegation at the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/11–2744

[Document 521]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

No. 19,499 London, November 27, 1944.
[Received December 9.]

Sir: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s circular telegram of October 18, 1944, regarding the reactions in Great Britain to the Dumbarton Oaks Conference, and to enclose a memorandum of conversations held by the Hon. Hamilton Fish Armstrong, American Minister and Special Assistant to the Ambassador, with the Foreign Minister of the Netherlands, M. Eelco van Kleffens; Dr. Josef Lipski, former Polish Ambassador in Berlin; and President Eduard Beneš, of Czechoslovakia, on the subject of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals. It will be noted that Dr. van Kleffens and Dr. Lipski are hostile to these proposals, while Dr. Beneš is favorable to them.

Respectfully yours,

For the Ambassador:
Robert Coe
Second Secretary of Embassy

[Enclosure]

Memorandum of Conversations, by the Special Assistant to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Armstrong)

[London,] November 25, 1944.

Between: Mr. Hamilton Fish Armstrong, and

1) Foreign Minister Eelco van Kleffens, of the Netherlands;

2) Dr. Josef Lipski, former Polish Ambassador in Berlin;

3) President Eduard Beneš, of Czechoslovakia.

Subject: The Dumbarton Oaks Program.

The Department has expressed a desire to obtain as many and as varied reactions as possible to the plan for an international organization worked out at Dumbarton Oaks. In view of this I have introduced the subject into a number of conversations which I have had recently, and have held out the resulting expressions of view from various memoranda already submitted to the Department. Of the three persons listed above, Dr. van Kleffens and Dr. Lipski are hostile to the Dumbarton Oaks program, while Dr. Beneš is favorable. In each case, the date of the conversation follows the name of the person whose views are set forth.

1) Eelco van Kleffens, Foreign Minister of the Netherlands (November 3, 1944).

Dr. van Kleffens was quite clear that the Netherlands Government will not be able to take any decision regarding a matter so important as joining a world organization before it has had a chance to consult the Dutch people through the medium of Parliament. Like the other members of the Netherlands Government, he intends to resign on returning to his country, and personally he does not intend to tie his successor by even informal commitments to any permanent international policy. This is particularly so, he says, in the case of a matter like the program agreed upon tentatively at Dumbarton Oaks; for the proposed organization is not to be based on law but on policy, and the policy involved will be the policy not even of the members of the Assembly as a whole, and not even of the members of the Security Council acting as a body, but of certain members of that Council, namely the Great Powers. He does not deny that the Great Powers have greater responsibilities than the lesser ones, but he does deny that they are right in asking the lesser ones to give them a blank check and to promise to honor whatever is written on it.

Dr. van Kleffens thinks that in future as in the past wars will come in three ways: (1) by an attack by a large Power on a smaller one; (2) by an attack by a small Power on another small Power; (3) by a dispute ending in war between two large Powers.

The proposed Security Organization does not propose to deal with any dispute involving one of the Great Powers holding veto power in the Security Council. In connection with (1) and (3), then, the only sort of war which might be dealt with would be one resulting from an attack by a large Power not holding veto power in the Security Council on another such Power or on a smaller Power. A case in point might be an attack by Germany on, say, Czechoslovakia, just as happened before the present war. What security would Czechoslovakia have that the two Powers which would naturally have to deal with Germany most directly, namely Britain and Russia, would do so? Might not one hold back, and if it did would the other act alone? The example may not be a good one. The point is that there is no law which would justify Czechoslovakia in calling on the Great Powers involved to protect her, nor in fact any undertaking on their part to do so. Their decision when the time came would be based on current political considerations and appraisals of risk and advantage.

There is the same lack of insecurity [security?] in the event of wars between two small Powers. If, say, Greece is attacked by Bulgaria, what reason is there to believe that the latter country, being a protégé of Russia’s and under Russian protection, will not be supported in the Security Council by the vote of Russia’s representative? There is no agreed law binding Russia not to support Bulgaria or binding the Security Council or the Security Organization as a whole not to stand by while Bulgaria defeats Greece. The only consideration would be one of policy. We saw at the time of Munich71 to what lengths mistaken considerations of policy can lead even Great Powers.

“No,” remarked Dr. van Kleffens, “if I were the Greek Government I would scratch my head three times before signing the pledge of membership in an organization of any such sort. Certainly the Netherlands Government will do so.”

Dr. van Kleffens said he had not consulted formally or informally with the representative of any other Government about any agreed course of action. He said he would wait till after the American election even to give the Dutch public an indication of what the Netherlands Government might consider the pros and cons of the proposed security set-up; certainly he had no intention of waging anything like a campaign against it. He said he understood perfectly the considerations which had made agreement on any more ambitious scheme impossible. He did not blame anyone nor did he think any nation had arrière-pensées or washed to keep open the avenues for waging war with immunity [impunity?]. He merely thought that if no real organization could be devised on the basis of law it would be preferable not to raise false hopes that anything really effective had been done on a general and universal basis, and that instead more limited organizations had best be formed to deal with the two culprit nations against which everyone was willing at the present time to promise to act, Germany and Japan. Each for at least a generation and a half, say thirty years at the least, would be dominated either by men who were confirmed Nazis or by fanatical Shintoists and worshippers of the Mikado: to arrange to cope with them was not enough to secure peace in the world for that length of time, but it would at least secure peace from two potential aggressors for that length of time.

2) Br. Josef Lipski, Polish Ambassador in Berlin 1933–1939 (November 4, 1944).

After the last war, said Dr. Lipski, the chief emphasis was laid on self-determination of small peoples; perhaps the procedure was carried too far. Now the tendency is to swing the pendulum too far the other way; small peoples are dismissed as negligible, or at any rate though told that their interests are being taken into account are not told how, why or when. The Dumbarton Oaks proposals are a case in point. There is to be a sanction for the small Powers; but there is to be none for the great. The small are to be bound to obey the great; the great do not take any explicit obligation to protect the small.

The world cannot be organized permanently, Dr. Lipski considers, on any such formula. Either there is to be international collaboration or there is to be dictation. The war has not been fought to establish the right of anyone, even nations or statesmen with the highest motives, to dictate to others. They may justifiably decide that international collaboration is impossible under present circumstances, and they may substitute for it agreements between the Great Powers for maintaining the peace in their own way. They then should not invite, persuade or coerce other Powers to submit to their dictates and to promise to fulfill their orders.

The secondary Powers will prefer to await a time when world conditions will permit international collaboration in the real sense of the word, meanwhile holding themselves free to secure as much safety as they can by suiting their current policies to the current requirements of the Great Power or Powers in their immediate neighborhood. That would be a sad upshot from a war such as this, and one which the promises of many representatives of the Great Powers had not led the world to expect; but without blaming anyone for the deterioration in the spirit and moral basis of the war, the fact must be faced that it has deteriorated and that the Dumbarton Oaks program is evidence of how far the process has gone.

3) President Edward Beneš, of Czechoslovakia (November 21, 1944).

President Beneš said that since we last talked (see this Embassy’s despatch No. 19166 dated November 10, 1944)72 he had studied the document issued at Dumbarton Oaks and was now prepared to give an opinion of it. In view of his long service at Geneva, where he was President of the Assembly once and President of the Council nine times, it was natural for him, he said, to compare it with the Covenant. He saw both disadvantages and advantages in the new instrument.

The chief disadvantage in Dr. Beneš’ eyes was that the Dumbarton Oaks program did not have sufficient ideological content to arouse the interest and enthusiasm of the public. Offsetting this lack was the fact that it was simpler and more clear-cut in approach and put the responsibility for action or inaction squarely where it belonged, on the Great Powers. In the League, those Powers used often to hide behind their little colleagues. Under the new plan, if one of the Great Powers is unwilling to join in collective action it will have to assume the full onus before the world.

A second defect might be that no orderly course of action has been laid down in advance. The Dumbarton Oaks proposals almost entirely omit to prescribe procedures. On the other hand, said Dr. Beneš, he had to admit that the old League procedure could and did become attenuated to such a degree that action never seemed required at any specific point and one more vista of inquiry and discussion was continually opening up. Furthermore, he said, he supposed that procedures were bound to develop in any event. In this connection he said that despite his criticism of League procedure as a whole he hoped the League experience would be taken into careful account and that where the League had developed good methods they would be copied. He gave as an example the course usually followed when a minorities complaint was presented to the League. A committee of three was usually appointed to study it, the appointees being delegates of countries not in any way involved in the dispute. The committee would not merely inquire into the facts; it would attempt informally to reconcile the two sides, and at the least would suggest a compromise which the Council might, in the last resort, press the contestants to adopt. Dr. Beneš felt that the new organization ought to be encouraged to develop procedures of this sort.

This led him, Dr. Beneš said, to a third criticism, or rather to point out another danger. An international organization which is to ameliorate and not to exacerbate international relations must not be “too open” to the presentation of complaints, and if it is ready to receive all complaints should be careful not to discuss them all in public. He wondered if the new organization might not have this fault. Most complaints that come to an organization are minor and should not be magnified by being discussed in the Assembly or Security Council. The very simplicity of the Dumbarton Oaks scheme will encourage the filing of all sorts of complaints. The Secretariat will have to counteract this by developing a method of sifting and handling most of them without letting them reach the stage of public debate.

I asked Dr. Beneš how he thought some of the other smaller nations would feel about the Dumbarton Oaks program. He said he had been told that the Dutch, the Belgians and the Norwegians were critical of it. He was bound to note, he said, that though these nations had always behaved as respectable members of international society some of them could not claim to have been very energetic or useful when difficult conflicts had to be dealt with. Some of them might perform better since they had learned that neutrality did not necessarily spell security; but he was not sufficiently impressed by their role at Geneva in the past to feel under the necessity of bowing to their opinions now. In addition, there had been other League members, some of them with regular seats on the Council, who never “pulled their own weight”. He was thinking, he said, of certain Latin American states which refused to take a position on any subject that did not touch them directly. Consequently, he said, he strongly favored the Dumbarton Oaks provision that the Security Council is to be small.

On balance, Dr. Beneš found the Dumbarton Oaks program “not unsatisfactory” and he said he would be glad to try to work on the basis of it.

H[amilton] F[ish] A[rmstrong]

71 For correspondence pertaining to the agreement effected at Munich, September 28–30, 1938, between France, Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom, and accepted by Czechoslovakia, see Foreign Relations, 1938, vol. i, pp. 657 ff.

72 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics 500.CC/12–1544: Circular airgram

[Document 522]

The Secretary of State to Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics

Washington, December 15, 1944—9:45 a.m.

The Department has recently received reports from the field indicating that there are misunderstandings in certain quarters concerning the provisions in the Dumbarton Oaks Proposals relating to the position of the General Assembly73 in the general international organization. For example, the statement has been made that the General Assembly is subordinate to the Security Council74 both in matters relating to security and in those relating to general political, economic and social interests. The opinion has also been expressed that in the field of economic and social cooperation the General Assembly can make recommendations only to the Security Council. It is apparent that the central position given to the General Assembly in the Dumbarton Oaks Proposals is not well understood. Since it is vitally important to correct any misconception which impairs an adequate understanding of the proposed General Organization, the following points are suggested for your guidance:

(1) According to the Proposals, responsibility for promoting international cooperation in political, economic and social fields and of adjusting situations likely to impair the general welfare would be vested in the General Assembly only. The Security Council would not be charged with functions in this field. The Economic and Social Council75 would be elected by the General Assembly alone and would be under the sole authority of that body. The General Assembly would be free to make recommendations in this field directly to states and to specialized organizations.

Your attention is called to the statement in the British Government’s Commentary76 on the Dumbarton Oaks Proposals for the Establishment of A General International Organization that “generally speaking …77 the General Assembly would be given, through the Economic and Social Council elected by it and responsible to it, complete control of all the Organization’s activities in questions other than the maintenance of international peace and security.”

The procedures and powers of the Security Council could be invoked only in disputes or in situations which might lead to international friction or give rise to a dispute, or in the event of threats to the peace or breaches of the peace. In such cases, the Security Council could take action whether the situation resulted from economic, social, political, or military conditions.

(2) Moreover, the General Assembly is by no means excluded from participation in security matters. Your attention is called particularly to Chapter V, Section B, par. 1 of the Proposals. The General Assembly would be empowered to discuss both general principles and particular questions relating to the maintenance of international peace and security. It would be empowered to make recommendations directly to states on any such principles or questions. The two restrictions on these particular powers of the Assembly are (1) that any such questions on which action is necessary should be referred to the Security Council by the General Assembly either before or after discussion, and (2) that the General Assembly should not on its own initiative make recommendations on any matter relating to the maintenance of international peace and security which is being dealt with by the Security Council.

It is to be noted that at no time could the Security Council prevent the General Assembly from discussing any question relating to the maintenance of international peace and security brought before it by any member or members of the Organization. Moreover, when the Security Council has determined that its action is not required in any situation and the matter no longer requires handling by the Security Council, the General Assembly would have the right to make recommendations with regard to the situation.

(3) In addition to these important responsibilities the General Assembly would be the one organ representative of the entire membership of the Organization. Also it would be empowered to apportion the expenses of the Organization among the members, and to approve the budgets of all the organs and agencies of the Organization, including the Security Council. Furthermore, the General Assembly would elect not only the members of the Economic and Social Council but also the six non-permanent members of the Security Council. The General Assembly would be empowered, upon recommendation of the Security Council, to admit states to membership in the Organization, to suspend states from the rights and privileges of membership, to expel states, and to elect the Secretary-General.

Since it is a matter of utmost importance to the Department that inter-American understanding and support of the Dumbarton Oaks Proposals be enlisted, every opportunity should be taken to correct misconceptions that arise and also, as far as possible, to prevent their arising. The Department will be glad to give you whatever assistance is necessary in explaining and interpreting the provisions of the Proposals.

Add the following for Argentina and El Salvador:

These matters should not of course be discussed with any officials of the Government, but every opportunity should be taken to correct misconceptions of private individuals in your conversations with them.

Stettinius

73 Chapter V in the Dumbarton Oaks Proposals, p. 891 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 506].

74 Chapter VI in the Dumbarton Oaks Proposals, p. 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 506].

75 Chapter IX in the Dumbarton Oaks Proposals, p. 898 [Pg. 898 is part of Doc. 506].

76 Not printed (copy filed under 500.CC/12–244).

77 Omission indicated in the original airgram.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Brazil (Donnelly) 500.CC/12–1844: Telegram

[Document 523]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Brazil (Donnelly)

Washington, December 18, 1944—7 p.m.

3733. Your telegram 4307, December 2, 3 p.m.78 For your own guidance and such use with the Brazilian authorities as you deem desirable, there is set forth below a brief statement of this Government’s position in respect of Brazil’s aspirations to a seat on the Council of the International Security Organization.

The United States is prepared to give strong support to Brazil’s claim to a non-permanent seat on the Security Council. It is not prepared to insist upon the allocation to Brazil of a permanent seat. Among the reasons for our position is the fact that the prospects of success without the active support of Soviet Russia would, as a practical matter, be negligible. The effort would not only be fruitless but would weaken this Government’s stand on other important issues.

There is determined opposition to increasing the membership of the Council over the present proposal of eleven, to be composed of five permanent and six non-permanent members. An increase in the number of permanent seats would therefore involve reducing the number of non-permanent members to five at the sacrifice of other vital interests. A major consideration, among others, in the selection of the five permanent members is the estimated contribution which such members could, should the necessity arise, make to the enforced maintenance of peace in any part of the world, including the Far East, as measured by their prospective naval, air, and military strength, as well as the possession of adequate transportation facilities, in the period following the end of hostilities.

It is the belief of this Government that Brazil’s interests will best be served by not pressing the case for a permanent seat at the present time. Your 4307, December 2 does not make clear whether you refer to a permanent or non-permanent seat. Please inform the Department whether in your opinion Brazil would be satisfied with assurances of this Government’s support for a non-permanent seat on the Council.

Stettinius

78 Not printed.

The Chargé in Brazil (Donnelly) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/12–2744: Telegram

[Document 524]

The Chargé in Brazil (Donnelly) to the Secretary of State

Rio de Janeiro, December 27, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received 11:50 p.m.]

4546. Department’s 3733, December 18, 7 p.m., and Embassy’s 3754, October 18, 6 p.m.79 Velloso80 said to me today that the Brazilian Government obviously prefers and considers that it is entitled to a permanent seat on the Security Council but if it cannot be arranged that Brazil should receive one of the first non-permanent seats. I believe that Brazil would be satisfied with the latter.

Donnelly

79 Latter not printed.

80 Pedro Leão Velloso, Acting Foreign Minister of Brazil.

The Ambassador in the Netherlands (Hornbeck) to the Secretary of State 500.CC/12–2744: Airgram

[Document 525]

The Ambassador in the Netherlands (Hornbeck) to the Secretary of State

London, December 27, 1944.
[Received January 6, 1945—11 a.m.]

Netherlands Series A–3. In the course of the conversation which I had with Dr. van Kleffens on Saturday, December 23, Dr. van Kleffens brought up the subject of the Dumbarton Oaks Conference. He said that the Netherlands Government was preparing a memorandum81 of comment and opinion which he thought would be completed in the relatively near future—“perhaps ten days.” He said in reply to a question, that some, one at least, of his associates in the Netherlands Government are not confident of the value of an international organization. He himself, however, he said, believes in and desires to see created an international organization but he wants it to be one in which the security of all states is equally safeguarded and the sovereignty of all states is equally respected and considered. He said that there are some things to which the Netherlands Government cannot make a commitment of approval; for instance, a provision that in the functioning of the proposed Executive Council one of the major powers should be legally authorized to exercise a veto power in its own case whereas any decision of the Council would be binding upon all powers, thus establishing a distinction and discrimination of great importance between the position rights and obligations of major powers and those of lesser powers. There followed a half hour’s discussion of the circumstances under which the Dumbarton Oaks Conference had been called and was held, of the attitude and thought of the American Government regarding the principles and provisions which were agreed upon by the delegates to that Conference for submission to their Governments, and of procedures which lie ahead. In the course of this discussion I availed myself of the opportunity presented to stress the practical aspects of the problem presented in the effort to promote and to achieve agreement among the Allied Powers upon the idea of creating a new international organization. I had in mind the contents of memoranda which were given me in the Department analysing and explaining various of the provisions of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals. I brought to bear some of the points elaborated therein. I took occasion to suggest to Dr. van Kleffens that in my opinion, and speaking on a personal and unofficial basis, the maximum of helpful contribution might be made by his and other Governments if, when and as they offer comments those who are addressing themselves to the preparation and presentation thereof would have constantly in mind the conditions and circumstances in the whole field of world affairs, political, economic and social, in the light of which the problem of creating a world organization has to be handled; that the proposals be considered in their sum total and be discussed on their merits—in the light of that background; and that as far as possible the taking of definite political positions, especially positions contra, in reference to the proposals as a whole or to any of the provisions in particular be avoided. Dr. van Kleffens said that he considered that those suggestions had merit and that he would take full account of them but that he felt it essential to make clear the limitations within which his Government must function in the determining of the position of the Netherlands regarding some features of the proposals.

Hornbeck

81 For text of Netherlands suggestions dated January 1945, see Documents of the United Nations Conference on International Organization, San Francisco, 1945, vol. iii, p. 306.

Meeting in Room 285, State Department, on December 29, 3:45 p.m., Including the Secretary, Assistant Secretary Nelson A. Rockefeller, Chiefs of the Diplomatic Missions of the American Republics, Except Argentina and El Salvador, and Certain American Officers Lot 60–D 224, Box 54: ISO 243

[Document 526]

Meeting in Room 285, State Department, on December 29, 3:45 p.m., Including the Secretary, Assistant Secretary Nelson A. Rockefeller, Chiefs of the Diplomatic Missions of the American Republics, Except Argentina and El Salvador, and Certain American Officers

Washington, December 29, 1944, 3:45 p.m.

The Secretary, after welcoming the Chiefs of Mission, said that during the interval since their last meeting on November 9 the Committee on Coordination appointed at that meeting had prepared a document which it would present. He then stated that progress appeared to have been made for the holding of a conference of Foreign Ministers of the governments cooperating in the war effort to consider, among other items, the major issues which had been discussed at these meetings. He expressed confidence that the discussions now being held and the forthcoming conference would enable the American Republics to go to a general conference regarding international organization with a full understanding of each other’s viewpoints and the common resolve to make effective the purpose, shared by all, of preventing future war.

The Secretary then mentioned that nine governments had submitted to the Committee on Coordination helpful memoranda commenting on the Dumbarton Oaks proposals. He said that at this meeting and at further ones he thought it would be useful to all present to have frank discussions of the questions that have been raised. He said that this Government would be glad to explain the provisions of the proposals receiving attention in those memoranda and wished to explore the suggestions of the other governments with them. The governments at the general conference should, he said, then be in a position to cooperate in building the enduring international structure wanted by all, on the basis of an understanding of each other’s point of view and, therefore, with greater effectiveness.

The Secretary then asked Ambassador Martins of Brazil, Chairman of the Committee on Coordination, if he would like to make some remarks on behalf of the Committee.

Ambassador Martins spoke of the work of the Committee and presented the document it had prepared,82 a compilation of the memoranda regarding the Dumbarton Oaks proposals submitted by nine governments—Brazil,83 Chile,84 Costa Rica,85 Guatemala,86 Haiti,87 Mexico,88 Panama,89 Uruguay90 and Venezuela91 —and copies of this document were distributed to each of the Chiefs of Mission present. Ambassador Martins then said that the Committee believed that the Republics which had not yet sent in memoranda would wish to do so at the earliest possible moment and that thereafter a revised document would be prepared and sent to the respective governments.

The Secretary, after thanking Ambassador Martins and the Committee of Coordination, for the help that he and the Committee had given in preparing this document for the consideration of the questions, stated he wished to make one comment at this time concerning the discussions themselves. He said that the Governments of the American Republics would undoubtedly wish to carry the present discussions a step further at the conference of American States participating in the war effort, which evidently was to be held, and thereafter at the general conference on international organization, and that he was sure all would want to go to the latter with open minds and as few formal commitments as possible. He said that in his opinion if formal positions now were taken it would be harder to change later and he urged that a flexible rather than a crystallized approach to the matter be kept.

The Secretary then stated that Mr. Norman Armour was shortly leaving the country to assume his duties as Ambassador to Spain and asked whether it would be satisfactory if Mr. Nelson Rockefeller, Assistant Secretary of State, were appointed to succeed Ambassador Armour on the Committee on Coordination. The Chiefs of Mission agreed.

The Secretary next called on Dr. Leo Pasvolsky92 to explain and comment on the Dumbarton Oaks proposals in the light of the suggestions made in the memoranda of the other American Republics. Dr. Pasvolsky first took up the question of the name of the new international organization, to the selection of which unfavorable comments had been expressed by certain governments (Brazil, Mexico, Venezuela). He said that it was difficult to agree on the best name; he felt, however, that the one proposed was open to fewer objections than any others and that the term “United Nations” was symbolic not only of the war efforts being made by the countries engaged in the hostilities but also of the future relationship of states. He said that the word “Union” had been rejected because of its connotation of a super-state, and that the word “league” did not appear to be acceptable because of its past association as being closely tied with the League of Nations. He added that rejection of the word “league” apparently represented the feeling of other governments as none had suggested its use in any of the memoranda.

Ambassador Martins expressed the view of the Brazilian Government that the term United Nations was too inclusive in that it embraced the connotation of war as well as of peace. Señor Mora, Ambassador of Chile, commented that the use of the term United Nations was not sufficiently specific. He averred that the name should embody or at least indicate the objectives of the organization and that those objectives were “peace”, while at the present time the nations were primarily united for war. He thought it would be appropriate, therefore, to have a more precise name such as “Union of Nations for Peace”. The Honduran Ambassador demurred, on the grounds that the proposed title embodied the idea of unity in defending our good way of life against any aggression. Señor de la Colina, Chargé d’Affaires of Mexico, suggested the name “Permanent Union of Nations” because of the strong peaceful ideal behind such a name. He remarked that in Spanish the word “union” had no connotation of “super-state” as it was said to have in English. He also objected to the war connotation in the present proposed name. Señor Andrade, Ambassador of Bolivia, then recommended that decision concerning the name for the new organization be left in abeyance and he added that the final selection of a proper name for the organization might eventually be found by the people of the world as they would probably find a name for the present international world conflict to which at present no one could put a satisfactory title.

Dr. Pasvolsky stated that he appreciated the concern of the other American governments in regard to the perpetuation of the connotation of war through the name selected but that he felt nevertheless that the use of the word “united” was extremely important. He emphasized two other connotations of the name: (1) unity against danger, and (2) unity for progress. He thought that it was important to focus on this functional concept of unity.

Following these remarks the Secretary stated that he regretted that he was unable to remain longer at the meeting due to other appointments and took leave of the Chiefs of Mission. Mr. Rockefeller presided during the rest of the meeting.

The next topic of discussion was Chapter I of the document and attention was centered on the question of whether specific principles in international relations should be enumerated. Dr. Pasvolsky pointed out that there was no preamble to the document and he added that further principles could undoubtedly be incorporated in a preamble when the final document was completed. The effort, he said, had been made in stating the purposes and principles to single out the most important concepts of a general nature in order to give these greater weight, comprehension and simplicity. Dr. Pasvolsky said that it had been considered preferable, as less limiting, not to enumerate purposes and principles in detail, in the belief that they were all comprehended in the broad general statements in Chapters I and II. Dr. Pasvolsky said that the suggestions which had been made in the various memoranda were very valuable. He thought that some might be included in the preamble. He suggested that too detailed an enumeration of principles might weaken rather than strengthen the document.

Ambassador Mora stated that he appreciated the reasoning of Dr. Pasvolsky but said that he felt that the explicit or specific principles, such as assurance for respect for international treaties, were fundamental and that in particular, since on the basis of these principles the American nations had been successful in a far greater degree than those in any other area of the world in minimizing war and bloodshed, they should be expressly set forth in the document. Dr. Pasvolsky inquired whether there was not a broader principle than the others spoken of, namely that of settling disputes by peaceful means. He suggested that this principle embraced respect both for international treaties and for other obligations of nations. Señor Mora thought, nevertheless, that it would be important to state the principle of respect for treaties.

The Chiefs of Mission of Honduras, Guatemala and Mexico expressed the view that the principles under discussion, including political independence and territorial integrity, which were high attributes of sovereignty, should be given specific mention in the document. Señor de la Colina stated that the discussion strengthened his view that the most important principle or purpose is the recognition of international law and that he felt that the recodification of the tenets of international law should be undertaken. Dr. Pasvolsky assured the others that there was no intention that the principles mentioned, such as juridical equality of nations, respect of territorial integrity and assurance of respect for international treaties, would be excluded nor any diminution made of their continuing validity and force. He emphasized that the whole plan envisaged in the proposals was based on respect for their international obligations by the members of the organization. There was no disagreement on the fundamental validity of the principles suggested.

Ambassador Mora suggested that a vote be taken on the Chilean proposal that there be specifically stated in the document the principle requiring respect of treaties. He felt it desirable to have an expression of the majority view so that the governments would be able to present a united position at the future general conference. The Chiefs of Mission of Paraguay,94 Brazil, and Nicaragua95 declared that they did not think that this would be advisable at the present time as they had not received instructions from their respective governments in the matter. The discussion led to the conclusion that the purpose of the meeting was to exchange views rather than to take positions, and no vote was taken.

Mr. Rockefeller said that he felt that it was very useful that such an exchange of ideas had taken place at this meeting, so that each country could learn the opinions and views of the others and, having done so, be better prepared to work together at future conferences. He believed, however, that the American nations should not arrive at closed views and preferably not go to the general conference on international organization as a bloc with unified views, an approach which could be misunderstood and distrusted in other parts of the world, but rather to go with a common informed understanding and will on the part of each to create an effective organization together.

The discussion of the document at this meeting was concluded at this point.

Before the meeting adjourned Mr. Rockefeller stated that replies had been received from approximately one half of the other American Republics and were generally favorable to the holding in the near future of a conference of the representatives of the American Republics associated in the war.96 He said that he wished to make it clear that this was not to be a conference per se of Foreign Ministers of the American Republics. He said that he believed that the subject of Argentina might be discussed at the conference after the other matters on the proposed agenda had been dealt with. Mr. Rockefeller concluded the meeting by saying that a further session would be called for an early date.

82 Entitled “Proposals for the Establishment of a General International Organization, Comments and Suggestions From the Other American Republics”; not printed. (IO Files: ISO–215)

83 Memorandum dated November 4, 1944; printed in Documents of the United Nations Conference on International Organization, San Francisco, 1945, vol. iii, p. 245.

84 Memorandum dated December 11, 1944, ibid., p. 282.

85 Memorandum dated December 5, 1944, ibid., p. 274.

86 Memorandum dated November 14, 1944, ibid., p. 254.

87 Memorandum dated October 27, 1944, ibid., p. 51.

88 On September 5, 1944, the Mexican Government submitted a “Project for the Constitution of a ‘Permanent Union of the Nations’,” ibid., pp. 166–174. A memorandum entitled “Opinion of the Department of Foreign Relations of Mexico concerning the Dumbarton Oaks Proposals for the Creation of a General International Organization” was dated October 31, 1944, and printed ibid., p. 54.

89 Memorandum dated November 16, 1944, ibid., p. 259.

90 Memorandum with title “The Position of the Government of Uruguay respecting the Plans of Postwar International Organization for the Maintenance of Peace and Security in the World” dated September 28, 1944, and printed ibid., p. 26. Since this memorandum and the Mexican “Project” of September 5, 1944, antedate the publication of the Dumbarton Oaks Proposals, they obviously do not specifically refer to the latter.

91 Memorandum dated October 31, 1944, ibid., p. 189.

92 Special Assistant to the Secretary of State, and a member of the U.S. delegation at the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations.

94 Celso It. Velazquez.

95 Guillermo Sevilla Sacasa.

96 For correspondence on preliminaries to the Inter-American Conference on Problems of War and Peace, Mexico City, February 21–March 8, 1945, see vol. vii.

Attitude of the United States regarding the eligibility of the Vatican for membership in the proposed international organizationAttitude of the United States regarding the eligibility of the Vatican for membership in the proposed international organization

[527] Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII, to the President

[Vatican City,] September 10, 1944.

500.CC/9–2244

[528] The Secretary of State to Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII

Washington, September 14, 1944—7 p.m.

500.CC/9–1444: Telegram

[529] Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII, to the Secretary of State

Vatican City, September 18, 1944—5 p.m. [Received September 18—4:10 p.m.]

500.CC/9–1844: Telegram

[530] The Secretary of State to Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII

Washington, September 27, 1944—5 p.m.

500.CC/9–1844: Telegram

[531] Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII, to the Secretary of State

Vatican City, October 6, 1944—8 p.m. [Received October 8—9 a.m.]

500.CC/10–644: Telegram

[532] The Secretary of State to Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII

Washington, October 6, 1944.

500.CC/10–644

Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII, to the President 500.CC/9–2244

[Document 527]

Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII, to the President 1

[Vatican City,] September 10, 1944.

Dear Mr. President: I recently wired you2 that His Holiness had requested more detailed information than I had as yet seen fit to give to him in respect to the International Organization for the Preservation of Peace.3 In my wire I enquire to what extent Secretary Hull and yourself wished me to go in explaining the details of the plan which I followed in the consultations4 which I had with Chief Justice Hughes,5 Honorable John W. Davis6 and Honorable Nathan L. Miller.7

I now have a similar written request from His Holiness, of which I am attaching a copy. Your advice in the premises will be very greatly appreciated and with best regards, believe me.

Sincerely yours,

Myron C. Taylor

[Enclosure]

The Papal Under Secretary of State (Montini) to Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII

No. 82564/SA [Vatican City,] September 4, 1944.

Your Excellency: His Holiness has graciously indicated to me that in your Audience of August 30th you made reference to an International Organization for the Preservation of Peace, which is the object of serious study of President Roosevelt and his advisers.

Since the Holy See, by the very nature of its high mission, is deeply interested in any project which might further the cause of lasting peace, I should be indeed grateful if you were to find it possible to provide me with further details regarding the nature of the proposed organization and the plans for its activation and development.

With the renewed assurance [etc.]

G[iovanni] B. Montini

1 Copy transmitted to the Secretary of State with the following memorandum of September 22, 1944, from President Roosevelt: “For preparation of reply for my signature.”

2 Telegram 301, September 6, 10 a.m., not printed.

3 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 376] ff.

4 In April and May of 1944 Secretary of State Hull authorized Mr. Taylor, who was a member of the Department of State Informal Political Agenda Group concerned with a “Possible Plan for the Establishment of an International Organization for the Maintenance of International Peace and Security”, to hold consultations with the three jurists mentioned. See Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, 1939–1945 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1949), pp. 169–173, 247–255 and 263–265.

5 Charles Evans Hughes, Chief Justice of the United States, 1930–1941.

6 Democratic presidential candidate in 1924.

7 Governor of New York, 1921–1923.

The Secretary of State to Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII 500.CC/9–1444: Telegram

[Document 528]

The Secretary of State to Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII

Washington, September 14, 1944—7 p.m.

32. We feel it is premature to inform the Pope of the trend of discussions and drafting now going on concerning the International Organization. At a later stage I hope to be able to send you some useful background information concerning recent developments which can be given to the Pope.

Hull

Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII, to the Secretary of State 500.CC/9–1844: Telegram

[Document 529]

Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII, to the Secretary of State

Vatican City, September 18, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received September 18—4:10 p.m.]

320. Referring to your No. 32, September 14, 7 p.m. I would suggest for your consideration the following hypothetical case:

If Vatican State apply for membership in proposed International Organization as provided by Section Four, Moscow Declaration8 and Senate Resolution9 as small peace-loving state, could its application be denied? If admitted and if its integrity as independent state is violated by forcible aggression through Italian revolution or otherwise, would it be entitled to protection by armed forces if necessary to preserve its independence?

Taylor

8 For text of the Declaration of Four Nations on General Security, signed at Moscow at the Tripartite Conference of Foreign Ministers on October 30, 1943, and published on November 1, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 755.

9 For text of the Connally Resolution (Senate Resolution 192, 78th Congress, November 5, 1943), see Senate Document No. 123, 81st Cong., 1st sess.: A Decade of American Foreign Policy, Basic Documents, 1941–49 (Government Printing Office, 1950), p. 14.

The Secretary of State to Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII 500.CC/9–1844: Telegram

[Document 530]

The Secretary of State to Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII

Washington, September 27, 1944—5 p.m.

39. While the Department is not in a position to give a definitive answer to the questions raised in your No. 320, September 18, 5 p.m., the following observations are offered for your guidance and confidential information.

Admission to membership would be determined by the international organization and would probably require consent of the major powers including the Soviet Union. Original members not maintaining diplomatic relations with the Vatican State would in some instances probably oppose its admission and the question would be likely to raise political controversy in the United States. For these reasons it would seem undesirable that the question of membership of the Vatican State be raised now.

As a diminutive state the Vatican would not be capable of fulfilling all the responsibilities of membership in an organization whose primary purpose is the maintenance of international peace and security. In a number of cases diminutive states were refused admission to the League on this ground. Membership in the organization would not seem to be consonant with the provisions of Article 24 of the Lateran Treaty,10 particularly as regards spiritual status and participation in possible use of armed force. Non-membership would not preclude participation of the Vatican State in social and humanitarian activities of the organization nor impair its traditional role in promotion of peace by its moral influence.

Protection of the integrity of the Vatican as an independent state would not be increased by membership. Attack upon it could be dealt with by the organization under its powers with respect to threats to or breaches of the peace. Security action by the organization as so far contemplated would not be dependent on membership of the state threatened or attacked nor upon membership of the violating state.

Hull

10 Signed at Rome, February 11, 1929; for text, see Treaty between the Holy See and Italy establishing the Vatican State, with Financial Convention, British and Foreign State Papers, vol. cxxx, pp. 791, 799.

Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII, to the Secretary of State 500.CC/10–644: Telegram

[Document 531]

Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII, to the Secretary of State

Vatican City, October 6, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received October 8—9 a.m.]

344. For the President and Secretary. Reference my 320 September 18 and your 39 September 27. In lengthy audience yesterday the Pope raised the question particularly with respect to admission to membership in International Organization, and without expressing a final determination as to Vatican policy, sought information as to terms of proposed plan under which a small state such as the Vatican would have the right to be admitted. The Pope then asked my opinion whether it would be advisable for Archbishop Spellman11 who is now here, to defer his plan for a visit to the Far East, and to call upon the President at once with a view to discussing this question on behalf of the Holy See. I developed the thought in replying that the plan was now only in its first stages of discussion among the four great powers12 and that the many questions regarding the composition of the Assembly, and particularly of the Council and the implementation of the plan by ultimate use of force were receiving primary attention. I expressed personal opinion that the whole matter of an acceptable plan would have to be arrived at by a meeting of minds upon a higher official level than the present preliminary discussions had reached before a plan could be intelligently proposed to a meeting of United and Associated Nations and neutrals who were entitled to be consulted before the case of any particular state could wisely be injected into the field of discussion. In other words, that this was not the time for such a special approach to the President. I indicated that probably the International Organization to Preserve Peace would be obligated to come to the aid of any state, large or small, if attack were made upon it. After considerable general discussion along this line and of the whole subject it was thought wise that I should discuss with Archbishop Spellman the matter of proposed visit to the President. That meeting took place this afternoon. Archbishop Spellman informs me that the Pope had presented the same question to him on Wednesday,13 the day before my audience; that he had also conferred with the Pope after my audience and discovered that he had given the Holy Father the same answer in substance as myself. In substance he also had stated that the visit for the purpose indicated at this moment was untimely. I assume this closes the matter for the present though I imagine however in due course the question may be presented in the form of a letter of inquiry. I have however received no present indication to that effect.

Taylor

11 Francis J. Spellman, Archbishop of New York.

12 Reference here is to the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations involving the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and China; for correspondence, see pp. 713 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429] ff.

13 October 4.

The Secretary of State to Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII 500.CC/10–644

[Document 532]

The Secretary of State to Mr. Myron C. Taylor, Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII

No. 12 Washington, October 6, 1944.

The Secretary of State encloses an official copy in English of the “Proposals for the Establishment of a General International Organization”14 which have been agreed upon by the British, Soviet, Chinese and the United States delegations to the Dumbarton Oaks conversations and have been submitted to their respective governments.

The Personal Representative of the President at the Vatican should deliver the enclosed copy informally to His Holiness the Pope, pointing out that this document represents only the tentative proposals reported to their respective governments by the delegations to the; Dumbarton Oaks conversations.

14 For text of the Dumbarton Oaks Proposals, see p. 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 506].

Participation of United States in the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education, London, April 5–29, 1944, and the proposed establishment of a United Nations organization for educational and cultural reconstructionParticipation of United States in the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education, London, April 5–29, 1944,1 and the proposed establishment of a United Nations organization for educational and cultural reconstruction

1 For previous correspondence, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 1152 ff.

[533] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 3, 1944. [Received January 12.]

800.42/347

[534] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] February 14, 1944.

840.42/23

[535] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 21, 1944.

800.42/322: Telegram

[536] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] March 22, 1944.

800.42/412

[537] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, April 17, 1944. [Received April 17—11:55 a.m.]

800.42/482: Telegram

[538] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, April 17, 1944—midnight.

800.42/482: Telegram

[539] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, April 20, 1944. [Received April 20—7:22 p.m.]

800.42/496: Telegram

[540] Memorandum by the American Education Delegation

April 29, 1944.

800.42/541

[541] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 10, 1944.

800.42/8–1044

[542] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, September 27, 1944.

800.42/8–1044

[543] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 18, 1944—10 p.m. [Received October 19—1:30 p.m.]

800.42/10–1844: Telegram

[544] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 22, 1944—11 p.m.

800.42/11–1844: Telegram

[545] The Acting Secretary of State to Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt

Washington, November 23, 1944.

800.42/11–1444

[546] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Acting Secretary of State

London, November 27, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 5:06 p.m.]

800.42/11–2744: Telegram

[547] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Acting Secretary of State

London, November 28, 1944. [Received December 8—4 p.m.]

800.42/11–2844: Airgram

[548] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 16, 1944—11:10 a.m.

800.42/11–2844: Airgram

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 800.42/347

[Document 533]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

No. 13064 London, January 3, 1944.
[Received January 12.]

Sir: Referring to the Embassy’s despatch No. 13013 of December 30, 1943,2 regarding the attitude of the observer for the U.S.S.R. toward the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education, I have the honor to submit additional information about the attitudes of China, Australia and New Zealand toward the Conference gleaned from recent conversations between the Embassy’s observer and the observers of those Governments.

The Chinese observer stated that his Government has approved in principle China’s entry into the Conference but indicated that this would be conditional upon the expansion of the Conference, at least to include the United States.

The Canadian observer stated that Canada’s participation in the Conference is being studied very carefully in Ottawa and that a decision probably would not be reached immediately because of the difficulty of obtaining a measure of agreement between all the Provincial education authorities.

The New Zealand observer stated that the Dominion Governments would not send a representative or observer to the Executive Bureau of the Conference until the whole question of full Dominion participation is resolved. She indicated that her own Government is not anxious to incur financial obligations of any substantial proportions in connection with the Conference, and that no decision respecting New Zealand’s participation will be announced until the February plenary session of the Conference.

Respectfully yours,

For the Ambassador:
W. J. Gallman
First Secretary of Embassy

2  Ibid., p. 1160.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt 840.42/23

[Document 534]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to President Roosevelt

[Washington,] February 14, 1944.

On February 9, 19443 you transmitted to me and requested my recommendation on the attached memorandum dated January 22, 1944,4 addressed to you by the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, the Archivist of the United States and the Librarian of Congress suggesting that this Government, in conjunction with the principal Allied governments, make provision for the establishment of an international commission to take constructive and effective measures for the intellectual rehabilitation of Europe.

This Department’s Division of Science, Education and Art (formerly the Division of Cultural Relations) has been and is giving this important subject active attention. As the memorandum in question recognizes, an adequate program in this field will require the active cooperative participation of various governmental and private agencies in this country and the establishment of effective international facilities for inter-governmental cooperation.

To these ends we propose to take the following steps in the immediate future: 1. Appoint an outstanding leader from the field of intellectual and educational organizations as Chief of the Department’s Division of Science, Education and Art. The plan is to appoint a man who ordinarily could not be attracted to this position, requesting him to undertake the job as a temporary public service for the purpose of reappraising our cultural relations program and realigning it for most effective operations in the light of future conditions and needs. This man would also be expected to select and groom a highly qualified successor to take over the permanent position in the Department. Dr. Waldo Leland, Director of the American Council of Learned Societies, appears to be the best qualified man who might be available for this assignment at this time.

2. Make a public statement of the Department’s and this Government’s general policies in respect to these matters in order that there may be a clear policy basis on which private and governmental agencies here may develop cooperative programs and the inter-governmental facilities may be created. Attached hereto is a proposed statement which, with any changes you may care to suggest, will be issued by the Department.5

3. Submit proposals to the British Government and the other governments having members or observers in the existing Conference of Allied Ministers of Education in London for the transformation of the present conference into an United Nations Advisory Commission for Educational and Cultural Reconstruction. To date we have not participated in the existing Conference, but have sent observers. We propose to suggest to these governments that the Commission be organized in London not later than this April as a temporary body with investigatory and advisory powers, each member having one vote, with a program to study and formulate recommendations for action on the following immediate and critical problems: (a) aiding in the material rebuilding of national educational systems.

(b) aiding in the reestablishment of technical and university education, especially for the training of educational and other professional personnel by furnishing books, periodicals, scientific apparatus, etc.

(c) aiding, within the scope of its functions, in recovering objects and materials looted by Axis countries from historic monuments, art galleries, archives, and libraries, and aid in restoring them to their rightful owners.

If these three proposed steps have your approval, we shall go forward on these lines immediately.

Edward R. Stettinius, Jr.

3 Memorandum by President Roosevelt, not printed.

4 Not printed.

5 For text of statement issued by the Department on March 31, 1944, see Department of State Bulletin, April 1, 1944, p. 299.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 800.42/322: Telegram

[Document 535]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 21, 1944.

2111. The Department proposes that the reply noted below, to the invitation of December 9, 1943 of the British Government to participate in the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education in Embassy’s telegram No. 8531,6 be transmitted by you to the British Government. This reply is a result of the studies undertaken in the Department which were suggested in its telegrams No. 8257, No. 32 and No. 32,7 respectively, sent to the American Embassies in London, Chungking and Moscow, for the governments of Great Britain, China and USSR respectively. The Department will transmit this reply to the other governments having members or observers in the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education.

The suggested reply follows.

“The United States Government acknowledges the important preliminary work done by the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education, and recognizes it as a useful agency for the further emergency development of international cooperation in educational and cultural reconstruction.

The United States Government also recognizes the great importance of the reestablishment of essential educational and cultural facilities in the war torn countries, and, therefore, proposes, for the present, to collaborate with the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education, pending the development of a United Nations organization in this field.

In undertaking such collaboration, it would be the view of this Government:

First, that the Governments collaborating in the Conference should study and formulate recommendations for action on the emergency problems of rebuilding the educational and cultural facilities of the war torn countries, (a) Aiding in the essential material restocking of primary and secondary schools,

(b) Aiding in the reestablishment of essential technical and university education, especially for the training of technical and professional personnel by furnishing books, periodicals, scientific apparatus, and other means for advanced study.

(c) Aiding in the reestablishment of essential library facilities.

(d) Aiding in the recovering of objects and materials looted by the Axis countries from historic monuments, art galleries, archives, and libraries, and aiding in restoring them to their rightful owners.

(e) Aiding in the providing of opportunities for training technical and professional personnel.

In connection with the foregoing there should be no external interference with national educational and cultural organizations and programs of the collaborating nations.

Second, that the governments collaborating in the Conference should take steps with other interested governments to seek the best means for establishing a United Nations agency for educational and cultural reconstruction, organized and administered along democratic lines.

The United States Government proposes to send representatives to collaborate with the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education for the session of April 5, 1944, upon which occasion initial recommendations covering the above points will be made.”

Please telegraph immediately if there have been any developments which might raise questions regarding advisability or feasibility of proposed reply and basis of collaboration.

Hull

6 December 8, 1943, not printed.

7 See telegram 8257, December 31, 1943, and footnote 15, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 1162.

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 800.42/412

[Document 536]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 8

[Washington,] March 22, 1944.

In pursuance of the approval which you conveyed on March 16 to Assistant Secretary Shaw9 of our collaboration with the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education, it is proposed, if you agree, to invite the persons listed below to make up our delegation to the April meeting of the Conference in London.10 The composition of the delegation has been discussed with Archibald MacLeish who agrees that there would be a distinct advantage in having a member of Congress serve as chairman of the delegation. As you know, Representative Fulbright has been President of the University of Arkansas.

Representative J. William Fulbright, Chairman of Delegation, (Member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs);

Archibald MacLeish, (Librarian of Congress);

John W. Studebaker, (Commissioner, United States Office of Education);

Dr. Grayson N. Kefauver, (Consultant to Department of State’s Division of Science, Education and Art and Dean of School of Education of Stanford University);

Dr. Ralph E. Turner, (Assistant Chief, Division of Science, Education and Art, Department of State).

[Coincidental with the departure of the delegation for London, there was released on March 31 a statement of policy on the participation of the United States in this Conference. See Department of State Bulletin, April 1, 1944, page 299.]

8 Marginal note: “CH OK FDR.”

9 Memorandum to the Assistant Secretary of State, not printed.

10 In addition to those listed, C. Mildred Thompson, Dean of Vassar College, was also appointed to the American delegation.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 800.42/482: Telegram

[Document 537]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, April 17, 1944.
[Received April 17—11:55 a.m.]

3124. From Fulbright. Excellent progress was made last week toward drafting a plan for a United Nations organization for educational and cultural reconstruction. Open meetings attended by representatives of all member and observer states connected with Conference of Allied Ministers of Education were held the 12th and 14th. Agreement was reached on general principles and a small committee was appointed on Friday to prepare a final draft for presentation to the April 19th session of the Conference.

The drafting committee met yesterday and completed its work in one session. The organizational plan consists of seven sections. The first contains a preamble restating in summary the main principles of the Department’s declaration of policy on educational reconstruction. Section two states the objectives of the organization. These follow in general the Department’s statement of topics on which the delegation was instructed to seek modes of collaboration with the Conference. Section three declares that membership in the organization shall be open to all the United Nations and associated nations and to such other nations as shall be accepted by the Assembly on application after the cessation of hostilities with the Axis. Section four lists the agencies of the proposed organization, providing for an assembly with equal representation by all member states, an executive board to be elected by the Assembly and an international secretariat. Fifth or financial section provides that the national contributions for administrative expenses shall be determined by the Assembly. It also provides for creation of emergency rehabilitation fund controlled by an emergency rehabilitation fund committee. National contributions will be fixed by committee subject to approval of each contributing nation. Committee will consist of representatives of three states making largest contributions for administrative expenses and three members elected by executive board. Committee will also allocate fund. Section six contains provisions relating to ratification, amendment and interpretation. Amendment and interpretation clauses follow closely those in statute of the United Nations Food Organization. When 20 of the United Nations or associated nations indicate to the Conference of Allied Ministers their intention to adhere to the new organization, the Conference will convene the first meeting of the Assembly. Section seven contains miscellaneous provisions relating to obligations of member nations to supply information about educational and cultural matters, legal status of organization and staff, cooperation with existing international organizations in educational and cultural fields and relationship of organization to any agency for coordinating public international organizations.

The delegation has been greatly impressed by the fine spirit of cooperation and genuine international good will which members of the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education have manifested. They have shown every disposition to meet the delegation in a friendly and generous spirit, and it is believed therefore that the plan as outlined above will be approved without substantial amendment by the Conference. In that case it is believed that the Conference will submit it to the United Nations and associated nations with an invitation to adhere to the proposed organization.

The delegation is also making progress towards ascertaining material needs of occupied countries for educational rehabilitation and expects to devote major part of its time to this task during remainder of visit. [Fulbright.]

Winant

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 800.42/482: Telegram

[Document 538]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, April 17, 1944—midnight.

3071. For Fulbright. We are pleased with good progress being made by delegation. In order that draft plan for a United Nations organization for educational and cultural reconstruction as outlined your 3124 of April 17 may receive careful consideration here on all aspects and be discussed informally with interested members of Congress, we would prefer not having plan formally approved and submitted by Conference to United Nations for adherence until it has been informally referred to interested governments for preliminary consideration, comments and possible suggestions. We believe it essential for us to have an opportunity to go over plan with you on your return here before it is formally approved and submitted by Conference to this Government. Please make our position on this clear to Conference members and observers. Please continue full reports on developments and forward full text of proposed plan.

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 800.42/496: Telegram

[Document 539]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, April 20, 1944.
[Received April 20—7:22 p.m.]

3242. Reference Department’s 3071 of April 17. Conference of Allied Ministers of Education today accepted with minor textual amendments tentative draft of constitution of a United Nations organization for educational and cultural reconstruction prepared at open meetings convened by joint invitation of conference and United States delegation. Conference also decided to send tentative draft constitution to all United Nations and Associated Nations for study and comment. It was sense of meeting that if comment proved favorable constitution would then be adopted formally by conference. In that event invitations to join proposed organization could be issued. There was no discussion of agency which might issue invitations but Chairman Butler12 suggested on previous occasion that Great Britain, the United States and Belgium might wish to join eventually in taking such action. Copies of tentative draft constitution as accepted by Conference are being submitted by airmail.13

Conference also decided to create ad hoc committee to serve as centralizing and coordinating body for agencies collecting information on looting and destruction of European monuments and objets d’art.14 All members of Conference will send representatives to Committee which will be headed by Professor Paul Vaucher. Present Conference Committee on revindication will be disbanded but Harvey15 will serve as Secretary of new body. Object of Committee will be to supply information to Combined Civil Affairs Committee in London during pre-ivasion and invasion periods.

Winant

12 Richard A. Butler, British Minister of Education, and President of the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education.

13 The draft constitution, not printed, was transmitted to the Department in despatch 15139, April 20, 1944; received April 29.

14 For correspondence concerning the protection and salvage of artistic and historic monuments in war areas, see vol. ii, pp. 1031 ff.

15 Cyril P. Harvey, a member of the British Bar, represented the British Council at the Conference until his appointment to the Vaucher Committee.

Memorandum by the American Education Delegation 800.42/541

[Document 540]

Memorandum by the American Education Delegation 16

April 29, 1944.

Recommendations of the American Education Delegation on Educational Rehabilitation

The Delegation finds that the Conference of Allied Ministers and the representatives and observers of the various countries (excepting Russia whose attitude was not expressed) composing it are willing, in fact eager, to move quickly towards the formation of a United Nations Organization for Educational and Cultural Reconstruction. The Conference and the several Ministers of Education, either collectively or individually, have not yet developed a program or programs of educational rehabilitation for the war-torn countries. It is clear, however, that, first, the providing of material aid, and second, the affording of opportunities for training new personnel, will be the essentials of such programs. In the main the programs will be developed and administered separately by each nation; in other words, international cooperation will supplement national efforts. The several Ministers of Education emphasize the need to begin the work of educational rehabilitation as soon as possible after the Allied armies have liberated their respective countries.

On the basis of these findings the Delegation recommends that: 1. The Department act immediately to approve, with the amendments it may see fit to make, the tentative draft constitution of a United Nations Organization for Educational and Cultural Rehabilitation accepted by the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education on April 19, 1944.

2. The Department, through diplomatic channels, consider with other governments but especially with those of Great Britain, Russia, and China, their respective acceptances of this tentative constitution and the convening of the assembly provided for therein.

3. The Department maintain a small staff in London to collaborate with the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education in the preparation for educational rehabilitation of the war-torn countries until a United Nations Organization for Educational and Cultural Reconstruction is constituted. It is further recommended that the Department allocate funds to pay the share of the United States in the Secretariat of the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education during this interim period.

4. The Department, on the basis of studies undertaken by the staff in London, request an appropriation from Congress to cover the contribution of the United States Government to (a) the initial costs of educational rehabilitation programs, (b) the administrative expenses of a United Nations Organization, and later (c) to the Emergency Rehabilitation Fund.

5. The Department, through the Office of Education especially but also through other governmental and private agencies, move as quickly as possible to mobilize the various financial resources and other services, excepting those that may be provided by a Congressional appropriation, for assisting in the educational rehabilitation of the war-torn countries.

6. The Department undertake through bilateral arrangements to give such assistance for educational and cultural rehabilitation, especially in personnel training, to the war-torn countries, as it may seem desirable to give in this manner. Negotiations looking toward the giving of such assistance to the Russian and Chinese Governments should be begun at once in Washington.

7. The Department undertake to bring about a coordination of activities affecting educational rehabilitation in the period of military control by Allied armies and subsequently in the period when relief is provided by UNRRA so that they support the programs of educational rehabilitation to be aided by the United Nations Organization for Educational and Cultural Reconstruction.

The American Education Delegation
J. William Fulbright
Archibald MacLeish
John W. Studebaker
C. Mildred Thompson
Grayson N. Kefauver
Ralph E. Turner

[The Secretary of State announced on May 3, 1944, that Congressman J. William Fulbright, Chairman of the American Delegation to the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education in London, had returned to this country with three other members—Archibald MacLeish, John W. Studebaker, and C. Mildred Thompson. For a report on the work of the delegation and the progress made at the London meeting, see Department of State Bulletin, May 6, 1944, page 413.

Two members of the delegation, Dr. Grayson N. Kefauver and Dr. Ralph E. Turner, continued in London to complete the gathering of factual information regarding emergency basic needs for reestablishing essential educational and cultural facilities in Allied liberated areas. Dr. Turner remained in London until September 1944, and Dr. Kefauver until October 1944. For information concerning Dr. Kefauver’s activities from May to October, see Department of State Bulletin, October 22, 1944, page 465. See also article by Dr. Turner and Miss French, ibid., November 19, 1944, pages 602–605.]

16 Addressed to Mr. Shaw, Assistant Secretary of State; Mr. Dickey, Director, Office of Public Information; and Mr. Thompson, Cultural Adviser.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 800.42/8–1044

[Document 541]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)19

No. 4409 Washington, August 10, 1944.

Sir: Reference is made to the Department’s telegrams No. 8257 of December 31, 194320 and No. 2111 of March 31, 1944 regarding collaboration with the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education. You are requested to bring informally to the attention of Mr. Eden21 the enclosed tentative draft22 of a United Nations Organization for Educational and Cultural Reconstruction. It is suggested that a discussion of recent developments in London with Mr. Kefauver, the London representative of the American Education Delegation, may be desirable before taking up the matter with Mr. Eden.

The attached draft, which is slightly modified from the one originally adopted by the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education and the American Education Delegation, when adopted, will bring about the creation of such an organization on a temporary basis. The Department does not propose at this time to consider the matter of a permanent organization in this field. An exchange of views on the main points of the draft between the British and American Governments is desired before formal reply is made to the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education, under whose auspices the original draft was issued.

Discussion with the Russian and Chinese Governments will be undertaken before this reply is made. Also discussions will be held with members of Congress after the summer recess.

The Department emphasizes that its primary objective in furthering the establishment of such an organization is to make a beginning of cooperation in the educational and cultural field. It believes that cooperation in dealing with concrete aspects of the problem of educational reconstruction is the most satisfactory approach to the development of international cooperation in these fields for the post-war period.

Very truly yours,

For the Secretary of State:
G. Howland Shaw

19 Similar instructions were sent to Moscow, July 13 (No. 219), and to Chungking, August 3 (No. 755).

20  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 1162.

21 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

22 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 800.42/8–1044

[Document 542]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

No. 310 Washington, September 27, 1944.

Sir: Reference is made to the Department’s airmail instruction No. 219 of July 13, 1944,23 with which was submitted a revised tentative draft for a United Nations Organization for Educational and Cultural Reconstruction. At the time this instruction was sent to you, the Department also despatched to the American Ambassadors in London and Chungking an instruction and a copy of the revised tentative draft, asking them to discuss the draft informally with the Foreign Minister of the country to which they are accredited.

There is enclosed herewith a copy of a subsequent instruction being sent to Chungking,24 in reply to a telegram raising certain questions regarding discussion of the proposed United Nations Organization with the Foreign Minister. You will note the Department has asked the Ambassador to indicate to the Foreign Minister informally and orally the textual differences between the original tentative draft prepared in London, copy of which is enclosed, and the draft after revision in the Department. You will note also an indication of the Department’s intentions regarding the proposed organization.

The copy of this subsequent instruction and the original tentative draft are for your information when discussing the proposed United Nations Organization for educational and Cultural Reconstruction with the Soviet Government. A copy is also being sent to the American Ambassador in London.

Very truly yours,

For the Secretary of State:
G. Howland Shaw

23 See footnote 19, p. 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541].

24 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 800.42/10–1844: Telegram

[Document 543]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 18, 1944—10 p.m.
[Received October 19—1:30 p.m.]

8910. From Johnson25 for Turner. The Rt. Hon. R. A. Butler, Minister of Education and President of the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education, informed the Embassy’s observer at the Conference today that he was greatly concerned about the fact that no provision had been made as yet to meet the extremely urgent needs of the liberated and about to be liberated countries for educational equipment and textbooks. He said that in his opinion this problem was quite as important as that of providing relief for physical needs through UNRRA and that he intended to press the British Government strongly to provide funds for an emergency program. He asked if in the opinion of the Embassy’s observer the United States would be prepared to contribute to an emergency relief fund which would operate before the creation of the proposed UNOECR.26 He was told that this was a matter which would obviously have to be raised in Washington but that to the best knowledge of this Embassy’s observer no appropriation existed at present from which funds could be drawn for such a purpose.

Mr. Butler went on to say that he hoped the United States would be able to participate in an emergency relief scheme since it did not seem likely that the proposed long term organization could be brought into existence before March at the earliest. He said he did not know how generously the British treasury would be disposed to act and that in all probability it would not be prepared to allocate a very substantial sum for emergency relief especially if the United States should not make a similar contribution. In the event that an emergency fund should be established Mr. Butler suggested that it should be administered by a committee, board, or agency upon which the United States could be usefully represented if it chose to participate. He stressed that there was no desire on the part of the British Government to embarrass the United States by making an appropriation for emergency relief if the United States was not prepared to act in similar fashion and he offered to keep the Embassy’s observer fully informed about any decision taken in the Council of Ministers of the British Government or by the British treasury. Mr. Butler said that he intended to raise the matter in the Council of Ministers on October 27 and that he would communicate any decision taken there to the Embassy’s observer during the following week.

The foregoing conversation took place after the fourteenth plenary session of the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education during which there was a prolonged discussion of the financial position of the Conference after December 1, 1944. During the course of this discussion Mr. Butler stressed the urgency of the relief problem and his intention to press the British Government strongly for funds to meet this need. He also urged the other national representatives to press their Governments to take similar action. No other business of primary importance was transacted at the meeting. [Johnson.]

Winant

25 Richard A. Johnson, Third Secretary of Embassy.

26 United Nations Organization for Educational and Cultural Reconstruction.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 800.42/11–1844: Telegram

[Document 544]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 22, 1944—11 p.m.

9840. Kefauver to Johnson. Reference Embassy’s 8910, October 18. Special appropriation by Congress would be necessary to provide funds for emergency aid. Problem being studied in Department. Not feasible just now to request such appropriation in view of enabling legislation before Congress. Independent action by British Government would not be embarrassing. Instead Department would be pleased that emergency needs could be met.

Definite that army will not handle basic scholastic equipment needs except on spot requisition by field commander. Some such requisitions coming through. Ministers of education should indicate importance and urgency of need which cannot be met locally to head of army Civil Affairs Mission for his consideration for spot requisition. [Kefauver.]

Stettinius

The Acting Secretary of State to Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt 800.42/11–1444

[Document 545]

The Acting Secretary of State to Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt

Washington, November 23, 1944.

My Dear Mrs. Roosevelt: I am pleased to give you a report, as you requested in your note of November 14, 1944,27 on the present status of the planning for the United Nations Organization for Educational and Cultural Reconstruction, the preliminary plans for which were developed by the American Education Delegation in London in cooperation with the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education.

The tentative draft constitution which was developed in London last April was sent to the governments of the United Nations for their reaction. Thirteen governments have given reactions to this tentative draft constitution, all of which were favorable. The Department of State considered this draft constitution on the return of the Delegation to Washington and made certain revisions. This revised draft was sent to our Ambassadors for informal discussions with the governments of the Soviet Union, Great Britain and China concerning their position on the establishment of the United Nations Organization for Educational and Cultural Reconstruction.

It also seemed desirable to discuss the matter with Congressional leaders before reporting back this Government’s suggestions for revision of the draft constitution to the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education. In addition to the preoccupation of Congressional leaders with other pressing matters during recent months several other factors have led to these discussions being postponed. In the first place, important developments in the international field such as the Dumbarton Oaks proposals28 and the progressive liberation of the occupied countries have tended to change the situation which existed last April and to make desirable a reconsideration of the original plans in the light of these developments. Secondly, it has seemed to us especially important to secure action first on legislation authorizing the extension of basic cultural cooperation activities to other parts of the world, in addition to the other American republics. Such “enabling” legislation, H.R. 5350,29 has been introduced by Congressman Bloom and is now in the Committee on Foreign Affairs. If this legislation can be acted upon in the near future it will permit us to get ahead with at least the first essential stages of a program of international cooperation in these fields which, as you say, have truly great potentialities for good.

In the meantime this Government has continued its active collaboration with the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education through Dr. Kefauver, a member of the original Delegation, who remained in London to carry on our relations with the Conference. Dr. Kefauver has recently returned for consultation with the Department on these matters.

I hope that we may count on your active and continued interest in carrying these important programs ahead. If you would like further information on any aspect please let me know, and if you should desire, I would be glad to arrange for someone from the Department to confer with you personally on it at any time.

Sincerely yours,

Edward R. Stettinius, Jr.

27 Not printed.

28 For correspondence on the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations, held at Washington, August 21–Oetober 7, 1944, see pp. 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419] ff.

29 Bill introduced September 13, 1944, Congressional Record, vol. 90, pt. 6, p. 7749.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Acting Secretary of State 800.42/11–2744: Telegram

[Document 546]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Acting Secretary of State

London, November 27, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 5:06 p.m.]

10444. British Treasury has refused to consider granting funds to relieve emergency educational needs of liberated countries (Department’s 9840, November 22) because it feels that the problem of meeting such needs is international in character and that British should delay action until formation of proposed United Nations Organization for Educational and Cultural Reconstruction. This information provided by Foreign Office and Ministry of Education representatives at Conference of Allied Ministers of Education. Both state that Minister of Education Butler was unduly optimistic about his ability to obtain funds for emergency needs when he informed Embassy’s observer at conference (Embassy’s 8910, October 18) that he would press for a grant.

Winant

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Acting Secretary of State 800.42/11–2844: Airgram

[Document 547]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Acting Secretary of State

London, November 28, 1944.
[Received December 8—4 p.m.]

A–1419. Reference Department’s instruction No. 4409, August 10. Following letter and enclosure were received today from the British Foreign Office: “No. LC 768/10/453. 25th November, 1944. My dear Ambassador: I am writing on behalf of Mr. Eden to express his deep regret that the Foreign Office should have delayed so long in replying to your letter of the 18th August about the tentative draft constitution for a United Nations Organization for Educational and Cultural Reconstruction. We should welcome an exchange of views, in which the Minister of Education (of whose interest in the matter you are aware) would participate, on the detailed amendments of the original draft which you and we might wish to propose.

“We are, however, in complete agreement with the general trend of your proposed modifications, and in order to accelerate the next stage towards the establishment of the new organization—the discussion which is to take place as soon as 20 Governments have expressed their views on the tentative draft—we suggest that it might be helpful if we were both, without further delay, to accept the project in principle on the lines of the enclosed draft memorandum.

“There would seem to be no need to consult any other Governments before doing this, though it might be wise to inform the Russian and Chinese observers on the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education, and the French representative, of our intended action.

“Yours sincerely, (signed) Alexander Cadogan30

“His Excellency, The Honourable John Gilbert Winant, United States Embassy, 1, Grosvenor Square, W.1.

Memorandum

“His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom accept in principle the project for a United Nations Organization for Educational and Cultural Reconstruction as set forth in the tentative draft constitution, on the understanding that

“(1) they intend to propose a number of amendments to the draft when it comes before the meeting foreshadowed in the explanatory note which was circulated with it to the Governments;

“(2) the immediate task of the proposed Organization will be to promote practical and concrete measures to meet the urgent educational needs of liberated territories;

“(3) as regards other fields of educational and cultural cooperation, the activities of the proposed Organization will be directed to the preparation of plans for the establishment of a continuing organization.”

The Embassy would appreciate an instruction as to whether the exchange of views to which the British Government has acceded should be undertaken immediately or whether it should await the return of Mr. Kefauver to London.

Winant

30 British Permanent Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 800.42/11–2844: Airgram

[Document 548]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 16, 1944—11:10 a.m.

A–2676. Reference Embassy’s Airgram 1419, November 28. Department now reviewing earlier plans for United Nations organization in educational and cultural field in view of changes in general situation since last April and the clarification of the framework of international organization developed by the Dumbarton Oaks Conference.

Kefauver will return to London with instructions for participation in informal discussions with representatives of the British government concerning United Nations educational and cultural organization. Suggest proposed exchange of views be delayed until his arrival in January or soon thereafter.

Stettinius

Governmental assistance to persons forced to emigrate for political or racial reasonsGovernmental assistance to persons forced to emigrate for political or racial reasons1

1 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 250–401. Additional information on the rescue and relief of Jews in Europe and other victims of enemy persecution may be found in Final Summary Report of the Executive Director, War Refugee Board, September 15, 1945 (Washington, 1945).

[549] The Secretary of State to the Polish Ambassador (Ciechanowski)

Washington , January 11, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/5054

[550] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 13, 1944. [Received January 13—4:35 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/4993: Telegram

[551] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 18, 1944. [Received January 18—6:37 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/5014: Telegram

[552] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 19, 1944—7:20 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5042a: Airgram

[553] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 20, 1944. [Received January 20—10:48 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/5016: Telegram

[554] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 25, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/4980: Telegram

[555] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 25, 1944—midnight.

840.48 Refugees/5060: Telegram

[556] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 31, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/5060: Telegram

[557] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 2, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/4988: Telegram

[558] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 2, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/5014: Telegram

[559] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 3, 1944.

103.9169/2372k: Telegram

[560] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, February 7, 1944—11:30 a.m.

840.48 Refugees/4934: Airgram

[561] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, February 18, 1944—midnight.

101.4/18a: Telegram

[562] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, February 21, 1944. [Received February 21—1:02 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/5230: Telegram

[563] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, February 25, 1944. [Received February 25—2:20 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/5260: Telegram

[564] The Apostolic Delegate (Cicognani) to the Acting Secretary of State

Washington, February 26, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/5272

[565] The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, February 28, 1944—6 p.m. [Received March 2—8:40 a.m.]

840.48 Refugees/5279: Telegram

[566] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 29, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/5260: Telegram

[567] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, March 2, 1944. [Received March 2—10:16 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/5288: Telegram

[568] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, March 7, 1944—9 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5329a: Telegram

[569] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 10, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/5260: Telegram

[570] Memorandum by the Executive Director of the War Refugee Board (Pehle) to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Washington, March 10, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/3–1044

[571] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, March 11, 1944—7 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5363b: Telegram

[572] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, March 11, 1944—7 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5363c: Telegram

[573] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, March 11, 1944. [Received March 18.]

840.48 Refugees/5372

[574] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, March 23, 1944—5 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5279: Telegram

[575] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, March 24, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/5498c: Telegram

[576] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, March 24, 1944—6 p.m. [Received March 25—2:40 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/5425: Telegram

[577] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 25, 1944—5 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5448a: Telegram

[578] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 25, 1944—9 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5260: Telegram

[579] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, March 27, 1944—7 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5487a: Telegram

[580] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics

Washington, March 31, 1944—1:05 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5499b: Circular airgram

[581] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, April 5, 1944—midnight.

740.00115A Pacific War/1113: Telegram

[582] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, April 7, 1944—5 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5557a: Telegram

[583] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, April 10, 1944—8 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5485: Telegram

[584] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics

Washington, April 11, 1944—11 a.m.

840.48 Refugees/5484: Circular airgram

[585] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Portugal (Norweb)

Washington, April 12, 1944—2 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5337: Telegram

[586] The Ambassador to the Yugoslav Government in Exile (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, April 13, 1944—11 a.m. [Received 4:13 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/5600: Telegram

[587] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, April 13, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 10:06 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/5613: Telegram

[588] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, April 13, 1944—11 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5887a: Telegram

[589] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics

Washington, April 15, 1944—7 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5841a: Circular airgram

[590] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, April 17, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1939/1409a: Telegram

[591] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, April 17, 1944—6 p.m. [Received April 18—2:31 a.m.]

840.48 Refugees/5637: Telegram

[592] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, April 20, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/5841h: Telegram

[593] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, April 21, 1944—1 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5847a: Telegram

[594] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson)

Washington, April 21, 1944—6 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5371: Telegram

[595] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, April 22, 1944—2 p.m. [Received April 23—7:50 a.m.]

740.00116 European War 1939/1406: Telegram

[596] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, April 24, 1944—9 p.m. [Received 9:37 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/5802: Telegram

[597] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson)

Washington, April 25, 1944—4 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5578: Telegram

[598] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, April 29, 1944—midnight.

840.48 Refugees/5903b: Telegram

[599] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, May 13, 1944—8 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/6033a: Telegram

[600] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, May 13, 1944—11 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/6015a: Telegram

[601] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, May 15, 1944. [Received May 15—9:25 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/6007: Telegram

[602] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, May 17, 1944—8 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/6079a: Telegram

[603] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, May 18, 1944—7 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/6088a: Telegram

[604] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, May 21, 1944—11 a.m. [Received 1:10 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/6081: Telegram

[605] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson)

Washington, May 22, 1944—10 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5921: Telegram

[606] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, May 22, 1944—9 p.m. [Received 10:23 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/6089: Telegram

[607] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, May 25, 1944—1 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/6139b: Telegram

[608] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, May 25, 1944—4 p.m. [Received 9:13 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/6125: Telegram

[609] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Uruguay (Dawson)

Washington, May 26, 1944—noon.

710 Consultation 3 (A)/740c: Telegram

[610] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, May 27, 1944—10 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/5842: Telegram

[611] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, May 27, 1944—11 p.m.

740.00115 European War 1939/9547: Telegram

[612] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 3, 1944—midnight.

840.48 Refugees/3842: Telegram

[613] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , 5 June, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/6–544

[614] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson)

Washington, June 7, 1944—1 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/6007: Telegram

[615] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 7, 1944—5 p.m. [Received June 7—4 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/6226: Telegram

[616] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 7, 1944—6 p.m. [Received June 7—5:35 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/6225: Telegram

[617] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, June 8, 1944—midnight.

840.48 Refugees/6256b: Telegram

[618] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, June 9, 1944—9 a.m.

840.48 Refugees/6125: Telegram

[619] The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, June 10, 1944—1 p.m. [Received June 11—2:40 a.m.]

840.48 Refugees/6257: Telegram

[620] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, June 10, 1944—6 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/6269b: Telegram

[621] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, June 12, 1944—1 p.m. [Received June 12—12:23 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/6271: Telegram

[622] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 12, 1944—2 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/6228: Telegram

[623] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, [June 13, 1944—6 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/6018: Telegram

[624] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Naples (Brandt)

Washington, June 13, 1944—7 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/6290a: Telegram

[625] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, June 14, 1944—2 p.m. [Received June 15—7:53 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/6302: Telegram

[626] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 15, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/6338a: Circular telegram

[627] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 15, 1944—11 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/6226: Telegram

[628] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, June 17, 1944—9 a.m. [Received 8:40 p.m.]

740.00115 European War 1939/10084: Telegram

[629] The Secretary of State to the President of the Emergency Advisory Committee for Political Defense (Guani) at Montevideo

Washington, June 17, 1944.

710 Consultation (3)A/757a: Telegram

[630] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, June 19, 1944—midnight. [Received June 20—2:46 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/6334: Telegram

[631] The Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington , June 19, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/6–1944

[632] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 20, 1944—11 a.m. [Received June 20—10:52 a.m.]

840.48 Refugees/6339: Telegram

[633] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, June 24, 1944—5 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/6399a: Telegram

[634] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, June 26, 1944—7 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/6257: Telegram

[635] The United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

[Algiers,] June 27, 1944. [Received July 12.]

840.48 Refugees/6–2744

[636] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 28, 1944—5 p.m. [Received June 28—3:28 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/6–2844: Telegram

[637] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, July 3, 1944—noon. [Received July 4—4:40 a.m.]

840.48 Refugees/7–344: Telegram

[638] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 4, 1944—9 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/6225: Telegram

[639] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson)

Washington, July 6, 1944—9 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/7–644: Telegram

[640] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, July 7, 1944—2 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/6334: Telegram

[641] The Chargé in Spain (Butterworth) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, July 9, 1944—11 p.m. [Received July 10—9:42 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/7–1044: Telegram

[642] The Consul at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, July 12, 1944—1 p.m. [Received July 13—10:02 a.m.]

840.48 Refugees/7–1244: Telegram

[643] The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, July 12, 1944—6 p.m. [Received 11:30 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/7–1244: Telegram

[644] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, July 13, 1944—midnight.

840.48 Refugees/7–1344: Telegram

[645] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 14, 1944—7 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/6–2844: Telegram

[646] The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, July 19, 1944—3 p.m. [Received 5:15 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/7–1944: Telegram

[647] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, July 19, 1944—10 p.m. [ReceivedJuly 19—12:08 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/7–1944: Telegram

[648] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, July 21, 1944—midnight.

840.48 Refugees/7–2144: Telegram

[649] Memorandum by the Delegate of the International Committee of the Red Cross (Zollinger)

Washington, July 24, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/7–2444

[650] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, July 26, 1944—noon. [Received 1:19 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/7–2644: Telegram

[651] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, July 26, 1944—4 p.m. [Received July 27—6:17 a.m.]

840.48 Refugees/7–2644: Telegram

[652] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 27, 1944—8 p.m. [Received 9:45 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/7–2744: Telegram

[653] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 28, 1944—midnight.

840.48 Refugees/7–2844: Telegram

[654] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 29, 1944—5 p.m. [Received July 29—3:55 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/7–2944: Telegram

[655] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, July 29, 1944—6 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/7–2944: Telegram

[656] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 31, 1944—7 p.m. [Received July 31—5 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/7–3144: Telegram

[657] The Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington , July 31, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/7–3144

[658] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, August 2, 1944—midnight.

840.48 Refugees/7–1944: Telegram

[659] The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics

Washington, August 3, 1944—11 a.m.

840.48 Refugees/8–344: Circular airgram

[660] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, August 5, 1944—6 p.m. [Received August 6—12:56 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/8–544: Telegram

[661] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, August 7, 1944—2 p.m. [Received 9:35 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/8–744: Telegram

[662] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Australia (Johnson)

Washington, August 12, 1944—8 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/8–1244: Circular telegram

[663] The Acting Secretary of the State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 12, 1944—midnight.

840.48 Refugees/8–1244: Telegram

[664] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 14, 1944—6 p.m. [Received August 15—2:30 a.m.]

840.48 Refugees/8–1444: Telegram

[665] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 16, 1944—7 p.m. [Received August 16—4:05 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/8–1644: Telegram

[666] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 16, 1944—8 p.m. [Received 9:56 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/8–1644: Telegram

[667] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 16, 1944. [Received August 16—2:45 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/8–1644: Telegram

[668] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Representatives

Washington, August 18, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/8–1844: Circular telegram

[669] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, August 19, 1944—10 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/8–1944: Telegram

[670] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 22, 1944—1 p.m. [Received August 22—10:16 a.m.]

840.48 Refugees/8–2244: Telegram

[671] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, August 22, 1944—8 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/8–2244: Telegram

[672] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 23, 1944—5 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/8–1444: Telegram

[673] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, August 23, 1944—5 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/8–2344: Telegram

[674] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, August 23, 1944—10 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/8–544: Telegram

[675] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, August 24, 1944—7 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/8–1244: Telegram

[676] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb)

Washington, August 24, 1944—11 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/8–1444: Telegram

[677] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 25, 1944—7 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/8–2244: Telegram

[678] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, August 26, 1944—10 a.m. [Received 10:35 a.m.]

840.48 Refugees/8–2644: Telegram

[679] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Murphy)

Washington, August 30, 1944—7 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/8–3044: Telegram

[680] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, August 31, 1944—9 a.m. [Received 2:26 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/8–3144: Telegram

[681] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 31, 1944. [Received September 22.]

840.48 Refugees/8–3144

[682] Memorandum by the Director of the Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees (Emerson) to the International Red Cross Delegation at London

[London,] 31 August, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/9–144

[683] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, September 2, 1944—midnight.

840.48 Refugees/7–2944: Telegram

[684] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, September 6, 1944.

740.00115 E. W./7–1944: Telegram

[685] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, September 6, 1944—2 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/9–644: Telegram

[686] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, September 7, 1944—6 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/9–744: Circular telegram

[687] The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Rome, September 8, 1944—4 p.m. [Received September 9—10:02 a.m.]

840.48 Refugees/9–844: Telegram

[688] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, September 9, 1944—6 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/8–2644: Telegram

[689] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, September 11, 1944—9 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/9–544: Telegram

[690] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 11, 1944—11 p.m. [Received September 11—7:54 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/9–1144: Telegram

[691] The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, September 14, 1944—11 a.m. [Received 10:52 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/9–1444: Telegram

[692] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, September 14, 1944—10 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/9–1444: Telegram

[693] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, September 14, 1944—midnight.

840.48 Refugees/9–1144: Telegram

[694] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Paraguay (Frost)

Washington, September 18, 1944—5:20 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/8–3144: Airgram

[695] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, September 18, 1944—8 p.m.

740.00119 E. W./9–1844: Telegram

[696] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 19, 1944—9 p.m. [Received September 20—2:15 a.m.]

840.48 Refugees/9–1944: Telegram

[697] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, September 20, 1944—5 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/9–2044: Telegram

[698] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson)

Washington, September 20, 1944—6 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/9–2044: Telegram

[699] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 29, 1944—10 p.m. [Received September 30—2:05 p.m.]

740.00119 E. W./9–2944: Telegram

[700] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb)

Washington, October 3, 1944—8 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/9–1444: Telegram

[701] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, October 5, 1944—11 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/9–2244: Telegram

[702] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, October 6, 1944—9 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/9–2844: Telegram

[703] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, October 7, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/10–744: Telegram

[704] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, October 18, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 10 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/10–1844: Telegram

[705] Note From the German Legation in Hungary to the Swiss Legation in Hungary

Budapest , October 19, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/12–1144

[706] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 22, 1944—noon.

840.48 Refugees/9–2244: Telegram

[707] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, October 26, 1944—2 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/10–1944: Telegram

[708] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan)

Washington, October 30, 1944—7 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/10–3044: Telegram

[709] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, November 8, 1944—6 p.m.

740.00115 EW/8–1444: Telegram

[710] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, November 11, 1944—midnight.

840.48 Refugees/9–2744: Telegram

[711] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, November 18, 1944—midnight.

740.00115 E.W. 1939/11–1544: Telegram

[712] The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, November 21, 1944—10 a.m. [Received 6:30 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/11–2144: Telegram

[713] The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, November 22, 1944—3 p.m. [Received 3:55 p.m.]

740.00115 E.W./11–2244: Telegram

[714] The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, November 24, 1944—9 a.m. [Received 10:41 a.m.]

840.48 Refugees/11–2444: Telegram

[715] The Turkish Ministry for Foreign Affairs to the American Embassy in Turkey

Ankara , December 6, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/12–1444

[716] The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, December 7, 1944—2 p.m. [Received 7:33 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/12–744: Telegram

[717] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle)

Washington, December 8, 1944—9 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/11–2144: Telegram

[718] The Secretary of State to the Executive Director of the War Refugee Board (Pehle)

Washington, December 13, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/12–1344

[719] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson)

Washington, December 21, 1944—8 p.m.

840.48 Refugees/12–2144: Telegram

[720] Memorandum by the Adviser on Refugees and Displaced Persons (Warren) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] December 22, 1944.

840.48 Refugees/12–2244

[721] The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, December 23, 1944. [Received December 24—10:41 a.m.]

740.00115 E.W./12–2344: Telegram

[722] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle)

Washington, December 23, 1944—9:30 a.m.

840.48 Refugees/12–2344: Airgram

[723] The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, December 23, 1944—3 p.m. [Received December 24—3:42 a.m.]

711.62114 Sick/12–2344: Telegram

[724] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 25, 1944—noon. [Received December 25—10:30 a.m.]

840.48 Refugees/12–2544: Telegram

The Secretary of State to the Polish Ambassador (Ciechanowski) 840.48 Refugees/5054

[Document 549]

The Secretary of State to the Polish Ambassador (Ciechanowski)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to his Excellency the Ambassador of Poland and has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Embassy’s note of December 24, 1943,2 concerning Jewish persons interned in special camps for citizens of the Allied Nations whose passports of various Neutral and Allied Nations are reported to have been taken by the Germans.

The Department is appreciative of the efforts of the Polish Government on behalf of these persons and as suggested by the Embassy, the Government of the United States has taken certain steps in order that these unfortunate persons may be saved.

The Department referred the matter to the Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees3 at London asking it to endeavor to stay the deportation of these families. The American Embassy at Asuncion was requested to investigate the report that the Government of Paraguay issued instructions to annul passports which had been issued to interned Polish Jews. The Department has received word from the Paraguayan Ministry stating that the passports of the persons in question have not been cancelled nor is the Paraguayan Government considering such cancellation. This information was sent to the Intergovernmental Committee by the Department with the request that it bring the statement of the Paraguayan Ministry to the attention of the Swiss Government for communication to the German Government in intercession for the persons referred to.

The Department proposes to take any further steps which it can on behalf of these unfortunate victims of the Nazis.

Washington , January 11, 1944.

2 Not printed; it stated that information had been received through Polish diplomatic channels that the Spanish Ambassador in Berlin, acting upon instructions from the Government of Paraguay, intended to annul passports theretofore issued by the Paraguayan Consul in Bern to Polish Jews interned by the Germans in special camps for citizens of the Allied Nations (840.48–Refugees/5054).

3 Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees (IGC), established by the Evian Conference, July 1938, which was convened on the initiative of President Roosevelt.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/4993: Telegram

[Document 550]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 13, 1944.
[Received January 13—4:35 p.m.]

327. For Department and FEA.4 Embassy’s 239, January 11 and despatch 11336, September 24, 1943.5 Following telegram was sent by MEW6 to British Legation, Bern, on January 12. Owing to an oversight EWD7 was not informed until telegram had been despatched.

“As you know, the Swiss have been invited to come prepared to discuss, at the forthcoming economic negotiations,8 the reception in Switzerland of selected children from Belgium, France and other Allied occupied territories. They have already been told that we and the Americans would welcome such action on their part, and would be glad to give facilities for extraordinary imports to ease the burden of feeding and clothing children so received within a provisional limit of 100,000.

“Please request that they now as a first step and as soon as possible approach the Germans for permission in principle for children to leave occupied territory in this connection. We should be glad if they would include Jewish children from Germany and elsewhere in Axis Europe in the enquiry.

“This would clear the ground and facilitate the forthcoming discussions. It will be understood of course that the selection of children under such a scheme could not be left to the Germans or to puppet governments in occupied countries.

“For your information, if the Germans refuse, we intend to give their attitude the fullest publicity. If this point should arise when you speak to the Swiss you should therefore avoid any undertaking that the matter will remain secret.”

MEW is awaiting your views on Embassy’s 239 before approaching Swedish Legation here.9 Please expedite reply.

Winant

4 Foreign Economic Administration.

5 Neither printed.

6 British Ministry of Economic Warfare.

7 Economic Warfare Division of the Embassy in London.

8 For correspondence on this subject, see vol. ii, pp. 1 ff.

9 In telegram 381, January 15, 1944, to London, the Department expressed approval of suggested approach to the Swedish Legation (840.48 Refugees/4979).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/5014: Telegram

[Document 551]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 18, 1944.
[Received January 18—6:37 p.m.]

452. My letter of December 17.10 We raised with Foreign Office the instructions contained in Department’s 7946, December 1611 and have received from Foreign Office the following reply requesting Department’s agreement on terms of joint approach to Intergovernmental Committee director:12 “Please refer to that part of your letter to me of December 17 which deals with instructions received by the United States Embassy from the State Department to collaborate with the British Government in drawing up terms of reference to the Director of the Intergovernmental Committee in regard to the proposal that the Intergovernmental Committee should take over the care of civilian refugees in Switzerland whether Allied, stateless, or ex-enemy refugees.

“We have now consulted the various Departments concerned and would like to suggest for your agreement or comment the following terms of reference: “1. The Intergovernmental Committee to be asked to be the authority to look after and be responsible for the care of stateless persons and ex-enemy refugees in Switzerland. Though the advice and help of the Intergovernmental Committee representative would undoubtedly be valuable regarding refugees, in general we feel that those of Allied nationality should be looked after by and be the responsibility of their respective governments. Our reason for this is that Allied Governments are most anxious to bear and are in fact bearing responsibility for their own refugees, looking upon them as potential supporters when their respective countries are liberated. There would, of course, be nothing against any Allied Government seeking the help or advice of the Committee in connection with its refugees but we should prefer ourselves not to disturb the existing practice.

2. Any Swiss request for exceptional blockade facilities for the maintenance of refugees ought, we feel, to be addressed to His Majesty’s Government and the United States Government by the Swiss Government itself. The Ministry of Economic Warfare is, of course, the Department here to whom communications on this subject are addressed and the question could conveniently be handled in conjunction with the Economic Warfare Division of your Embassy. The Intergovernmental Committee could not conveniently we think be the authority to deal with this matter which has to be handled within the framework of our general economic policy toward Switzerland. We agree, however, that the Intergovernmental Committee would be a useful source of information regarding the number and needs of the refugees.

3. If it is necessary to help the Swiss financially, a particularly difficult problem in present circumstances, the Intergovernmental Committee should be the channel through which financial help to be provided by both our Governments in consultation and mutual agreement can conveniently be given.

“I should be grateful if you would let us know whether your Government agrees with these points and whether a joint approach by the United States and British Governments can be made to the Director of the Intergovernmental Committee to take over refugees in Switzerland on these terms.”

Winant

10 Not found in Department files.

11  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 392.

12 Herbert W. Emerson.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/5042a: Airgram

[Document 552]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 19, 1944—7:20 p.m.

A–83. Department was informed on December 29 by British Embassy that information has been received from the British Foreign Office to the effect that it will not be possible to assign numbers to children in Switzerland to permit them to enter Palestine after the war. The Representative of the British Embassy stated that no one knew whether Palestine would continue to be a British mandate or the attitude which would be taken concerning immigration after the war. We mentioned that it was our understanding that the unused numbers would be made available even after the expiration of the White Paper13 [March 31, 1944]. The reply was that this was true but the British do not desire to tie up these numbers when the children might not even wish to proceed to Palestine after the war.

This action may have serious consequences in our attempt to provide refuge for those who have suffered at the hands of the Nazis and may have unfortunate repercussions in this country.

Please discuss this with appropriate British officials and express the hope of this Government that they may reconsider their position and authorize numbers to be allocated permitting children to enter Palestine, within the total allowable under the White Paper.

Hull

13 British Cmd. 6019: Palestine, Statement of Policy, May 1939. For correspondence regarding American interest in the White Paper, see Foreign Relations, 1939, vol. iv, pp. 732 ff.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/5016: Telegram

[Document 553]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 20, 1944.
[Received January 20—10:48 p.m.]

561. In accordance with your 381 of January 15,14 the Swedish Minister in London was received by Lord Selborne15 yesterday in the presence of Adams,16 and handed the following joint letter: “Ministry of Economic Warfare,
London, 19th January 1944.

Dear Minister, His Majesty’s Government and the United States Government greatly admire the willingness displayed by the Swedish Government to receive refugees from German-occupied Europe. They take note with appreciation of the communication recently made to the Chairman of the Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees to the effect that the Swedish Government is willing to afford asylum to a substantial number of children evacuated from occupied territories and of Jewish children from Germany or occupied territories. They fully realize that these schemes would already have come into operation had not the consent of the German Government and the Quisling Government in Norway17 been withheld.

His Majesty’s Government and the United States Government greatly hope that the Swedish Government will now be prepared to make a fresh approach to the German Government (and, where appropriate, to the Quisling authorities in Norway) offering asylum in Sweden (a) to children from Norway and other occupied countries (b) to Jewish children from Germany and other Axis countries and (c) to other children from Germany and other Axis countries who have been deported from their countries of residence or are in danger of deportation, or whose parents have been deported or are in danger of being deported; and requesting permission for such children to come to Sweden.

Realizing that the reception of a considerable number of children would involve a fresh burden upon Sweden’s economy, His Majesty’s Government and the United States Government would, for their part, be prepared to make appropriate increases in Swedish blockade quotas. They would also give prompt and sympathetic consideration to any request from the Swedish Government for assistance in meeting the requirements of these children.

As regards the carriage of additional supplies, the two governments suggest that an arrangement should be made similar to that which governs the shipment of relief supplies to Greece, namely that both belligerents should permit the departure from the Baltic of a Swedish ship or ships on the understanding that such ships are to be used exclusively for the carriage of relief supplies, and will be allowed to return to the Baltic if for any reason such supplies can no longer be shipped.

As far as His Majesty’s Government and the United States Government are concerned there would be no objection to Norwegian children leaving Norway in rotation and returning to their homes after a stay in Sweden.

Yours sincerely,

Signed Selborne,

Signed Ware Adams”

It was made clear to the Swedish Minister that (a) the method of choosing the children would have to be satisfactory to our Governments, as, for example, by having it under the supervision of some responsible organization such as the Swedish-Norwegian Relief Committee or the Swedish Red Cross, and (b) that if the Germans obstructed this relief plan, we would give full publicity to their action. We considered it wiser to make this last statement orally rather than in writing.

The Norwegian Government was informed of the substance of the letter before the meeting with the Swedish Minister. As the Norwegians intend to make a separate approach to the Swedish Government along similar lines, reference to the Norwegian Government was omitted from the letter.

The Swedish Minister expressed his own sympathy with the proposal for evacuating children and said he would communicate both the text of the letter and his own endorsement to his Government.

He suggested that since Sweden had already placed itself in the vanguard of humanitarian movements in cases like the Oslo students and had already been rebuffed by the Germans, it might be well if the Swedish and Swiss Governments could act in unison in approaching the German Government. Lord Selborne said we would examine this suggestion sympathetically and communicate with him on the subject in the near future. Embassy will report.

Stockholm has been informed.

Winant

14 See footnote 9, p. 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 550].

15 British Minister of Economic Warfare.

16 Ware Adams, Second Secretary of Embassy and Consul.

17 Maj. Vidkun Quisling, former leader of the Nazi party in Norway, promoted to position of Minister President of the German puppet government which was set up in that state on February 1, 1942.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/4980: Telegram

[Document 554]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 25, 1944.

625. World Jewish Congress has received following cable from its representative in Lisbon: “About ten thousand Turkish Jews since generations and actually living France are in great difficulties pending recognition of their nationality according laws issued some years ago similar Polish 1938. Their deportation to Poland imminent being considered as apatrides.18 Please intervene urgently Turkish Government through Turkish Ambassador Washington for saving these unfortunates recognising them provisorily as Turkish subjects.”

Department received telegram 49 January 10 from Ankara19 stating Rabbi Wise20 had requested that matter be placed before Turkish Government. Embassy at Ankara made informal approach to Turkish officials and was informed that Turkish Government would take whatever steps possible to afford protection to the persons in question and that insofar as concerns those who are able to establish Turkish citizenship the same treatment will be demanded for them as is accorded other Turkish citizens. As concerns those who are unable to establish Turkish citizenship doubt was expressed that the Vichy authorities will recognize the rights of Turkish officials to intervene on their behalf.

Department has asked the Embassy at Ankara to express the hope of this Government that Turkish officials will interpret as liberally as possible the citizenship status of those in question.21

Please refer to IGC Director requesting the Committee take any further action it may deem advisable and inform Department.

Hull

18 Stateless persons.

19 Not printed.

20 Stephen S. Wise, President of World Jewish Congress.

21 As a result of representations by the Ambassador in Turkey, by mid-March the Turkish Government had authorized entrance visas for about 700 of the 10,000 Turkish Jews, and, within a few weeks, several hundred repatriates had actually reached Turkey from France. The eventual liberation of France by Allied forces put an end to dangers facing hundreds of Turkish Jews remaining in that country.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/5060: Telegram

[Document 555]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)22

Washington, January 25, 1944—midnight.

634. The President has instructed the Secretaries of State, Treasury and War to take action for the immediate rescue and relief of the Jews of Europe and other victims of enemy persecution. In an executive order issued January 2223 the President declared “it is the policy of this Government to take all measures within its power to rescue the victims of enemy oppression who are in imminent danger of death and otherwise to afford such victims all possible relief and assistance consistent with the successful prosecution of the war”. The order establishes special governmental machinery for executing this policy. It creates a War Refugee Board consisting of the Secretaries of State, Treasury and War.24 The Board is charged with direct responsibility to the President in seeing that the announced policy is carried out. The President indicated that while he would look directly to the Board for the execution of this policy, the Board would cooperate with the Intergovernmental Committee, UNRRA,25 and other interested international organizations. The President stated that he expected the cooperation of all members of the United Nations and other governments in carrying out this difficult but important task. He stated that the existing facilities of the State, Treasury and War Departments would be employed to furnish aid to Axis victims to the fullest extent possible. He stressed that it was urgent that action be taken to forestall the plot of the Nazis to exterminate the Jews and other persecuted minorities in Europe.

You should do everything possible to effectuate this policy of this Government, bearing in mind that time is of the essence. You should cooperate closely with all public and established private agencies who are active in your area in this field, aiding them in the development of coordinated programs and in the effectuation of integrated measures for the rescue, transportation, maintenance and relief of victims of enemy oppression, etc.

The communication facilities should be made freely available to these private agencies for all appropriate messages for carrying out the policy of this Government herein stated, keeping the War Refugee Board advised through the Department. You should give them every assistance in obtaining and verifying information.

You are requested to render an immediate report concerning the actual situation as it exists today in the country to which you are accredited. This report should include a full statement as to what is being done to rescue the Jews and other persecuted minorities from Hitler, including particularly (a) the extent to which these war refugees are permitted to enter the country to which you are accredited (b) the extent to which such country actually encourages and cooperates in their entry and (c) the extent to which such refugees are not able to enter such country because of the failure of such country to cooperate in their entry. This report should cover actual cases which have come to your attention involving refugees being turned back at the border and the reasons why such refugees were turned back. You should also report periodically on cases of this character which come to your attention in the future.

You should include in your report your recommendations as to what you feel this Government can do to effectuate with all possible speed the rescue and relief of the victims of enemy oppression, including particularly what can be done to make the government of the country to which you are accredited cooperate more fully in carrying out this policy. Your report should cover any special obstacles which you feel are interfering with the rescue and relief of these victims and your recommendations as to what can be done to remove these obstacles.

You are requested to approach the Government to which you are accredited, explain the policy expressed in the President’s Executive Order referred to above, and ascertain from such Government the extent to which it is prepared to cooperate.

Diplomatic and consular officers are instructed to do everything possible to carry out the policy expressed in the President’s Executive Order. This cablegram has been transmitted by telegram or airgram to all diplomatic and consular offices.

Repeat to consular offices under your jurisdiction.

Hull

22 Repeated on the same date to Ankara (61), Bern (251), Lisbon (200), Madrid (207) and Stockholm (131). Sent on January 26, 7 p.m., as circular airgram to all other Missions.

23 Executive Order 9417, 9 Federal Register 935; also printed in Department of State Bulletin, January 22, 1944, p. 95.

24 President Roosevelt, in his letter of January 29 to the Secretary of the Treasury (Morgenthau), not printed, allocated $1,000,000 to the War Refugee Board from the President’s Emergency Fund for administration and other expenses of the Board.

25 United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/5060: Telegram

[Document 556]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)26

Washington, January 31, 1944.

774. The following telegram is sent at the request of the President’s War Refugee Board:

Refer to Department’s cable 634 of January 25 concerning the President’s Executive Order establishing the War Refugee Board and declaring the policy of this Government.

In discussing this matter with the British Foreign Office, you are requested to make it clear that the establishment of the War Refugee Board represents this Government’s determination to effectively carry out without delay the policy heretofore agreed upon by the two Governments to take all possible measures for the speedy rescue and relief of the refugees of Europe.

Although this Government on its part intends to take all possible action with all possible speed, we hope that this effort will not be unilateral and we wish to make it clear that it continues to be the policy of this Government to encourage and participate in effective cooperative efforts with other governments.

As the President has stated, the Board of course will cooperate fully with the Intergovernmental Committee and other interested international organizations.

You are requested to make clear to the British Government the position of this Government and our desire for its cooperative action. You should explore with the appropriate officials of the Foreign Office the possibility of implementing such cooperation through the issuance by the British Government of a declaration of policy similar to that made by the President and the issuance by the Foreign Office of instructions to its representatives in other countries comparable to the instructions contained in the Department’s telegram 634.

Please keep us informed of the attitude of the British on this matter.

Hull

26 Substance of this message transmitted in circular airgram of February 29, 7:30 p.m., to all American Missions except those at London, Ciudad Trujillo, San Salvador, Port-au-Prince, Tegucigalpa, La Paz, and Buenos Aires.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/4988: Telegram

[Document 557]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 2, 1944.

828. Concerning assistance to Danish refugees now in Sweden referred to in your 303 January 12,27 Department concurs with views as expressed by British Foreign Office. In collaboration with the British please refer matter to IGC requesting it to coordinate all activities in consultation with our Governments, the Swedish Government and the Danish Ministers in Washington and London.

Hull

27 Not printed; it contained the text of a letter of January 10 from the British Foreign Office with respect to refugees from Denmark in Sweden, requesting that an inquiry be made of the State Department whether they would agree that the organization of aid to these refugees should be entrusted to the Intergovernmental Committee who would be enabled to coordinate all activities in consultation with the United States and British Governments and with the Swedish Government and the recognized Danish authorities (840.48 Refugees/4988).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/5014: Telegram

[Document 558]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 2, 1944.

829. Concerning terms of approach to IGC Director referred to in your 452 January 18, Department suggests that the words “seeking the help or advice of the Committee” in last sentence of paragraph numbered 1 be changed to read “seeking information and advice from the Committee”. It is our view that above change makes clear that the Committee is not expected to assume responsibility for providing material aid but it may act in a consultative capacity.

The following addition is suggested at the end of last sentence of paragraph numbered 2 “and its advice should be sought in each instance. The Committee should be informed of blockade facilities which may be granted by our respective Governments for maintenance of refugees”. It is thought that IGC should be the agency through which activities on behalf of refugees in Switzerland should be cleared and the above addition is intended to clarify this point.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 103.9169/2372k: Telegram

[Document 559]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 3, 1944.

858. Reference your 327 of January 13 and Department’s 381 of January 15.28 In view of the fact that the reception of children in Switzerland is to be discussed at the forthcoming economic negotiations, Department and FEA believe that our Mission in Bern should be instructed to associate itself at the first suitable opportunity with the British representations, which we assume from your reference telegram have already been made. We would appreciate your discussing the current British position in the matter with MEW and informing our Legation in Bern of the background of the problem and of the action which we desire should be taken.

Hull

28 Latter not printed, but see footnote 9, p. 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 550].

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/4934: Airgram

[Document 560]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, February 7, 1944—11:30 a.m.

A–45. On December 24, 1943 Department received a note from the Polish Embassy29 stating that the Polish Minister at Bern had received information that the Spanish Ambassador in Berlin, acting upon instructions from the Government of Paraguay, intended to annul passports theretofore issued by the Paraguayan Consul in Bern to Polish Jews who were interned by the Germans in special camps for citizens of the Allied Nations. As a result on December 12 German authorities arrived at camps and took up passports of all Allied Governments held by Jews. Department desires that you place matter before Swiss Foreign Office requesting that appropriate Swiss consular officers in Germany make an investigation in the matter. If any American passports have been taken up it is desired that if possible the Swiss consular officers obtain the names of the persons to whom they were issued, the approximate date of issue and make appropriate representations with a view to having passports surrendered to Swiss consular officers for ultimate transmission to the Department.

Hull

29 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) 101.4/18a: Telegram

[Document 561]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, February 18, 1944—midnight.

463. With reference to War Refugee Board, refer to Department’s no. 207 of January 25, 1944.30 In formulating a program of immediate action the Board has resolved that one of the projects which should be pushed with greatest speed is an effort to facilitate the evacuation of as many Jewish and other war refugees as possible from occupied areas to Spain. The Board understands that the movement of French refugees is well organized and functioning and that some thousands have already been transferred to North Africa. It also understands that arrangements are presently being made to transfer stateless refugees and those lacking protection of their government to North Africa.

The Board feels that the most feasible way of accomplishing this extremely urgent task is: (a) To remove from Spain as rapidly as possible refugees now there, thus making room for more and (b) To obtain from the Spanish Government the greatest possible relaxation of border and other controls and other action designed to encourage the entry of refugees into Spain.

With the object of increasing the movement of refugees from occupied areas through Spain to refuge elsewhere, the following concrete proposals have been agreed upon by the Board. (1) In view of the establishment of a camp in North Africa31 which is ready to receive refugees, a substantial number of refugees now in Spain can be moved to such camp and the transfer should be facilitated. (2) In order to take care of new refugees, particularly stateless refugees and those lacking the protection of their government, who will arrive in the future and to effect their removal from Spain, on an involuntary basis if necessary, the Spanish Government should be asked to maintain reception camps in which future arrivals may remain until their transfer to North Africa. As a basis for obtaining the necessary action by the Spanish Government they should be advised (a) that the War Refugee Board will make the necessary arrangements to finance the maintenance and support of such stateless and unprotected refugees as arrive in Spain in accordance with these arrangements until the refugees can be removed to North Africa, and (b) that the War Refugee Board will assume responsibility for arranging for the transfer to North Africa of stateless and unprotected refugees as rapidly as possible. In this connection, the Spanish Government may be reminded of the recent evacuation of refugees to Palestine and of arrangements presently being made for the removal of stateless refugees to the camp already established in North Africa. (3) The Spanish Government should be requested in the strongest manner possible to take effective steps to encourage the entry of more refugees into Spain. In addition to the relaxation of border controls and the taking of other actions, it will be extremely helpful if the Spanish Government will take steps to facilitate the spread of information to the occupied areas that Spain is prepared to grant asylum to refugees pending their removal to another country.

The foregoing commitments are not intended to replace in any way the activities or responsibilities of the French Committee of National Liberation with respect to the flow of French refugees through Spain.

The Department anxiously desires to support the foregoing program of the Board and you are requested at the earliest possible moment to approach the Spanish Government with a view to obtaining their agreement to the plan. Kindly report as soon as possible on the practical measures that will be necessary to put the proposed plan into operation in Spain, including the requirements of funds.

You will, of course, appreciate that these negotiations with the Spanish Government are on an entirely different level than the political and economic negotiations being carried on with that Government. This Government is simply addressing a humanitarian appeal to the Spanish Government rather than a request to take certain action favorable to us at some sacrifice to them. Accordingly, it is our desire that the proposed negotiations with respect to refugees should be carried to a conclusion rapidly and effectively without becoming entangled in other pending problems under discussion with the Spanish.

It is also important to keep in mind that it is the policy of this Government to move promptly to Camp Lyautey as many stateless and unprotected refugees as facilities permit. Accordingly, every effort should be made to encourage the voluntary migration to the Camp of the greatest possible number of eligible persons now in Spain. This evacuation operation should, of course, be executed as rapidly as possible.

Kindly report to the Department as soon as possible the progress that is being made in this matter.

Stettinius

30 See footnote 22, p. 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555].

31 Camp Maréchal Lyautey, a joint United States-United Kingdom undertaking, at Fedhala, near Casablanca, Morocco.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/5230: Telegram

[Document 562]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, February 21, 1944.
[Received February 21—1:02 p.m.]

1439. Reference last sentence Department’s telegram 626, January 25.32 Foreign Office has replied to our letter in the matter as follows: “His Majesty’s Government welcome the proposal that a representative of the Inter-Governmental Committee should be attached to MERRA and if the latter is merged in UNRRA33 then it would appear that there would be scope for cooperation between the latter and the Inter-Governmental Committee to be extended to that territory in accordance with the general agreement recently reached regarding the relations between UNRRA and the Inter-Governmental Committee. If you agree we can jointly inform Emerson accordingly so that he can proceed with necessary arrangements in Cairo.”

Please inform us when Cairo is instructed.

Winant

32 Not printed; it requested that the matter of attachment of a representative to the Middle East Relief and Refugee Administration (MERRA) be discussed with the British (840.48 Refugees/4978).

33 For information regarding UNRRA administration of Middle East refugee centers, see press release of June 10, 1944, by UNRRA, in Department of State Bulletin, June 10, 1944, p. 533.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/5260: Telegram

[Document 563]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, February 25, 1944.
[Received February 25—2:20 p.m.]

1554. Randall, Foreign Office Counselor, has personally approached Bucknell34 to discuss problems raised by an anticipated debate in House Commons Wednesday, March 1st on Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees and to ask for any suggestions which Department and War Refugee Board may have.

Debate is in connection with estimates and will give ample time for adverse critics to air views. Richard Law35 will probably make part of reply for Government. From statements by interested organisations Foreign Office expects there will be effort to show a rift between United States and British Governments on refugee policy and believes that one question will be whether American Government has approved a plan for large scale (ten million dollars) relief of Jews in enemy occupied areas which has been blocked by British. Foreign Office has in mind replying that such is not the case, that British and American Governments have machinery for acting together in refugee matters including membership on the part of both in the Intergovernmental Committee, that relief and assistance must of necessity be comprised of such actions as are consistent with successful prosecution of the war as was stated by the President in establishing War Refugee Board, that several joint agencies including economic policy agencies of course given consideration to relief proposals in connection with problems of successful prosecution of war, and that consideration of several proposals is currently pending.

Foreign Office would like to have an understanding with Department that British Government, if challenged as anticipated, might reply along foregoing lines with Department’s approval. Embassy agrees with Foreign Office in foreseeing danger if impression would be given that two Governments are drifting apart in refugee policy.

Foreign Office has instructed all Missions abroad to consult with United States colleagues with a view to seeing what further measures can be adopted for helping forward refugees along lines of President’s executive order.

Winant

34 Howard Bucknell, Jr., Counselor of Embassy.

35 British Minister of State.

The Apostolic Delegate (Cicognani) to the Acting Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/5272

[Document 564]

The Apostolic Delegate (Cicognani) to the Acting Secretary of State

No. 581/42 Washington, February 26, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Stettinius: Referring to your letter of February 21, 1944, and my reply of February 23, 1944,36 concerning the welfare of the Jews remaining in Slovakia, I beg to inform you that I am in receipt of a reply from the Cardinal Secretary of State on this question.

His Eminence, the Cardinal, states that he has interested the Papal Representative in Bratislava in the condition of these Jews. The Representative sent a communication to the Secretariate of State to the effect that, although the present condition of the Jews in Slovakia is indeed sad and still uncertain, the census that was taken had only one purpose, the investigation of certain specific suspicions. Furthermore, according to a promise from the President of the Republic, Dr. Josepf Tiso, the Jews will not be persecuted, that is, will not be condemned to severe punishments, but will only be interned and will be given opportunity and facilities to withdraw to some other country.

In bringing you this communication from the Apostolic Nunciature in Bratislava I wish to assure you that the Holy See will continue its interest in the welfare of these unfortunate people.37

With highest personal regard and sentiments of esteem, I beg to remain

Yours very sincerely,

A. G. Cicognani
Archbishop of Laodicea

36 Neither printed.

37 The Apostolic Delegate, in his letter of May 24, not printed, advised that Slovakian authorities had given assurances to the Apostolic Nunciature in Slovakia that, despite the registration of Jews, officials had no intention of taking any other anti-Semitic measures; the Nunciature added, however, that the possibility of new reprisals could not be excluded.

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/5279: Telegram

[Document 565]

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, February 28, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received March 2—8:40 a.m.]

683. Proposals for War Refugee Board outlined in Department’s 463, February 18, midnight, raise two separate questions, first that of evacuation of stateless and unprotected refugees now in Spain, and secondly that of the facilitation of passage of further numbers of such refugees into or through Spain from German occupied territories.

(1) With reference to first question there are now estimated to be in Spain approximately 1300 refugees who might be classified as stateless and unprotected. Of this number about 400 are Spanish Sephardic Jews who have recently been brought to Spain from German concentration camps under agreement between Spanish and German Governments for evacuation elsewhere but whose travel to further destinations has not yet been arranged; it is expected that considerable number of these persons will apply for admission to Fedhala center. Another 450 have already applied for evacuation to Fedhala and estimated 250 have received or will soon receive visas for other destinations principally Canada. Most of remaining 200 prefer to remain in Spain for one of following reasons: (a) to be near families still in German occupied countries; (b) to await visas for destinations to which they cannot at present time proceed; (c) because of feeling based on distrust of the French, that they will be better off in Spain than at Fedhala and inability to proceed to any other destination.

Response of refugees to offer of evacuation to Fedhala center [unenthusiastic] due largely to this distrust and to fear that Lyautey will turn out to be French concentration camp and under instructions from Department we have attempted no means of persuasion beyond acquainting them with nature and conditions of proposed project. French authorities have moreover insisted on subjecting all applications to detailed scrutiny at Algiers and Rabat before allowing persons to proceed from Spain and present indications are that considerable numbers may be turned down on security and other grounds. It appears therefore that under present circumstances this project may not prove solution of problem of clearing residue of stateless refugees out of sea in [Spain?] and that there will remain question of destinations for those who either do not choose to accept this offer of evacuation or who are not considered acceptable by French and Allied authorities. (In this connection I should appreciate clarification of meaning of “involuntary” removal of refugees from Spain). It may be mentioned with reference Department’s 512 February 24,38 that present delay in completing arrangements for departure of refugees for Fedhala is due principally to above mentioned requirement that applications be submitted to North Africa for prior approval.

As has been previously reported stateless refugees in Spain are at present being well cared for by private American charitable organizations represented by David Blickenstaff39 who has also been instrumental in arranging evacuation of approximately 900 such refugees during past year. Number of stateless and unprotected refugees now entering Spain is negligible.

(2) With reference to problem of facilitating escape of additional numbers of refugees from German occupied territory into Spain it should be pointed out that reduced rate at which such refugees are now entering Spain is not attributable to Spanish border control but is considered due rather to difficulties of reaching Pyrenees frontier from points within occupied Europe.

So far as is known virtually no refugees of this type have been prevented from entering Spain by Spanish border control or turned back by them to German authorities and there would appear to be little advantage to be gained by encouraging a further relaxation of this control. There are on the contrary definite arguments against such relaxation principally that it would facilitate the undetected entry of German agents into Spain at a time when one of our major objectives is to rid Spain of such agents and would render increasingly difficult the control of smuggling activities which directly impair our preemptive purchase program. It would moreover give to Spanish authorities convenient excuse for closing their eyes to such of these activities as they might wish to let pass unnoticed.

I consider it unnecessary to suggest to Spanish Government that it facilitate spread of information to German occupied areas that Spain is prepared to grant asylum to refugees in view of fact that any changes in Spanish policy toward refugees are known throughout occupied Europe by means of underground grapevine almost as soon as they are known in Spain. It can hardly be denied moreover that a broadcast offer by Spanish Government of asylum to persons fleeing from German authority would have political implications over and above its primary humanitarian purpose and it is not illogical to suppose that one of primary results of such a step would be immediate tightening of German border control along Pyrenees and increased surveillance over routes leading toward that frontier, a development which could seriously jeopardize the chances of escape of American and Allied air force personnel forced to land in German held territory and make escape of all refugees more difficult than before.

It is my feeling that Spanish Government could best expedite release of refugees from German controlled areas of Europe by directly approaching German Government with offer to grant transit or temporary residence visas to refugees wishing to leave those areas in much the same way that it has recently effected release of above mentioned Sephardic Jews the ultimate destinations for such refugees to be arranged by the War Refugee Board or other such organization. It should be emphasized, however, that sympathetic consideration of Spanish Government to such a proposal can hardly be expected until there is found more adequate solution to problem of destinations for these refugees than provided by Fedhala project in order that effective evacuation of stateless refugees still in Spain can be expeditiously accomplished and assurances given Spanish Government that all refugees admitted to Spain in future under such an arrangement would be removed without delay to further destinations. This would necessarily involve postponement of screening of refugees until after their departure from Spain although it is appreciated that adequate measures would have to be taken at some later point to sift out agents which Germans would be certain, as in the past, to plant among them.

I have no idea as to what reaction of Spanish Government would be to such a proposal or how successful it would be should it agree to take up matter with German Government. In view of fact that principal obstacles to escape of refugees from German held territory appear to lie within that territory rather than at the Spanish frontier, however, I feel that this approach would come closer to heart of the problem.

I am, for the present, making no approaches to Spanish Government on subject of Department’s telegram pending consideration of points raised herein. I may say in this connection that it is still my opinion that present political and economic crisis with Spain is apt to have adverse effect on receptivity of Spanish Government even to proposals of purely humanitarian character.

Repeated to London and Lisbon and by pouch to Algiers.

Hayes

38 Not printed; it urged cooperation with proposals outlined in Department’s telegram 463, February 18, p. 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561].

39 Head of representation in Spain of American relief organizations.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/5260: Telegram

[Document 566]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 29, 1944.

1503. Refer to your 1554 of February 25 with respect to anticipated debate in the House of Commons on the refugee problem. As previously stated, it is the policy of this Government to encourage and participate in effective cooperative efforts with other governments in taking all possible measures for the speedy rescue and relief of the Jews of Europe and other victims of Hitler’s persecution. This Government hopes and believes that its actions in this matter will not be unilateral and that the British Government will actively cooperate in concrete measures designed to carry out this policy.

We agree that it would be unfortunate if this Government and the British Government should drift apart in refugee policy. We hope such will not be the case. Whether this will happen is not of course dependent as much upon the expressions of policy made by each government as it is upon the actual steps which are taken by each government to put these policies into effect.

Although the War Refugee Board has been in existence only a few weeks a number of concrete measures have been initiated for the purpose of carrying out without delay the policy announced by the President. The Board is now preparing for your information and for submission to the British Government a detailed statement of the action already taken and of the programs initiated to rescue and bring relief to war refugees. We feel that the Foreign Office should know, before making its proposed reply in Parliament, that the Board has under consideration various additional steps of which we hope to apprise it in the near future. The British Government will then be in a better position to judge the actual significance of the policy of this Government and to determine the steps it is prepared to take to carry out a similar policy.

The War Refugee Board has no objection in principle to a plenary meeting of the Intergovernmental Committee, but has not definitely formulated its views on future actions which may be requested of the Committee.

The War Refugee Board is pleased to be informed that the British Foreign Office has instructed all of its missions abroad to consult with United States diplomatic and consular representatives with a view to cooperative action.

Stettinius

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/5288: Telegram

[Document 567]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, March 2, 1944.
[Received March 2—10:16 p.m.]

1708. Director IGC has written Embassy further regarding passports referred to in Embassy’s 1543, February 24th.40 His letter dated February 29th which suggests at its conclusion certain action by Department states as follows: “Doctor Kullmann has returned from Switzerland where he was able to obtain a good deal of information. He discussed the matter with various Swiss authorities, with the United States Minister, the Polish Minister, the International Red Cross and with representatives of several voluntary organizations.

The facts are briefly as follows. There has been a large trade in passports. It is estimated that 4,000 have been issued from Switzerland and it is known that others have been issued from other neutral countries including Sweden. Some informants estimated the total number to be as high as nine to ten thousand but some thought that it did not exceed 5,000. In Switzerland it was organized by private individuals and reached such proportions that the Swiss Federal Government had to intervene since it threatened to embarrass their position and to give the German authorities the pretext of interfering with the Swiss administration of refugee affairs a matter in which the Swiss Government has hitherto successfully avoided any intervention and has been able to carry out a liberal policy to the great advantage of refugees in general. Legal action was taken against several of the organizers and at the same time enquiry was made regarding the authority of some of the representatives of the South American states to carry on these transactions. Doctor Kullmann was informed for instance that the Honduras Consul who had lost his exequatur for other reasons in 1942 had subsequently issued 400 passports. He further learnt that the Consuls in Switzerland of Haiti, Paraguay and Peru had been dismissed. The average price paid for a passport was approximately 700 Swiss francs. On the other hand the Consul of San Salvador has acted from purely humanitarian motives and has charged no fee at all.

There seems little doubt that the German authorities are aware of what has been going on but for reasons of their own they have hitherto not adopted a general policy of withdrawing the passports. While in many cases the possession of these documents has afforded the owners protection against persecution and even special treatment in some of the camps, in other cases they have afforded no protection at all and particularly so where the persons concerned were not interned. Originally the German authorities seem to have cherished the hope that the persons with these South American passports might constitute a basis for the exchange of German nationals in South American countries and it is not improbable that they still have vague hopes of this. Other reasons have been suggested for their lack of consistency. Recently however they have been making enquiries through some of the protecting powers of the South American Governments concerned regarding the genuineness of the documents and they have been submitting lists of persons concerned with a view to verification.

Of the countries mentioned in your letter of the 13th January41 the Consuls in Switzerland of Chile, Haiti, Paraguay, Peru and probably Ecuador were concerned in the issue of passports. It is probable though not certain that passports of Costa Rica, Nicaragua and Venezuela have been issued by Consuls in countries other than Switzerland.

The above is a brief statement of facts. In regard to action the Swiss authorities are very definite that any approach to the German authorities would not only [be] infructuose but would do more harm than good. There remains the approach to the Governments of the countries concerned which I mentioned in my letter of the 21st February. It is now clear that this approach should cover two points, (first) that the Governments should refrain from withdrawing the passports which have been issued and (second) that if and when the protecting power on the request of the German authorities submits lists of persons with such passports they should instruct the protecting power that the passports have been confirmed. The second is a new point but a very important one and I would ask that the State Department be requested to include it in its representations. I would also request that representations be made to the Government of San Salvador.”

Winant

40 Not printed; it contained the partial text of a letter of February 21 from the Vice Director of the Intergovernmental Committee, G. G. Kullmann, indicating that only partial information regarding passports of refugees in occupied areas had been so far obtainable, and suggesting certain action by Department (840.48 Refugees/5254).

41 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/5329a: Telegram

[Document 568]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, March 7, 1944—9 p.m.

770. Department has in mind the fact that through various channels you have had approaches from one or more of the Governments of Rumania, Hungary, and Bulgaria, and that you have channels through which messages can be conveyed to one or more of these Governments.

Through such channels, you are instructed to convey to the Governments of Rumania, Hungary, and Bulgaria, or any of them to which you may have such access, the following:

The United States Government is currently aware that these Governments are engaged in programs of persecuting their Jewish minorities and refugees of other nationalities who have escaped into their territories. Among other forms this persecution consists in sending such refugees beyond the borders of their own countries into Poland there to undergo various forms of cruelty and even death, dictated by Nazi degeneracy. Another form of persecution consists in the prevention of the escape of refugees to neutral countries where their lives might be preserved.

The United States Government is determined to do everything in its power to rescue such unfortunates who are in danger of death and to find havens of refuge for them. This Government views with great seriousness and will keep in mind in the future any continuation on the part of these Governments of the execution of these policies of Hitlerite persecutions. The position of the United States Government in this matter has recently been restated unequivocally by the President in establishing the War Refugee Board. (Department’s cable to Bern, no. 201 [251], January 2542 ). In the view of the United States Government these Governments, as well as their subordinates and functionaries, are fully responsible for the actions of persecution committed on their territories and should desist therefrom immediately in the interests of humanity. Further, they should be informed that they will be well advised in their own interest to take advantage of such opportunities as may be available to them in the future to permit refugees to depart across their borders into territories of any neutral countries which may be prepared to receive them.

Kindly endeavor to ascertain through appropriate channels that the substance of this message has been sent to the Governments in question, and the results, if any, of the representations.

Sent to Bern, Stockholm, Lisbon, Ankara, and Cairo for MacVeagh.43

Stettinius

42 See footnote 22, p. 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555].

43 Lincoln MacVeagh, Ambassador to the Greek Government in Exile at Cairo.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/5260: Telegram

[Document 569]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 10, 1944.

1812. Following our cable no. 1503 of February 29 you may wish to make clear to the British Government that the steps which the War Refugee Board is taking and is prepared to take are in accordance with the following general patterns:

(1) The Board realizes that its chances of saving most of the Jews and other victims of enemy oppression from death lies in the possibility of changing the actions and attitude of the enemy, particularly his satellites, subordinates and functionaries. The Board is convinced that it is of utmost importance to undertake at once an organized and concentrated effort to make clear, by all appropriate means, to all Axis satellites that the Allied Governments view in a most serious light their assistance in any form to Hitler’s program to exterminate the Jews, and other similar groups, regarding all such action as criminal participation in organized murder. The Board also believes it necessary to make clear to the satellites by all possible means, its intention to do everything in its power to rescue such unfortunates who are in danger of death, in order not only to give the satellites a clear view of the attitude of this country in the matter, but also of the opportunities which exist for assisting in the execution of our policy. The Board feels very strongly that a campaign of this kind must be made through all possible channels and be constantly repeated at every available opportunity. The Board believes that parallel action on the part of other Allied Governments would do a great deal to assure the success of this endeavor. At the moment it is important that pressure be brought to bear particularly on Rumania and Bulgaria, because in those areas there are many refugees in imminent danger of death who can be evacuated to Turkey and other places if those Governments permit it.

In addition to bringing pressure thru various channels on the governments of the satellite countries, the Board feels that there should be employed in this campaign all available means for effecting the widest dissemination of our attitude not only to the governments themselves but to the largest number possible of the people of satellite countries. In this connection the Office of War Information is cooperating with the War Refugee Board in bringing home to the people in Germany and the satellite countries the fact that we consider this matter to be of paramount importance and intend vigorously to pursue all possible means of accomplishing our objective.

(2) In addition to this program designed to bring about a change in the actions and attitude of our enemies, the Board is convinced that there is a real opportunity for actually bringing many of these people out of German controlled territory. The Board is determined to do what it can to bring these people out, in as large numbers as possible. The Board is certain that this Government and its Allies can find for these persons temporary havens of refuge. The Board feels very strongly that some solution of any problems which may arise in finding a temporary refuge for these people once they have escaped from Hitler can and must be found by the British and American Governments and that in any event such problems must be subordinated to the program of rescue.

The following examples of measures which have already been taken by the Board will illustrate the extent to which this Government is prepared to go in actually bringing people out of Hitler’s control.

(a) This Government has requested the cooperation of the neutral European countries in this endeavor. Thus, in order to increase the flow of refugees through Turkey from occupied areas this Government is being requested to relax border and other controls, etc. The Board is offering to arrange for financing the setting up of reception camps which would receive refugees entering those countries and would make it possible to take them on to other places as rapidly as possible.

(b) This Government is actively engaged in trying to solve the problem of getting ships to transport refugees. Thus, one of the greatest opportunities for actually rescuing such people exists in the areas adjacent to Turkey and the Black Sea. It is known that in Transnistria,44 Rumania and Bulgaria there are substantial numbers of refugees in imminent danger of death. It also appears that arrangements can be made with the Turkish Government to receive refugees from these areas. There are strong indications that the Rumanian Government at least will permit a substantial number of these refugees to leave Rumania. It is indispensable that means of transportation be found at once.

The Board, in this connection, is endeavoring to arrange for a small Turkish vessel to proceed to the Rumanian port of Constanza and evacuate to Turkey approximately one thousand children. That the charter of the S. S. Vatan, a small Turkish vessel, might be obtained, has been reported by the Board’s representative in Turkey providing a guarantee to replace the ship in the event of loss would be made to the Turkish Government. Such a guaranty was promptly offered by this Government. The possibility of obtaining some Swedish ships for this purpose is also being taken up with the Swedish Government. The Board is also exploring other possibilities.

(c) Licenses to six private organizations in the United States have already been issued by this Government giving permission to their representatives in Switzerland, in order to carry on relief and evacuation operations in enemy territory, to engage in the required communication and financing transactions. Our 242 of January 10, 1944 and also our A–139 of January 31, 1944,45 describe, in this connection, licenses which now have been amended to permit the acquisition, if necessary, of local funds against payment in free exchange or free currency notes, from persons in enemy or enemy-occupied territory. Four additional private agencies have received identical licenses. This Government concluded in issuing these licenses that any danger involved in permitting the enemy to acquire such relatively insubstantial quantities of foreign exchange was far outweighed by the saving of lives.

More complete details will be sent to you shortly concerning these measures as well as others which the Board has taken or is planning to initiate.

Hull

44 Or Trans-Dniestria, the region between the Dniester and Bug rivers in southwest Ukraine, U.S.S.R., which, together with Bessarabia, was given in 1941 to Rumania by Germany during World War II; retaken by Soviet armies in 1944–45.

45 Neither printed.

Memorandum by the Executive Director of the War Refugee Board (Pehle) to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) 840.48 Refugees/3–1044

[Document 570]

Memorandum by the Executive Director of the War Refugee Board (Pehle) to the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

Washington, March 10, 1944.

Pursuant to your suggestion, there follows a brief summary of those problems relating to the work of the War Refugee Board, in connection with which I feel that you can, while you are in London,46 help our cause a great deal.

As you will note these problems are of major importance and are directly related to the question as to the extent to which the British Government is prepared to give us its wholehearted cooperation in this task. For this reason, may I suggest that a frank discussion of the whole matter by you with Mr. Eden47 might well result in a tremendous contribution to our efforts.

(1) Convincing the British that we really mean business.

There is good reason to believe that the British are not yet convinced that there has been a real change in this Government’s attitude toward this matter—rather that they feel that the creation of the War Refugee Board was primarily a political move in an election year.

It is most important that we convince the British Government, as well as other governments, of our sincerity. In this connection, a citation of some of the significant steps which we have actually taken may be most helpful. I am attaching a résumé47a of the highlights of our action to date, and we are keeping our Embassy in London informed of developments.

(2) Cooperation with the British.

Our position on this was best expressed in our cable to Winant of February 29 (1503). As we pointed out, it is our policy to encourage and participate in effective cooperative efforts with other governments in taking all possible measures for the speedy rescue and relief of the Jews of Europe and other victims of Hitler’s persecution. We hope that our actions will not be unilateral and that the British Government will actively cooperate in concrete measures designed to carry out this policy.

Whether there will be wholehearted cooperation between this Government and the British Government is not dependent as much upon the expressions of policy made by each Government as it is upon the actual steps which are taken by each Government to put these policies into effect.

In brief, are the British prepared to take the same kind of measures we have taken?

(3) Relations with the Intergovernmental Committee.

As in the case of our relations with the British, I think that it is most important to convince the Intergovernmental Committee that we really mean business. Once they realize that our purpose is not to outshine them, or to cast aspersions on what they are doing, but to get the job done and get it done quickly, there will be a better basis for cooperation.

In connection with your discussions on the relationship between the War Refugee Board and the Intergovernmental Committee, I would like to make the following points: (a) The War Refugee Board is an American organization set up to carry out the policy of the American Government. The Intergovernmental Committee is an international organization, representative of over thirty nations, and therefore obviously in no position to carry out effectively and promptly the policy of any one individual nation.

(b) The War Refugee Board is prepared to lend every assistance to any and all projects which the Intergovernmental Committee has undertaken or undertakes in the future, designed to bring about the speedy rescue of victims of enemy oppression. In so far as financing such projects is concerned, the Board has already paid out $200,000 towards operating expenses of the Committee.

(c) The War Refugee Board is determined to carry out the policy of this Government as announced by the President. In doing this the Board is not anxious to take on any job which can be done just as quickly and effectively by any other organization, whether such organization be domestic, foreign or international. If the Intergovernmental Committee is in a better position than the Board to carry out with speed any particular project designed to save the lives of refugees, the Board will gladly look to and support the Committee in the execution of such project.

(d) On the other hand, the Board has no intention of referring to or clearing with the Intergovernmental Committee any project which is necessary to carry out this Government’s policy, unless such action would facilitate the speedy effectuation of such project. In the less than two months it has been in existence, the Board has already taken many steps designed to save people from death. A mere examination of these steps, in the light of the record of the Intergovernmental Committee to date, will reveal that most of these steps would not have been taken in this short time had they been referred to that Committee.

(4) Palestine issue.

The War Refugee Board has not taken and has no intention of taking a position supporting the establishment of a Jewish national state in Palestine.

The Board’s sole interest in Palestine lies simply in the question as to what extent Jewish refugees can be brought into Palestine, even if only on a temporary basis.

From the standpoint, with which we are concerned, of saving the Jews in Europe from death, bringing them into Palestine and placing them in camps, to be returned to their homelands at the end of the war, is just as effective as admitting them to Palestine on a permanent basis.

(5) Cyrenaica and Tripolitania.

We have no intention of turning down any project for the rescue of refugees facing death solely because of the problems which may be involved in finding a temporary place to put these people once they escape from Hitler.

However, the fact that we do not now have a place where we can assure that these people can go, at least temporarily, in as large numbers as possible is actually interfering to a great extent with our efforts to bring these people out of enemy territory.

As you know, one of the specific recommendations made at the Bermuda Conference48 was that the British Government consider the question of admitting refugees to Cyrenaica. Moreover, in July 1943, at the time the President and Prime Minister Churchill agreed to the establishment of a refugee camp in North Africa, the President expressed a definite interest in the possibility of establishing refugee havens in Cyrenaica and Tripolitania. As recently as January of this year, Mr. Long49 informally presented the matter to Sir Ronald Campbell.50 Despite this long standing interest in the matter, no agreement has been reached between the two Governments.

In my letter to you of March 251 it was recommended that a definite proposal be made at once to the British Government. We pointed out that once an agreement has been concluded with the British the matter can then be cleared with the Combined Chiefs of Staff.

In discussing this urgent matter with the British they might be advised that this Government is prepared to share with the British Government the responsibility for arranging to finance the establishment and maintenance of refugee camps in Tripolitania and Cyrenaica, including the cost of transferring refugees to such camps; and that this Government is also prepared to handle the transportation problem on a cooperative basis with the British. Thus, a division of obligations and responsibilities between the two Governments could be made in this case as in the case of the transfer of refugees from Spain to Camp Lyautey in French North Africa.

The importance of establishing refugee camps in Tripolitania and Cyrenaica can not be overestimated. The War Refugee Board is convinced that there is a real opportunity for actually bringing many people out of German controlled territory, particularly from areas adjacent to Turkey and the Black Sea. The Board is determined to do what it can to bring these people out in as large numbers as possible. Once these people are evacuated to Turkey, it is essential that areas be found to which they can be removed without delay. Camps in Tripolitania and Cyrenaica could be used for this purpose.

J. W. Pehle

46 At the request of the Secretary of State, the Under Secretary was to visit London for informal discussions with members of the British Government.

47 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

47a Not printed.

48 For correspondence on this Conference, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 134 ff.

49 Breckinridge Long, Assistant Secretary of State.

50 British Minister.

51 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 840.48 Refugees/5363b: Telegram

[Document 571]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, March 11, 1944—7 p.m.

554. From the War Refugee Board. Our circular airgram of January 2652 described the functions of the War Refugee Board, composed of the Secretaries of State, Treasury and War. This Board has been established by the President to take action for the immediate rescue and relief of the Jewish people of Europe and other victims of enemy persecution.

The Board is actively engaged in carrying out the policy of this Government as announced by the President, and is seeking the cooperation of all members of the United Nations in this tremendous task.

The Board is fully conscious of the great work which the Soviet Government has done to date in saving the lives of untold numbers of refugees, including Jews, from Hitler who are rescued in the midst of battle from the jaws of the German army. At the same time the Board is convinced that if it could secure the cooperation of the Soviet Government in some of the projects on which this Government is working, the chances of saving many people from death would be greatly increased. In view of the outstanding record of the Soviet Government in this whole matter we are not suggesting that pressure be put on them to do more than they are now doing. We feel, however, that if the Soviet Government can be convinced of the fact that we are sincerely determined to do what we can to prevent the murder of the Jews and other persecuted peoples by Hitler, they may be prepared to cooperate in some of the programs which we have under consideration.

There are many ways in which the Soviet Government might be of assistance in connection with these programs. The representative of the War Refugee Board in Turkey, Ira Hirschmann, at the suggestion of Ambassador Steinhardt, has already discussed two specific problems with Soviet Ambassador Vinogradov in Turkey. Vinogradov was informed of our intention to exert pressure on Bulgaria and other satellite countries and was requested to take parallel action. Vinogradov was also informed of our efforts to get the Turkish Government to give permission for the use of a ship for evacuating refugees and was asked to support our request. Although Vinogradov agreed to speak to the Bulgarian Minister informally, he pointed out that on both of these matters he could not act formally except through Moscow. Vinogradov suggested that you should request the assistance of his Government on these two problems and he agreed to do likewise.

We feel that it is very important that you discuss this whole matter with the Soviet Government immediately. You should make clear the policy of this Government and discuss frankly the problems with which we are faced.

The following information concerning some of the things we are working on and some of the obstacles we have encountered is furnished for your information and use in connection with your discussions with the Soviet Government:

[Here follows the substance of second and third paragraphs of telegram 1812, March 10, to London, printed on page 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 569].]

This cable has been repeated to Ambassador Steinhardt at Ankara. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

52 See footnote 22, p. 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 840.48 Refugees/5363c: Telegram

[Document 572]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, March 11, 1944—7 p.m.

555. From the War Refugee Board. This telegram immediately follows Department’s previous of same date on same subject. The Board is convinced that there is an opportunity for actually moving many of these refugees out of enemy controlled areas in addition to the proposed plan designed to effect a change in the attitude as well as the actions of our enemies. In the localities close to the Black Sea and Turkey, it is believed by the Board, exists one of the most promising opportunities for actually accomplishing the rescue of such people. That there are considerable numbers of refugees in Bulgaria, Transniestria and Rumania is known. That arrangements can be made with the Turkish Government to receive refugees from these localities seems possible. It also appears to be possible that permission to leave Rumania will be granted by the Rumanian Government to a substantial number of these persons. The necessity for immediate means of transportation is imperative.

In order to evacuate approximately 1,000 children to Turkey from Constanza, the Board is endeavoring to arrange for a small Turkish vessel to proceed to Constanza. A report has been received from the Board’s representative in Turkey that there might be a possibility of chartering the S.S. Vatan, a small Turkish ship, if he would offer to the Turkish Government a guaranty that if the ship were lost it would be replaced. Such a guaranty was promptly offered by our Government. In our negotiations with the Turkish Government it is hoped the Russian Government may be of some assistance. The possibility of using Swedish ships for this purpose is also the subject of negotiations between this Government and the Swedish Government. You are requested to keep in mind during your discussions with the Soviet Government that the key to evacuations in the Black Sea areas appears to be this problem of transportation.

The finding of places of temporary havens of refuge to which may be moved persons now in enemy dominated European countries is one of the functions of the Board. The cooperation of the Governments of Turkey and Spain depends upon our ability to move to other places as quickly as possible refugees coming into those countries. To facilitate the entry of additional refugees into Spain preparations have been made to move those now there to a camp which has been established in North Africa.

Refugees are entering Palestine by way of Turkey. Requests have been made of the Turkish Government to relax its border and other controls and in other ways increase the flow of refugees through Turkey from occupied territories. Oilers are being made by the Board to finance the establishment of reception camps to accommodate refugees entering Turkey and as quickly as possible the Board would arrange for their transport to other places.

It seems to the Board that it will be necessary to find at least temporary places of refuge in a number of places if as is planned evacuation of a substantial number of refugees can be effected. From negotiations with the Swiss Government it appears that, if a guarantee can be given that they will be removed after the war, Switzerland will accept refugee children now. Every effort is being made to provide Switzerland with assurances which will meet her requirements.

The possibility of evacuating large numbers of refugees would be greatly increased if the Soviet Government were prepared to immediately take refugees, Jewish and non-Jewish, who manage to reach neutral countries from enemy controlled territories and who could be given in the Soviet Union at least a temporary refuge after being transported across the Black Sea from the Balkan countries. It is possible that Switzerland and other countries might consider more favorably taking refugees now if the Soviet Government would give assurances that she would take refugees from those countries after the end of the war. In your negotiations with the Soviets make every endeavor to obtain their complete cooperation if it seems that they would even on a temporary basis be willing to accept such refugees.

You can understand from the foregoing, particularly taking into consideration the time and physical factors to be contended with, that a number of the obstacles which we are encountering could be solved with the aid of the Soviet Government. It will be greatly appreciated if you will give personal and prompt attention to this matter.

This cable has been repeated to Ambassador Steinhardt at Ankara. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/5372

[Document 573]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

No. 14393 London, March 11, 1944.
[Received March 18.]

Sir: Upon receipt of the Department’s airgram A–83, 7:20 p.m., January 19, 1944 the Embassy immediately discussed with the appropriate British officials the matter of immigration into Palestine and expressed the hope of the United States Government that the British authorities might reconsider their position and authorize numbers to be allocated permitting children to enter Palestine within the total allowable under the White Paper.

The view expressed by the Foreign Office was that, although there is no intention on the part of the British Government to close immigration into Palestine after March 31, 1944, (the time limit originally expressed in the 1939 White Paper for the immigration quota established therein) it is nevertheless undesirable to freeze any substantial number of certificates for cases that may never arise. By way of confirming the views expressed in that discussion the Foreign Office addressed to us a letter dated February 18, 1944. A copy is enclosed.53

It will be observed that the Foreign Office assumes that the aspect of the matter which gives concern to the Department is the effect upon Switzerland of British refusal to issue to refugee children to whom Switzerland may be considering giving temporary asylum quota numbers assured to be valid for immigration into Palestine after the war. To that presumed basis of the Department’s inquiry the Foreign Office addresses its answer, pointing out that, so far as it is aware, the Swiss Government has made no representations either to the Intergovernmental Committee or to the British Government regarding conditions on which Switzerland would be willing to receive refugee children. It should particularly be noted that the Foreign Office holds open appropriate consideration of the matter if and when the Swiss Government approaches the Intergovernmental Committee for concrete assurances. The position stated is that the British Government does not wish, on a hypothetical basis, to complicate its administering of the immigration quota into Palestine.

The Embassy has taken the occasion, by way of obtaining expressions of view of possible use to the Department in weighing the tenability of the British reply as above, to consult representatives here of several concerned organizations with regard to present practice in issuing quota numbers for immigration into Palestine. There is general agreement among them that, for reasons of political equilibrium in Palestine and the Arab area while the war continues, the British Government is seeking to keep the total of immigration into Palestine well within the number previously announced, in spite of lengthening the period of time to which it is to apply. On the other hand there is also general agreement that difficulties of travel and exit from enemy-occupied territory are the actual determining limitations under present conditions rather than lack of availability of numbers.

The 1939 White Paper (Cmd. 6019, May 1939, entitled Palestine, Statement of Policy; enclosed with despatch 2679, May 18, 193954 ) laid down certain conditions (page 10 and 11), including Palestine’s economic absorptive capacity, to govern the admission of some 75,000 Jewish immigrants into Palestine in the five year period from April 1, 1939 to March 31, 1944. In the House of Commons on November 10, 1943 (Parliamentary Debates, vol. 393, No. 120, column 1152; enclosed with despatch 12278, November 17, 194354a ) the Secretary of State for the Colonies reported that up to the end of September 1943 the number of Jews who entered Palestine against the total of 75,000 to be admitted under the existing quota system was 43,922, leaving a balance of 31,078 concerning which he made the following carefully-worded statement: “… There are thus 31,078 who, it may be fairly assumed, would have reached it before 31st March, 1944, but for the exigencies of the war. His Majesty’s Government have been considering this position, and have reached the conclusion that it would be inequitable to close the doors of Palestine to these persons on account of the time factor. No effort will be lacking on the part of His Majesty’s Government to facilitate their arrival, subject to the criterion of economic absorptive capacity.[”]

The unused balance of 31,078 as of the end of September 1943 has been reduced at the present to approximately 26,000 according to statements informally made to us at the Foreign Office.

Respectfully yours,

For the Ambassador:
W. J. Gallman
Counselor of Embassy

53 Not printed.

54 Despatch not printed.

54a Despatch not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) 840.48 Refugees/5279: Telegram

[Document 574]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, March 23, 1944—5 p.m.

799. The comments and suggestions with respect to War Refugee Board contained in your 683 of February 28 are appreciated. The War Refugee Board desires to point out that Camp Lyautey will not be the only haven to which refugees can be removed from Spain. Negotiations by the Board are in progress for other havens and you should assume and may advise the Spanish Government that all refugees from occupied areas entering Spain will be removed from Spain. It was gratifying to the Board to learn that the Spanish Government is not placing obstacles in the way of stateless and other refugees desiring to enter Spain from France with or without proper papers and the Board is hopeful that that Government will follow a generous policy in this regard in the future.

That the number of stateless refugees entering Spain from occupied areas is extremely small at present is known to the Board but the Board wishes to inform you that it is currently taking vigorous steps vis-à-vis Germany and satellite countries which it is confidently expected will stimulate the flow of refugees from occupied areas into Spain and other neutral countries. To this end the Board will continue to take all possible action. The flow of refugees into Spain in any event is certain to increase in the coming months when the snow melts in the Pyrenees.

It is the belief of the Board that as a result of the pressure now being brought to bear on the Axis, Spain is most likely to receive substantial numbers of refugees this coming spring. The Board is most desirous that the Spanish Government be relieved of as many of the problems connected with this influx as possible, including finance, supply and supervision of the refugees. The Board accordingly submits the following plan of proposed operations in Spain for your consideration, advice and comment and such action as is indicated.

[Here follow details on the setting up and maintenance of refugee camps.]

Will you kindly report any objections which you think the Spanish Government might raise to the establishment of these centers53 in the foregoing manner or to their financing by the Board. Private sources in the United States will probably provide the funds for their operation. As you will note this plan reduces the responsibility of the Spanish Government to a minimum. The Board will appreciate your comment on whether the staffs of the centers should be known to the Spanish Government as official employees of this Government or as representatives of American private welfare agencies. Incidentally, the American Red Cross is reluctant at this time to participate in the operations of the centers.

In Section 1, your 683, February 28 you requested clarification of the meaning of “involuntary removal” of refugees. It is anticipated that many of the refugees will desire to proceed to other areas than North Africa once they have escaped from occupied areas. It is the feeling of the Board however that it is undesirable that these refugees remain in Spain. They should proceed to North Africa where they may make arrangements for travel elsewhere with greater security for themselves and without the embarrassment to the Spanish Government which might be caused if they remained in Spain. The proposal is that frontier officials and police authorities direct the refugees to the centers, providing them with permits to travel only from the point of apprehension to the nearest center. It is hoped that the Spanish officials will advise the refugees that their presence in Spain will be tolerated only so long as they conduct themselves in accordance with this program. After arrival at the centers those in charge would explain to the refugees that the Spanish authorities have released them into the care of the centers. Thereupon every effort would be made to convince the refugees that the travel of other refugees through Spain is dependent on the rapid departure from Spain of those who have already entered. It might be explained further that the refugees, after leaving Spain, would be under the care of the officials of UNRRA rather than directly under the control of the French. Such a policy, it is believed, if skillfully executed by the representatives of the Board will assure the quick and voluntary departure for North Africa of all refugees who may succeed in crossing the Spanish border.

It is the hope of the Board that you will give this proposal your prompt personal attention and consideration and that you will cable as soon as possible your comments and suggestions.56

This cable has been approved by the War and State Departments.

Hull

53 Figueras, Tolosa, and Murillo.

56 The Ambassador replied in telegram 1195, April 6, that the facilities then available were adequate and had support of the Spanish Government, and that the Government would look with disfavor upon the plan outlined by the Board (840.48 Refugees/5551).

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/5498c: Telegram

[Document 575]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)57

Washington, March 24, 1944.

991. From the War Refugee Board. Tonight’s radio bulletin contains an important statement by the President on refugees and Nazi persecutions.58

The War Refugee Board is convinced that it is of utmost importance to undertake at once an organized and concentrated effort to make clear, by all appropriate means, to all Axis satellites that the Allied Governments view in a most serious light their assistance in any form to Hitler’s program to exterminate the Jews, and other similar groups, regarding all such action as criminal participation in organized murder. The Board also believes it necessary to make clear to the satellites by all possible means, its intention to do everything in its power to rescue such unfortunates who are in danger of death, in order not only to give the satellites a clear view of the attitude of this country in the matter, but also of the opportunities which exist for assisting in the execution of our policy. The Board feels very strongly that a campaign of this kind must be made through all possible channels and be constantly repeated at every available opportunity.

You are requested to see that the utmost publicity be immediately given to the President’s statement in local newspapers, radio, and in any other manner feasible. Please make every endeavor to have this publicity included on such radio broadcasts for foreign consumption as may emanate from the country to which you are accredited. It would be extremely helpful if you could obtain favorable comment from prominent governmental or other personages with respect to the statement for use in connection with the publicity program.

For your information, in view of the importance of the statement and the program which it implements, the Office of War Information expects to employ its full facilities in calling this matter and appropriate comment thereon to the attention of Axis, satellite and other countries.

You are requested to report by cable as soon as possible the measures you have taken to comply with these instructions together with the results thereof. Significant clippings and official comment should be sent by airmail. It must be borne in mind that the effectiveness of this statement will depend in large measure upon the extent to which adequate publicity can be obtained for it, particularly in German controlled Europe.

This cable has been cleared with the Office of War Information. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

57 Repeated on the same date to London, Moscow, Stockholm, Lisbon, Madrid, Ankara, Cairo, and Algiers.

58 For text, see p. 1230 [Pg. 1230 includes portions of Doc. 770 and Doc. 771].

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/5425: Telegram

[Document 576]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, March 24, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received March 25—2:40 p.m.]

1020. I handed to Vyshinski59 on March 21 a memorandum setting forth the policy of the United States Government as contained in the first paragraph of Department’s circular of January 26, 7 p.m.60 The memorandum also called attention to the cooperation solicited of the Soviet Government in requesting an assurance of safe conduct for the Tari (my 935 March 26 [20], 6 p.m.61 ) and continued: “similar specific problems will doubtless arise in the future, in the solution of which the assistance of the Soviet Union will be sought”. The memorandum concluded with a reference to the effect that the United States War Refugee Board was cognizant of the great work which the Soviet Government had done in saving the lives of many refugees and would appreciate the cooperation of the Soviet Government in its work.

I also stated orally that it was my desire to explore the manner in which the Soviet and the United States Governments might work together on this question after he had studied the memorandum. I referred to the parallel action both nations had taken and could take in endeavoring to impress on Germany and satellite countries that they would be held accountable for inhuman actions against the Jews and other similar groups. I stated that such pressure on satellite countries might assist in the evacuation of refugees from Rumania, Bulgaria, and Hungary. I said that with the advance of the Red armies the Black Sea area offered promising possibilities for the accomplishment of the rescue of refugees and referred in this respect to my recent request for expeditious consideration of the Tari case.

In conclusion I said that the matter was very close to the President and that public sentiment in the United States was supporting my Government in doing everything possible for these unfortunate people. I added that by working together in this matter, especially if this collaboration were publicly known, a great deal of good effect would result in both the United States and the Soviet Union.

Vyshinski appeared sympathetic to my approach. He said he would like to study the memorandum and then discuss the question further with me.

The Department will note that I did not touch specifically upon several of the points raised in the Department’s 554 and 555 of March 11, 7 p.m. regarding (a) the Soviet position with respect to temporary refuge on Soviet soil for refugees transported across the Black Sea from Balkan countries, and (b) an indication of Soviet willingness to accept after the war refugees admitted temporarily into Switzerland and other countries during the war. I felt that these questions can be more appropriately dealt with after a general agreement in principle is reached for cooperative action and perhaps on the basis of such specific problems as may arise in the handling of which the cooperation of the Soviet Government is desired.

Harriman

59 Andrey Yanuaryevich Vyshinski, People’s Vice Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union.

60 See footnote 22, p. 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555].

61 Not printed; it reported Ambassador Harriman’s memorandum to the People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union (Molotov), requesting safe conduct for the Turkish ship Tari to evacuate refugees from Constanza (840.48 Refugees/5396).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/5448a: Telegram

[Document 577]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 25, 1944—5 p.m.

2292. Refer to Department’s 371, January 14, 1944.62 Finding of havens where refugees may remain for the duration of the war is one of the most pressing and immediate problems before the War Refugee Board. Tripolitania and Cyrenaica in the opinion of the Department and the Board might be suitable for this purpose.

Tripolitania and Cyrenaica have been under consideration as havens ever since the Bermuda Conference at which it was specifically recommended that the British consider the admission of refugees to Cyrenaica. Thereafter when agreement was reached to consider a refugee camp in French North Africa, in a message to Prime Minister Churchill the President commented on his interest in the possibility of using Tripolitania and Cyrenaica as refugee havens.62a As recently as January of this year, the suggestion was again informally made to the British in the manner described in the aforementioned cable. Although many months have passed no decision has apparently yet been taken in this important matter. You are requested to reopen the matter immediately and to raise with the British Government the question of the use of Tripolitania and Cyrenaica as refugee havens subject of course to the later approval of the Combined Chiefs of Staff. Before any approach is made to the Combined Chiefs of Staff the consent of the British should be secured. The British Government should be advised that this Government is prepared to share responsibility for financing the establishment and maintenance of camps in Tripolitania and Cyrenaica, including the cost of transportation of refugees to these camps. If it later seems desirable we are confident that part of this cost may be borne by private refugee agencies. The problem of transportation can be worked out cooperatively between the British Government and ourselves.

A division of obligations and responsibilities between the two Governments, similar to the case of the transfer of refugees from Spain to North Africa, can be worked out with respect to Tripolitania and Cyrenaica.

The establishing of refugee havens in Cyrenaica and Tripolitania is extremely important. The War Refugee Board is convinced that a real opportunity exists for bringing many refugees out of occupied areas, especially from areas contiguous to the Black Sea and Turkey. As you have previously been advised the Board is determined to do everything it can to rescue refugees in as large numbers as possible. It is important once these refugees are evacuated to Turkey that areas to which they can be removed expeditiously be found. Camps in Cyrenaica and Tripolitania could be used for this purpose. Such camps would facilitate also the escape of refugees from other areas. Refugees from Southern Italy, for instance, could be removed from camps there to Tripolitania and Cyrenaica, thus making room for other refugees who succeed in escaping from occupied areas in Italy.

Kindly give this matter your urgent and personal attention and advise the Department as soon as possible of the progress of your conversations.

Hull

62 Not printed.

62a For text of President Roosevelt’s message sent on or before July 9, 1943, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 323.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/5260: Telegram

[Document 578]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 25, 1944—9 p.m.

2303. The following refers to our 1503, February 29 and 1812, March 10 partially presenting the steps which the War Refugee Board is prepared to take or has taken in order to implement the announced policies of the Board. The following more detailed statement is for the British and refers to remittances of funds and similar transactions which following the War Refugee Board’s recommendation have been authorized.

Relief and Specific Rescue Projects

Authorization has been granted to a number of private organizations in the United States to carry on in occupied Europe evacuation and relief operations. There have been issued by the Treasury Department, following the Board’s recommendation, licenses granting to the representatives of these organizations in Switzerland permission to finance, by the acquisition of requisite local currency if necessary from persons in enemy territory against payment in free exchange, their operations and to carry on with persons in enemy territory such communications as may be necessary. The position has been taken by the Board, the State and Treasury Departments that the main consideration in those cases is the saving of lives and that this is paramount to the possibility that there may become available in enemy territory certain amounts of free exchange. The following are among the relief and rescue projects execution of which has been facilitated by the Board and which have been sponsored by private organizations:

1. Evacuation to Switzerland from France.

(a) Evacuation of Abandoned Jewish Children. A license has been issued for one rescue program which involves abandoned children in hiding in France numbering several thousand who may presently be deported to Poland. Efforts are being made to sustain and keep alive these children in France, but until the Swiss Government has some assurance that the children will be removed after the end of hostilities they cannot be brought into Switzerland in large numbers. A proposal has been made by the Board that this Government give assurances to the Swiss that American visas will be granted to 4,000 children from France entering Switzerland and that renewals as necessary will be granted for these visas.

(b) Removal of Political and Christian Refugees and Scholars. The Board has also taken steps to facilitate the operations being carried out by several private organizations designed to rescue and give relief to political and Christian refugees and scholars who have been unable to leave France. Licenses were issued on the recommendation of the Board by the Treasury to make available funds in Switzerland to use in carrying forward this program.

(c) The Program of the World Jewish Congress. The World Jewish Congress, with the aid of the Board, has worked out a program to evacuate refugees into North Africa, Spain and Switzerland from Rumania and France. Licenses authorizing the necessary operations up to a total cost of $100,000 of which amount $25,000 has already been sent to Switzerland have been issued by the Treasury Department.

2. Evacuation to Hungary from Poland.

There was worked out between the War Refugee Board and the Union of Orthodox Rabbis of the United States and Canada a plan to evacuate Jews to Hungary from Poland. There were reported to be persons in Hungary in a position to aid refugees in crossing into Hungary across the Polish borders where a large Jewish community was willing to help the refugees and aid them to become absorbed into the economy of Hungary. Authorization has been granted to the Union to communicate with and transmit funds to these persons. There has been sent $100,000 to Switzerland to meet the requirements of this plan.

3. Program for Feeding Internees in Croatia, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Rumania.

The Intergovernmental Committee has been informed by the International Red Cross of an urgent need for funds to purchase food stuffs for distribution to internees in Czechoslovakia, Rumania, Croatia and Hungary. After an approach made by the Board $100,000 was provided at once by a large private organization in the United States. This sum has been remitted under Treasury Department license to Switzerland which permits the buying of the required food stuffs not only in neutral countries but in Rumania and Hungary as well.

4. Plans for Relief of Refugees in Shanghai.

Pursuant to licenses granted by the Treasury Department at the request of the Board to two private organizations, relief is presently being administered to 10,000 stranded refugees in Shanghai. By these licenses authorization is given for the borrowing of funds in Shanghai against a promise of reimbursement after the end of the war.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/5487a: Telegram

[Document 579]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, March 27, 1944—7 p.m.

1023. Following from the War Refugee Board for Intercross,63 Geneva.

“War Refugee Board urges in view of occupation of Hungary by Germany that effective representation be sent to Hungary by Intercross for the purpose of protecting the well being of groups facing persecution there.”64

Hull

63 International Committee of the Red Cross.

64 In response to this request, the Red Cross declined to send any special delegation as such a mission might be considered as inconsistent with its traditional functions. In telegram 1806, May 25, 1 p.m., the Minister in Switzerland was again requested to convey to the Red Cross the “urgent hope of this Government that the special delegation requested in our 1023 be sent immediately to Hungary.” (840.48 Refugees/5612)

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics 840.48 Refugees/5499b: Circular airgram

[Document 580]

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics 65

Washington, March 31, 1944—1:05 p.m.

Refer our previous communications regarding War Refugee Board. Information has been received that there are in enemy-occupied Europe a number of persons holding passports issued in the names of various Latin American countries including the country to which you are accredited.66 Our information is that in a large number of cases such persons are interned under conditions which are immeasurably better than the treatment they would receive if they did not have such passports. It is reported that without such passports, such persons would be transported to Poland and death.

The plight of these refugees was the subject of a memorandum presented to the Department by the Polish Ambassador in Washington on December 24, 1943,67 in support of the request of his government that this Government intercede on humanitarian grounds to save the persons concerned from deportation to Poland by interceding to prevent the withdrawal of these passports in cases in which they may have been improperly issued.

[Here follow excerpts from telegram 1708, March 2 (paragraphs 3, 4, and 6), from London, printed on page 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 566 and Doc. 567].]

Although the Department does not condone the unauthorized issue of passports, it does not follow that the Department should withhold its intercession in a situation in which the lives of so many persons are at stake. The Department and the War Refugee Board agree with Emerson that where thousands of human lives lie in the balance because of war conditions and enemy persecutions, appropriate steps should be taken to avoid the nonrecognition by the Germans of such passports.

The Department understands that these passports, appearing on their face to have been issued by competent officials, are valid until they are cancelled. While Department agrees that the Government to which you are accredited is entirely within its right in cancelling such passports, it urges that the right of cancellation be not exercised until the holders shall have reached a place of safety, so that the act of cancellation shall not be, in essence, condemnation of the holder to a terrible death. All that is here asked is that the Government to which you are accredited deal with the question at a time when it shall occasion the least possible measure of human suffering.

Special Instructions to the Ambassador.

You are instructed to memorize the contents of this airgram, burn the document and discuss the matter orally with the government to which you are accredited. Such report as you submit to the Department on this subject should be by secret courier.

Hull

65 The diplomatic representatives in Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, Peru, and Venezuela.

66 Information later received from private sources indicated that passports and documents issued in the names of Bolivia, Chile, Cuba, Guatemala, and Uruguay were likewise involved; accordingly, the circular airgram of March 31 was repeated in substance to those countries on May 1.

67 Not printed; for text of Department’s reply, see note of January 11, p. 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 549].

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 740.00115A Pacific War/1113: Telegram

[Document 581]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, April 5, 1944—midnight.

1151. American Interests—Financial Assistance. Department understands that there is a considerable number of persons held as United States citizens in internment camps in Germany or German-controlled areas who claim American citizenship but who may find it difficult readily to establish their claim. Henceforth, whenever the evidence of citizenship presented is considered by the Legation to be insufficient to establish the eligibility of such persons to receive financial assistance under Department’s 1202,68 the Legation instead of disapproving the application should merely inform the Swiss Government that the case has been referred to the Department for further consideration and that financial assistance may not be extended until receipt of the Department’s decision.

Hull

68 Instruction dated February 14, 1942, Foreign Relations, 1942, vol. i, p. 262.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/5557a: Telegram

[Document 582]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, April 7, 1944—5 p.m.

1181. Kullmann’s report has been received by the Department from London concerning his conferences with the Swiss authorities, Intercross, the Polish Minister, representatives of voluntary agencies and you with respect to the attitude of Switzerland toward those who helped Poles, including Jewish refugees in internment camps in France, to secure passports issued by the consulates of American Republics and the attitude toward persons in occupied areas holding such documents on the part of the German authorities. The American Republics are being approached by this Government and they are being urged at least until after the war to take no action on humanitarian grounds to cancel or revoke such passports or to indicate in any way that they are or may be cancelled or revoked or considered invalid or ineffective. The Government of Paraguay, as you presumably know, has already advised the Intergovernmental Committee and this Government that it has not revoked and is not considering revoking such passports made available through its consulates.

The hope persists that Poles, including Jewish refugees having such passports in their possession, will be accorded more favorable treatment than those refugees who are without such passports. Any action should be avoided in the view of this Government which might result in the deportation of these refugees, danger to their lives or to the worsening of their condition. It follows also that all appropriate action aimed at protecting the welfare and the lives of these refugees should be undertaken.

You are requested accordingly to advise the Swiss Government of the views of this Government in this matter. Appropriate officials of the Swiss Government should be requested to approach the Germans with a view to inducing them to continue the recognition of the validity of passports of the American Republics in the hands of refugees in internment camps in France and in Germany unless and until the government which has issued the passport affirmatively acts to deny its validity, revoke or cancel it. Kullmann and others report, it is noted, that the Swiss Government has acted against the relatives and others in Switzerland who participated in obtaining these documents and that the Swiss Government has also initiated inquiries concerning the authority of some of the officials who have made the passports available. The Swiss Government should be advised that it is the view of this Government that the validity of the aforementioned passports is not in issue at this time and should not be questioned by the officials of the Swiss Government when positive renunciation of the documents by the American Republics is lacking. Seemingly, in any event, such inquiry and action based on it might be postponed until after the war on humanitarian grounds if no other and the Swiss Government should be so informed.

You are advised that Kullmann has reported that the Swiss Government is convinced that any approach to the Germans would do more harm than good and prove completely ineffective. With that point of view this Government finds it impossible to agree. The War Refugee Board and the Department are strongly of the view and have reason to believe that it is most important and can only be helpful to refugees subject to enemy persecution that German officials be continuously advised that the treatment of Jews and others in occupied areas is being closely followed in all of its aspects.

Kindly report to the Department any and all developments with respect to this matter.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/5485: Telegram

[Document 583]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, April 10, 1944—8 p.m.

1221. Refer our previous communications regarding War Refugee Board. With reference to your 1958 March 30, your 1994 March 3169 and following our 1181 April 7, even though it is not clear what motives the Germans have in according better treatment to the Jewish refugees of Polish origin who hold passports and other documents issued in the names of several Latin American countries, it would seem that they include (1) some anxiety that ill treatment by them of these refugees might afford a pretext to the Latin American countries involved for further limiting the economic activities and the freedom of Germans who are residing in such countries of Latin America, (2) some hope that these refugees might be considered as exchange material in the Western Hemisphere against Germans there.

Referring to your 1958 March 30, the measure reported therein may be an indication that some doubt is beginning to be felt by Germany as to whether such Jews are considered exchange material and whether the treatment of Germans in Latin America would be afforded [affected] by such Jews’ treatment by the Germans. It is regarded as essential by this Government that prompt and effective measures be taken to dispel these doubts.

You are therefore requested to seek the good offices of the Swiss Government in presenting to the Germans that discussions are being undertaken by this Government with Latin American countries for a further exchange of Germans in the Western Hemisphere for persons who are now located in territories Under German control and that the United States considers in this connection that all persons in Vittel and elsewhere who hold passports and other documents issued in the names of Latin American countries will be eligible for exchange as indicated above.

You are requested to simultaneously ask the appropriate Swiss authorities to inform the German Government that in the interim this Government expects that the same immunities, rights and privileges will be accorded these people that the German Government expects will be accorded by the countries in the Western Hemisphere to Germans located in those countries. The additional statement may be made that a number of German civilians interned by various Latin American countries have been placed in the custody of the United States by such countries and are presently within the Continental United States in such custody.

You are informed that the substance of this message is being communicated to the American Missions in the Latin American countries concerned with this proposal. Inquiry is also being made of such Latin American countries concerning the authenticity of the information which was informally conveyed to you by the Foreign Interests Division of the Swiss Government which was referred to by you on March 31 in your 1994.70

Hull

69 Neither printed; they concerned a report that 238 Jews interned at Camp Vittel in France had been isolated on March 20 for deportation on the ground that the Latin American documents they held were only accommodation passports and their holders were thus not eligible for exchange.

70 In telegram 992, April 10, to Madrid (not printed), the Ambassador was instructed to inform the Spanish Government of the vital interest of this Government in the return of the Vittel group (840.48 Refugees/5485).

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics 840.48 Refugees/5484: Circular airgram

[Document 584]

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics 71

Washington, April 11, 1944—11 a.m.

Refer our previous communications regarding War Refugee Board. Reference is made to Department’s 1181 of April 7.72 Minister Harrison at Bern has informed us that the Swiss Foreign Interests Division has advised him informally that the Spanish government had been requested by the Germans to inquire into the bona fides of certain Latin American passports, held by internees in enemy-controlled territory and that the Latin American governments have denied responsibility as well as any claims of the persons holding such passports. Please approach appropriate officials of the government to which you are accredited and inquire whether it has received any such inquiries through the government of Spain or otherwise from the Germans with respect to the validity of passports held by such internees and if such inquiry has been made, please ascertain the nature of the response, if any.

In view of the perilous situation in which these internees find themselves, the conclusion has been reached that perhaps the only way of safeguarding the lives of these unfortunate victims of Nazi persecution is forthwith to initiate through proper channels negotiations for an exchange of nationals for which these people will be eligible. In contemplating such exchange negotiations, it is not expected that the government to which you are accredited will physically admit any such persons into its territory even on a temporary or tentative basis. This Government is prepared to take full responsibility for all arrangements necessary to route these persons to places elsewhere.

Proceeding on this basis, please approach the government to which you are accredited with the request that it give its approval to the Government of the United States approaching the German government through appropriate channels with a view to initiating such negotiations. Please also advise appropriate officials of the Paraguayan government that similar requests are being made of other Latin American countries, it being the hope of this Government that it will be put in a position to initiate exchange discussions on a hemispheric basis. Please also advise such officials that in any exchange negotiations that may be entered into, it is of course understood that unquestioned citizens of the United States and of the Latin American countries will be considered by this Government as being in a category entitled to priority over others.

Please also request the government to which you are accredited, on humanitarian grounds, affirmatively to approach the German government through the protecting power with a demand that the lives of all persons holding passports issued in its name or claiming its citizenship on the basis of consular documents be safeguarded and that they be given all rights, privileges and immunities accorded to civilian internees of enemy nationality to whom the Geneva Convention regarding the treatment of prisoners of war73 is currently applied by analogy.74

In view of the imminent danger in which the persons concerned find themselves, you are requested to act with the greatest possible dispatch.

Finally, we communicate to you, for communication to the government to which you are accredited, the substance of a cable which the Department has sent to our Minister at Bern as follows:

[Here follows the substance of telegram 1221, printed supra.]

Special Instructions to the Ambassador.

You are instructed to memorize the contents of this airgram, burn the document and discuss the matter orally with the government to which you are accredited. Such report as you submit to the Department on this subject should be by secret courier.

Hull

71  To the diplomatic representatives in Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Haiti, Nicaragua, Peru, and Venezuela; repeated in substance to Bolivia, Chile, Cuba, Guatemala, Honduras, Paraguay, and Uruguay.

A followup airgram along the same lines was sent on April 22 to Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, Peru and Venezuela; repeated in substance to Chile, Cuba, Guatemala, Paraguay, and Uruguay.

72 This reference is in error; reference should be to circular airgram of March 31, 1:05 p.m., p. 1021 [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580].

73 For text of international convention relative to the treatment of prisoners of war, signed at Geneva, July 27, 1929, see Foreign Relations, 1929, vol. i, pp. 336–367; Department of State Treaty Series No. 848; or 47 Stat. (pt. 2) 2021.

74 As result of prolonged negotiations with the other American Republics, consent to the protective measures proposed was granted by Bolivia, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Uruguay, and Venezuela.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Portugal (Norweb) 840.48 Refugees/5337: Telegram

[Document 585]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Portugal (Norweb)

Washington, April 12, 1944—2 p.m.

1013. From War Refugee Board. With reference to your telegram no. 779 March 11.75 Reports are carried by the Swedish press that Nazi pressure has been intensified on Hungary to strengthen the anti-Jewish policy and in the cases of Polish and other Jews who have escaped to Hungary to deport them.

Because of the reported operations in Hungary by the German military, it is requested that you again approach the channels to the Hungarian Government that are available to you and reiterate this Government’s position and make it clearly understood that, the current Nazi pressure notwithstanding, any action to inflict new and further persecutions on the part of the Hungarian Government, or to continue existing persecutions designed against foreign or native Jews or the deportation of foreign or native Jews to any territory controlled by Germany or to Germany itself, will be considered with the greatest disfavor by this Government and will be taken into account when the war has ended. Through the channels that are available to you, you should also again approach the Rumanian Government and inform them concerning the foregoing message to the Government of Hungary explaining the circumstances that are the basis of it. Clearly intimate that the same applies to the Government of Rumania notwithstanding any actions taken by the Nazis, to intensify the deportation or other persecution of foreign or native Jews, which may result from military defeats of the Nazis or from other causes.76 [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

75 Not printed; it indicated that, in accordance with Department’s instruction (see telegram 770, March 7, to Bern, p. 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568]), the substance of this warning had been conveyed to the Bulgarian and Hungarian Governments and would be later conveyed to the Rumanian Government (840.48 Refugees/5337).

76 Telegram 1150, April 18, from Lisbon, reported that the warning had been placed in proper channels for transmission to Hungarian and Rumanian authorities (840.48 Refugees/5645).

The Ambassador to the Yugoslav Government in Exile (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/5600: Telegram

[Document 586]

The Ambassador to the Yugoslav Government in Exile (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, April 13, 1944—11 a.m.
[Received 4:13 p.m.]

88. Yugos. The Foreign Office London “at the request of various Jewish bodies” has instructed its Embassy to Yugoslavia to approach Tito77 through Maclean78 with a view to obtaining his active assistance in facilitating the escape through Partisan territory to Italy and the Mediterranean area of Jews from Hungary. The Foreign Office adds that when such refugees arrive in Italy and the Middle East their care and maintenance will presumably be the responsibility of the Allied Displaced Persons Commission and MERRA and that arrangements should be made with these organizations to receive them. It concludes that “in view of the cooperation between the US Government and HM’s Government over refugee questions” British Embassy should keep in contact with this Embassy.

Pursuant to this instruction a member of the British Embassy called at this office yesterday and after advising that an appropriate message is being despatched to Maclean inquired concerning the attitude of the US in regard to this project. He was informed in reply that while the Embassy is without specific instructions as to this particular endeavor, the policy of the US concerning the rescue and maintenance of refugees from Europe was set forth by the President in an Executive Order of January 22 quoted in the Department’s circular airgram of January 26, 7 p.m.79 which was shown to him.

In response to an inquiry my informant stated that no similar effort to arrange passage for refugees through Mihailovitch80 territory is possible since as the Department knows (see Yugos 48 February 25, 7 p.m.81 ) the Allied mission to Mihailovitch is being withdrawn.82

MacVeagh

77 Marshal Tito (Josip Broz), military leader of the Partisans, became chairman of a Committee of National Defense on December 4, 1943.

78 Brigadier Fitzroy Hew Maclean, Commanding British Military Mission to the Yugoslav Partisans, 1943–45.

79 See footnote 22, p. 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555].

80 Gen. Draža Mihailovic, Yugoslav Minister of Navy, War, and Air Force, and leader of the Yugoslav Nationalist guerrilla forces.

81 Not printed.

82 The Ambassador to the Yugoslav Government in Exile at Cairo stated (1) in telegram, 102, (Yugos), April 29, 1 p.m. (not printed), that Tito had promised his support in rescuing Hungarian Jews (840.48 Refugees/5842), and (2) in airgram No. A–19, May 19 (not printed), that the Royal Yugoslav Ministry of Foreign Affairs had instructed Yugoslav diplomatic representatives and other organizations to aid Allied bodies concerned with war refugee questions (840.48 Refugees/6069).

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/5613: Telegram

[Document 587]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, April 13, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 10:06 p.m.]

2297. Substance your April 7, No. 1181 has been communicated to Swiss Foreign Minister. I have not as yet seen Kullmann report. While I had private intimations regarding Paraguayan Government’s action your statement was first official confirmation received.

My despatch 5824, August 1083 last year gives an objective review of irregular documentation situation with particular reference to Paraguayan and Dominican Consuls and my [despatch] 6921 of December 2783 gave first reports on difficulties of persons in German occupied territory who had been provided with this irregular documentation. Since latter date numerous telegrams on subject with information of interest have been dispatched. These should all be consulted as possibly supplementing Kullmann report since Kullmann did not review subject in detail with Legation.

Kullmann report as quoted by you seems to imply that Swiss Government has acted unilaterally in these cases without consultation with South and Central American Governments concerned. This assumption does not appear to be borne out by the records in several instances of which Legation has knowledge. (Please see Bern’s 6087, September 30, 194385 reporting dismissal by Paraguayan Government of Consul Hugli; Department’s FSS 78, October 26, 194386 presaging positive action by Peru in renunciation of passports irregularly issued by Peruvian Consul and instructing American diplomatic and consular officers to suspend action cases of all visa applications presenting Peruvian passports; Department’s 2678, November 187 reporting dismissal by Dominican Republic of Consul Bauer).

Impression is conveyed that Kullmann report is also critical of Swiss authorities in measures they have heretofore taken in endeavors to suppress traffic in irregular documentation.

Probably by far the greater part of this irregular documentation is in hands of bona fide refugees from Nazi oppression. It may surely be assumed that those holding such documentation who are now interned are not suspect. But issue has been widespread without proper control which in any event would appear impracticable and while names of persons to whom passports have been issued are I suppose usually of record identity has not been proved.

Irregular passports thus issued have been found in possession of suspect persons in Switzerland by Swiss authorities and in at least one known case irregular documentation has been issued by a foreign consular officer to an individual in Switzerland to conceal identity illegally. Swiss, moreover, found that extortionate fees were being collected.

On the whole it would appear that Swiss authorities have been motivated by considerations quite similar to those which occasioned Department’s several circular and special instructions which pointed out dangers inherent in practice particularly with reference to possible involvement of enemy agents. Moreover, cases were found which were deemed of immediate concern to Swiss national security. I feel consequently that criticism of Swiss authorities or of remedial action taken by them is scarcely justified and would be inappropriate at present juncture if such is actually contained in Kullmann report.

Moreover, there is among Swiss no lack of understanding of or sympathy with those victims who might find surcease or means of escape from Nazi oppression by use of documentation under discussion and I have reason to believe that Swiss Government will do what it feels it consistently can to alleviate their condition. Department understands Swiss required to guide their activities and relations with several belligerents in such manner as not to impair their usefulness as protecting power for many complicated and difficult purposes.

Please see also my 2282, April 1388 reporting Vatican activities in behalf of interned Jews.

Harrison

83 Not printed.

83 Not printed.

85 Not printed.

86 Foreign Service Serial (circular telegram to the American Republics), not printed.

87 Telegram not printed.

88 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/5887a: Telegram

[Document 588]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)89

Washington, April 13, 1944—11 p.m.

1269. From War Refugee Board. Information has been received by the Board that there are small groups of refugees from Poland claiming American citizenship who are interned at Bergen-Berzen [Belsen?], Germany and Vittel, France. It is further understood by the War Refugee Board that an inquiry concerning the validity of such claims may be made of the Swiss Government by the German authorities. In this connection you are instructed to advise the appropriate authorities of the Government of Switzerland at the proper time that in substance the following answer should be made to all such inquiries: “The Department will undertake to fully investigate any claim to United States citizenship, asserted by any person within territory under enemy control, upon the receipt from the Government of Switzerland of all pertinent information available to the German authorities relating to such claim of United States citizenship. During the time that the Department is investigating any particular claim to United States citizenship and until such time as the Department specifically advises the Swiss Government to the contrary, it must be presumed that the claimant is a citizen of the United States and the claimant must be accorded all the immunities, rights and privileges to which such citizens are entitled with the exception that financial assistance may not be extended until such assistance is specifically authorized by the Department (refer Department’s 1151, April 5)”.

[War Refugee Board]
Hull

89 The substance of this telegram was transmitted in a circular airgram of May 11, 7:30 p.m., to Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Uruguay, and Venezuela; repeated in substance to Bolivia on June 2.

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics 840.48 Refugees/5841a: Circular airgram

[Document 589]

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics 90

Washington, April 15, 1944—7 p.m.

With further reference to the Department’s circular airgram of January 26, 7 p.m.,91 and to subsequent communications on refugee matters, you are informed that the Department has now authorized the American consular officers in Switzerland to issue up to 4,000 quota immigration visas to refugee children up to 16 years of age without regard to religion, nationality or stateless status, to close relatives residing in enemy, enemy-controlled or occupied territory, or to the availability of means of transportation to the United States. The purpose of this authorization is to facilitate the escape to Switzerland of orphaned or abandoned children by giving assurances to the Swiss Government that these children will not remain in Switzerland after the termination of hostilities in Europe.92 The authorization contains provisions for the continued renewal of the visas until such time as adequate transportation facilities to the United States become available. Private sources have posted bond with the Attorney General of the United States to assure this Government that the emigrating children will not become public charges.

If there are private agencies in the country to which you are accredited willing and able to undertake a program for the care of refugee children, the War Refugee Board is confident that it can make arrangements to provide those agencies with adequate funds for the maintenance, education and welfare of as many children as the Government of that country would be willing to admit. Should it prove necessary, funds would undoubtedly be available to meet transportation expenses from Switzerland to that country.

Kindly approach appropriate officials of the Government to which you are accredited, inform them of the foregoing and request them to give assurance to the Swiss Government through their diplomatic mission in Bern that they will accept up to a fixed number of refugee children in a manner similar to that of this Government. For the information of the Government to which you are accredited, it is conservatively estimated that there are in France alone 8 to 10 thousand abandoned or orphaned refugee children. Should that Government be willing to make this humanitarian offer, please request the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to authorize its chief of mission in Bern to issue the appropriate number of immigration visas and to maintain their validity until suitable transportation facilities from Switzerland to its country become available. The Government may be informed that the special representative of the War Refugee Board attached to the American Legation in Bern will be glad to cooperate with the diplomatic and consular officers of the other American Republics in this as well as in all other refugee matters.

Please report by telegraph whether this suggestion has been favorably received by the Government to which you are accredited and, if so, the number of children it is prepared to admit.93

Hull

90  To the diplomatic representatives in Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Mexico, Panama, Peru, and Uruguay.

Substantially the same telegram was sent to Australia (No. 40, April 12), Brazil (No. 1215, April 14), Canada (No. 29, April 15), and by circular airgram on April 20 to Costa Rica, El Salvador, and Guatemala.

91 See footnote 22, p. 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555].

92 In an effort to encourage the Spanish and Portuguese Governments to give refuge to additional refugee children from France, special instructions were sent by the Secretary of State in telegram 1008, April 12, to Spain (repeated as 1017 to Lisbon), authorizing consular officers in those countries to issue up to 1,000 visas to such children arriving during the first six months of 1944. These visas were in addition to 4,000 made available to allow child refugees to reach Switzerland. In August these instructions were amended to permit the granting of visas to children arriving from Hungary as well as France. The Spanish Government in July authorized issuance of visas to 500 Jewish children in Hungary.

93 Favorable responses were received from Brazil, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 740.00116 European War 1939/1409a: Telegram

[Document 590]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, April 17, 1944.

937. From War Refugee Board. Department’s 699, March 24.94 With reference to the statement made by the President, the British Government, in a reaffirmation of its attitude toward the Nazi war crimes and atrocities, directed that the BBC95 report the President’s statement fully in all languages. Subsequently, on March 30, Mr. Eden, in the House of Commons, reiterated the position of the British Government with regard to these crimes.

You are requested to approach the appropriate authorities of the Soviet Union and ascertain whether, in view of the positive action taken by the British Government, the Soviet Government would take similar action and issue a statement expressing its attitude concerning the crimes and atrocities of the Nazis. It is felt by the Department that such action on the part of the Soviet Government would have a most profound and important effect upon the leaders and peoples of Rumania and Hungary.

Please report the result of your discussions concerning this matter. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

94 See telegram 991, March 24, to Bern, and footnote 57, p. 1015 [Pg. 1015 includes portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575].

95 British Broadcasting Corporation.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/5637: Telegram

[Document 591]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, April 17, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received April 18—2:31 a.m.]

1326. Reference my 1020, March 24, 6 p.m., and 1083, March 28, 1 p.m.96 A memorandum has been received from the Foreign Office in reply to my memorandum of March 21 regarding the creation of the War Refugee Board which states in substance that the policy of the Soviet Government has been, and still is, to give assistance of every kind to the victims of persecution by Hitlerite Germany. In keeping with this principle, the Soviet Government has agreed to the passage of a Turkish vessel and three Bulgarian ships from Rumanian and Bulgarian ports to Turkey for the purpose of evacuating refugees, as the Embassy already knows.

I plan to discuss with the Foreign Office the possibility of further Soviet cooperation in the implementation of our policy at the first favorable opportunity.

Harriman

96 Latter not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) 840.48 Refugees/5841h: Telegram

[Document 592]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin)97

Washington, April 20, 1944.

1202. Agreement has been reached in principle between American and British Governments to transfer to UNRRA full responsibility for operation and maintenance of refugee camp at Fedhala near Casablanca.

Detailed arrangements as to transfer of responsibility are now being worked out. It is proposed that the American and British Governments should retain responsibility of transporting refugees to North Africa and that UNRRA’s primary responsibility would be to maintain refugees after their arrival in North Africa. Responsibility for eventual resettlement of refugees not to be repatriated will remain unchanged, although under terms of UNRRA Agreement UNRRA will assist in repatriation of refugees who are to return to their original countries. Effective date of transfer will occur after appropriation by United States Congress of funds for contribution to UNRRA, which is expected before the middle of June.

UNRRA is instructing Beckelman98 to take up with French authorities in Algiers with respect to proposed transfer in order to obtain their consent as required by UNRRA Agreement to operations in French territory. You are requested to join with Beckelman in discussions with the French to the extent necessary, although, since French Committee is member of UNRRA, the initial approach should be made by Beckelman on behalf of UNRRA. UNRRA has informally notified French representatives here of these plans.99 It is understood that the British Government is issuing similar instructions to Algiers.

Hull

97 Selden Chapin, serving as officer in charge of the American Mission in the absence of the representative of the United States to the French Committee of National Liberation (Wilson), who left that post on January 14.

98 Moses Beckelman, UNRRA representative in North Africa.

99  In note 98/821 of July 6, enclosed in despatch 466, August 10, 1944, from Algiers (not printed), the French Commissioner for Foreign Affairs indicated that the French authorities had no objection to the transfer to UNRRA of the North African Refugee Camp at Fedhala under certain conditions (840.48–Refugees/8–1044).

Camp Lyautey was eventually closed by UNRRA, and its inmates were transferred to the camp at Philippeville.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) 840.48 Refugees/5847a: Telegram

[Document 593]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, April 21, 1944—1 p.m.

1108. From War Refugee Board. The Spanish Government has on several occasions in the past, as the result of intercession by the Holy See whose humanitarian efforts on behalf of the persecuted refugees of Europe have resulted in the saving of thousands of lives, extended protection to groups of Sephardic Jews in Axis occupied areas and has intervened with Germany to accomplish their evacuation to Spain after release from concentration camps.

The War Refugee Board has now been informed that 400 such Sephardic Jews residing in Athens have recently been interned in a concentration camp. To forestall deportation to Poland and almost certain death it is vital that these Sephardic Jews be given Spanish protection.

You are requested to approach appropriate Spanish officials to advise them of the situation of this group and to enlist the aid of the Spanish Government in the rescue of these refugees. You are authorized to give full assurance to the Spanish Government that funds will be available for the support in Spain of such of these persons as may be evacuated to Spain and that prompt action to speed their departure from Spain to other places of refuge will be taken. Kindly advise the Department of all developments in this matter.1

The foregoing has been repeated to Bern for Tittmann.2 [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

1 Spanish representations were instrumental in saving from imminent deportation to Poland a group of some 500 Sephardics, presumably including the 400 deported from Athens, all of whom were allowed to leave German concentration camps and proceed to Spain; most of these Sephardics were transferred to Camp Lyautey.

2 Harold H. Tittmann, Jr., Assistant to the Personal Representative of President Roosevelt to Pope Pius XII (Myron C. Taylor), and Chargé in absence of the Representative.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson) 840.48 Refugees/5371: Telegram

[Document 594]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson)

Washington, April 21, 1944—6 p.m.

724. For the Minister and Iver Olsen3 from War Refugee Board. WRB no. 3. The Legation’s efforts reported in your 908 of March 164 and 1209 of April 85 are gratifying to the War Refugee Board. It is requested that the situation in Finland be carefully watched and when first signs of danger appear for central European and Jewish refugees urge the Government of Sweden, in line with its generous action concerning Danish Jews, to carry out its informal undertaking as reported in your 908. You are instructed to take necessary steps to ensure that the proper authorities in Finland are informed that the Government of Sweden is ready to admit these people.

It is understood of course that observers in Sweden have a clearer knowledge of conditions than is had here but the Board is extremely alarmed concerning the possibility of a sudden deterioration the result of which might make impossible any action toward rescue. The Board places full reliance on you to see that precautionary measures are taken to prevent jeopardy to the lives of this group of people.

The informal undertaking reported in your 908 is noted by the Board as referring to 113 Jewish refugees only. According to the Board’s information the figure 113 refers only to refugees from Austria and Germany. The Board considers in the light of past events elsewhere that many additional persons are undoubtedly threatened with equal danger. The Board has been informed that there are in Finland at present 131 Italians, 144 Poles, 475 Danes, 192 Norwegians, 172 refugees from other German-occupied countries, and about 1500 persons, 940 of whom are holding Nansen passports,6 now in a local Jewish community.

It seems apparent that local and refugee Jews as well as a number of non-Jewish refugees would also be correspondingly threatened with Jewish refugees from Austria and Germany if German influence is increased. The Board requests you to urge the Swedish Government to extend its undertaking to include all of the persons under reference. It will be noted by you that the total is less than half of the number of Danish Jews to whom Sweden has given refuge.

The Board desires to be informed concerning the result of action taken by you in this matter. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

3 Special Attaché to the Legation in Sweden on war refugee matters.

4 Not printed; it concerned (1) Minister Johnson’s efforts in the course of conversation with a Swedish official on behalf of 113 Jewish refugees who came to Finland from Central Europe in 1938 and 1930 and had been refused permission by the Swedish Foreign Ministry to enter Sweden, and (2) the Swedish official’s promise that Sweden would admit this refugee group in case serious danger developed in Finland (840.48 Refugees/5371).

5 Not printed.

6 Nansen certificates (derived from the name of Dr. Fridtjof Nansen, who was designated by the League of Nations to deal with the problem of refugees) were certificates of identity issued to stateless refugees.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War 1939/1406: Telegram

[Document 595]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, April 22, 1944—2 p.m.
[Received April 23—7:50 a.m.]

1395. I informed Vyshinski on April 21 of the contents of the Department’s 937, April 17 and left with him a memorandum on the subject which included a statement inquiring whether the Soviet Government would issue a statement expressing its attitude concerning Nazi atrocities. Vyshinski replied that the Soviet Government had frequently expressed its position on this subject, however he would bring the memorandum to the attention of his Government and give the matter his personal study.7

Harriman

7 Soviet action in this matter was not obtained.

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/5802: Telegram

[Document 596]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, April 24, 1944—9 p.m.
[Received 9:37 p.m.]

1433. For War Refugee Board No. 5. On basis of our experience with Swedish Foreign Office it would seem there would be better prospects of success if our Legation in Helsinki would initiate action contemplated Department’s 724, April 21, 6 p.m., War Refugee Board No. 3, by making approach to Finnish Foreign Office that would result in Finnish Government requesting Swedish Government to permit entry of these refugees on ground that their lives are in jeopardy in Finland. This Legation would then press Swedish Foreign Office for sympathetic consideration of the Finnish request and offer United States financial assistance in carrying evacuation program out.

In general it should be emphasized that Swedes do not believe that in fact minority groups in Finland are in serious jeopardy. In event of a German occupation of Finland, Swedes say that minority groups are unlikely to be singled out for persecution because it is an established fact that such groups have participated as actively in Finnish military operations against Russia as any other class and have suffered proportionate casualties. On other hand Swedes are seriously concerned with possibility of Russian military operation against Finland which would produce a Finnish refugee movement into Sweden running into hundreds of thousands.

It is because of this prospect which would have major proportions that Swedes are reluctant to initiate any action which might compromise this position beforehand.

Johnson

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson) 840.48 Refugees/5578: Telegram

[Document 597]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson)

Washington, April 25, 1944—4 p.m.

749. To Johnson and Olsen from War Refugee Board. This is WRB’s cable no. 4. Reference your 1235 of April 11.8 The Board appreciates importance of Hellsted’s9 statement regarding extent of danger to many Germans, Swedes and others from Gestapo in Finland. Regardless of religion, nationality or stateless status Board is charged with rescuing “Victims in imminent danger of death from enemy oppression”. Therefore Swedish action to afford rescue to all groups in Finland especially in danger by increased German influence would be warmly welcomed by Board.

Board suggests that with respect to Hellsted’s remark that permission to enter Sweden to refugees and others would discredit Finnish Government, you bring to his attention Boheman’s10 statement to the effect that the Finnish Government has applied itself for the admission of Jewish refugees as reported in your 908.11

Answering questions final paragraph your 1235, Board holds that all persons described in Department’s 724, April 21 are in danger. Board is prepared to make arrangements for the evacuation of all persons other than Swedes who may be accorded refuge in Sweden as soon as practicable from Sweden and for the support of such refugees who cannot claim the support of their own governments in Sweden. Swedish action (reported in your 1379 of April 2112 ) in authorizing 100 visas to central European refugees now in Finland as a starter is appreciated. Danger threatening not only the 113 Jewish refugees from Austria and Germany but also the 2600 others described in Department’s 1724 [724] of April [21] is a matter of deep concern to Board. Your representations as reported in your 1209 of 8th12 have full support of Board.

Board assumes, in light of your 1379 of April 21, that the Hellsted statement does not modify in any way the confidential assurances reported in your 908 of March 16 as given by Boheman. The Board will welcome any confirmation which you may be able to secure of these assurances and if at any time you consider that danger is imminent the Board requests that you press immediately for appropriate action.13

Board is gratified by favorable Swedish response to Olsen’s appointment (reference Olsen’s no. 314 ) and approves statements made to press. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

8 Not printed.

9 Official of Swedish Foreign Office in charge of foreign interests.

10 Erik C. Boheman, Swedish Under Secretary of State.

11 See footnote 4, p. 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 593 and Doc. 594].

12 Not printed.

12 Not printed.

13 The Swedish Foreign Office later agreed to issue visas to some 60 central European Jews remaining in Finland, for the most part unemployables of German, Polish, Lithuanian, and Rumanian origin, on condition that assurances be given as to maintenance of this group in Sweden. The necessary assurances were promptly given by the United States Government and arrangements were made for evacuation of this group to Sweden.

14 Telegram 1126, April 3, not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/5903b: Telegram

[Document 598]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, April 29, 1944—midnight.

1498. From War Refugee Board. Please deliver the following to the Intercross: “The Intercross is requested by the War Refugee Board and American agencies interested in refugees to approach the German and satellite governments with a view to obtaining for Jews and other persons detained, interned, or otherwise confined, because of race, religion or political belief, (1) treatment comparable to that accorded civilian internees to whom is presently applied by analogy the Geneva Convention or, (2) treatment of such persons comparable at least to the extent that under Intercross supervision, distribution and reception of food packages under guarantee similar to those now in practice with respect to civilian internees referred to in (1) above, be granted to them. In connection with foregoing War Refugee Board feels strongly that (1) is preferable and suggests that only if, in the judgment of the Red Cross, (1) is unobtainable should (2) be presented. A further request of the Intercross is made by the Board that it secure opportunities and facilities to obtain food and other necessities, as may prove possible for Jews and other subjects of Nazi oppression (who have been singled out as victims of persecution though not actually interned), on a basis of equality with the local population in the communities in which they live both from local or domestic sources of supply and Intercross channels.

It is also desired by the Board to call the attention of the Intercross to the Board’s efforts to rescue Jews and other persons who are victims of persecution from occupied areas in as large numbers as possible. The Board urges that through considered approaches to German and other authorities of occupied areas and through any other means that are possible, the Intercross do everything possible to facilitate the departure to neutral countries which may receive the refugees in question. The Board is keenly appreciative of the humanitarian activities engaged in by the Intercross and is cognizant of the continuing efforts of the Intercross to effectuate the general program outlined in the foregoing. The War Refugee Board is ready, in every way possible, to collaborate with the Intercross.”

Following from the War Refugee Board for Minister Harrison: “In the achievement of its objectives the Board considers the foregoing suggested approaches, on the part, of the Intercross, to German and satellite authorities of utmost importance. Having in mind the recent military developments and including the changing situation in Bulgaria, Rumania and Hungary, the conclusion has been reached by the Board that now efforts should be concentrated on persuading the Germans to improve the situation of Jews and other persecuted groups in enemy-occupied territories. Accordingly, you are requested to support in every way possible the proposals to Intercross contained in this message. You are authorized, if at any time you believe that the Government of Switzerland would find it possible to associate itself with these approaches to the Germans or otherwise to assist in this general program, to informally suggest to the Swiss Government that it take such action.”16

The above is WRB No. 10. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

16 In its negative reply, the Red Cross maintained that any efforts on its part along the lines proposed would go far beyond the limits of its “traditional capacity” and would lay it open to the objection that it was intruding upon internal concerns of state.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 840.48 Refugees/6033a: Telegram

[Document 599]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, May 13, 1944—8 p.m.

425. The following is from the War Refugee Board and forms its cable no. 35.

The receipt is acknowledged of your April 22 no. 43 to War Refugee Board.17 Letter accordingly despatched to Turkish Ambassador requesting that his Government inform the German and other authorities in France that upon the assertion of a claim to Turkish nationality, the claimant is to be extended all the rights, privileges and immunities of a Turkish national, unless and until such authorities are advised by the Turkish Government that, after investigation, such claim has been rejected. It is further requested that adverse determinations of such claims by the Turkish Government be postponed until after the war has ended. The fact that this Government has taken a similar position relative to refugees within German-controlled areas claiming American citizenship has been communicated to the Ambassador.

It was further stated that if, pending investigation, the evacuation from German-controlled areas of claimants to Turkish nationality who may be in danger therein can be made possible by the Turkish Government, the Board will undertake to make available from American sources funds for their support and maintenance and will undertake further to find promptly havens outside Turkey for those evacuees whose Turkish nationality claims may be rejected by the Government of that country.18

Continuance of your efforts along same lines is requested.

It is understood that many Spanish nationals are interned in Greece for deportation therefrom. Similar action to that asked of Turkey is being urged on Spain, but your support of our action by urging Spanish Minister at Ankara who, we are advised, is handling the matter, is requested. Intercession with Spain is also being asked of the Vatican.

Hull

17 Telegram 732, not printed; it concerned deportation of 800 Jews from France who claimed Turkish nationality (840.48 Refugees/5790).

18 The Turkish Ambassador in Washington agreed to transmit the Board’s recommendation to Ankara, but the Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs asserted that most of the Jews in France claiming Turkish nationality had little to substantiate their claims. The eventual liberation of France by Allied forces put an end to the dangers facing Jews of Turkish origin in that country.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/6015a: Telegram

[Document 600]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, May 13, 1944—11 p.m.

1672. The following is for McClelland and forms WRB cable no. 17.

The information below has been reported by Consul at Istanbul: “In late March all registered Jews in Greece were confined in Haidari concentration camp. Evacuation from camp to unknown destination believed to be Theresienstadt, Czechoslovakia of 4,000 thereof occurred on April 2. Orders were issued for repatriation of Turkish, Spanish and Portuguese Jews. These developments have complicated the question of assistance since officially there are no Jews in Greece, all registered Jews having been removed, while through failure on their part to comply with registration order issued by the Germans all Jews in hiding have lost the last remnant of their rights.”

Instructions have been issued to obtain action to help victims in Greece claiming the nationalities of the respective countries to the missions at Istanbul, Lisbon and Madrid. A request to obtain the cooperation of the Holy See has been directed to the American representative in Vatican City.

Please ask Intercross to extend all aid possible to said victims including those evacuated from Greece. Information as to destination of evacuees would be appreciated.19

Hull

19 Intermittently throughout 1944 some 900 Jewish refugees from Greece and the Greek islands bound for Palestine managed to reach Turkey through the port of Izmir and small ports on the Aegean, and Turkish authorities assisted in prompt transportation of these refugees to Palestine.

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/6007: Telegram

[Document 601]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, May 15, 1944.
[Received May 15—9:25 p.m.]

1719. Our No. 13. For War Refugee Board. The question is frequently raised here as to what concern the WRB will have with the problems of bringing immediate relief to the European refugee groups at the moment hostilities cease, as is generally known the bulk of these refugees will be in critical need of medical attention, of food and clothing and of housing. Thousands of them will want to return to their homelands immediately and will cause a tremendous transportation problem. Thousands of others will be looking for new domiciles. It is generally considered here that failure to have a plan prepared for immediate action will result in losses of thousands of lives, since these people are dying off so rapidly that even a month’s neglect will mean substantial losses. Accordingly there are numerous Swedish organizations engaged in promulgating plans for immediate postwar action. The Swedish Government itself has made a large appropriation for these purposes and has appointed a commission to develop programs. They are obviously interested in what the United States is planning along similar lines, and would like to cooperate. It is not clear to us what we should advance as the War Refugee Board jurisdictional field in these activities as contrasted with UNRRA or IGC. Please instruct.

Johnson

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 840.48 Refugees/6079a: Telegram

[Document 602]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, May 17, 1944—8 p.m.

440. The following constitutes WRB Cable no. 36. Deportation of Jews from Hungary and Hungarian controlled areas has begun and 24,000 deported from Sub-Carpatho-Russia to date, in addition to general deportation of Polish refugees whose names are known to Hungarian police, is information reported to American Embassy London by London representatives of Jewish Agency Palestine. Our diplomatic missions at London and Moscow are being asked to try to have broadcasts in appropriate languages from their respective countries beamed on Germany and German-satellite countries send warnings to the military and civilian personnel of such countries that they will be held personally responsible by the United Nations for their actions and any deaths resulting from such deportation. Moscow has been asked to request Russian Foreign Office to use its influence on the satellite governments and populations by all means possible to cause their resistance to German demands for the deportation and persecution of minority groups under control of the satellites. Similar warnings are being carried by OWI20 transmitters.

The Vatican is being approached relative to applying pressure on satellites, especially Hungary.

London and Moscow have been sent the essence of your 794 of May 2.21 Your efforts to have Turkish authorities admit refugees from Balkans with or without visas will continue it is hoped. You may desire to invite attention of Foreign Office officials to fact they have reportedly admitted large numbers of persons from Greece without visas, if not already used in your approaches, and if, in your discretion, it would not prejudice established movement of refugees from that quarter. Further reported by Embassy London that Jewish Agency has informed its London representatives that all but 30 Jews have been released of the large group arrested in Budapest for their activity in assisting escape of Jewish refugees from Hungary and other areas. Trials of remaining 30 about to begin. Furnishing by the Jewish Agency of all available details regarding these 30 persons either through its Ankara representatives or his office has been asked of the American Consul General, Jerusalem.22 Should you deem action favorable upon receipt of information, kindly request Simond23 to communicate with Cretzianu24 and refer to assurances given by latter in his conversation of March 29 as reported in your 581 of March 30, paragraph no. 2.25 The Board is not unmindful of release of majority of persons charged with assisting Jews to escape. It hopes however for release of the 30 detained persons and the granting to them of all possible opportunities to leave [for?] Rumania.26

Hull

20 Office of War Information.

21 Not printed; Ambassador Steinhardt reported that the Turkish Consul at Budapest had informed the Foreign Ministry that every Jew who entered the Turkish Consulate in Budapest for the purpose of applying for a Turkish visa had been arrested as soon as he left and transported to an unknown destination (840.48 Refugees/5876).

22 The Jewish Agency for Palestine subsequently reported that the number of persons still under arrest had been reduced to 12 or 15.

23 Gilbert Simond, representative of the International Red Cross.

24 Alexander Cretzianu, Rumanian Minister to Turkey.

25 Not printed.

26 In telegram 1786 of May 23 to Bern (repeated on the same date to Lisbon, Madrid, Ankara, Stockholm, and Vatican City), this Government’s grave concern was expressed, and American Missions were asked to request the authorities of the various governments to which they were accredited to obtain as soon as possible information from their Missions in Budapest concerning the treatment of Jews in Hungary (840.48 Refugees/6112b).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/6088a: Telegram

[Document 603]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, May 18, 1944—7 p.m.

3953. From War Refugee Board for Riefler.27 We propose to approach the five principal neutrals in the way shown below regarding passage through the blockade, subject to appropriate safeguards, of additional food and clothing in quantities sufficient to meet added burdens on their resources so that reception by those countries of larger numbers of children and adult refugees from enemy oppression may be arranged. This is in furtherance of policy this Government to employ all available means to further the rescue of victims of enemy oppression in imminent danger of death which are consistent with successful prosecution of the war.

Portugal, Spain and Turkey. Assurances that arrangements would be made by the British and United States Governments to furnish the supplies required to meet the needs of refugees admitted to those countries, if latter adopt a more generous policy regarding the reception and maintenance of refugees.

Sweden and Switzerland. That every effort will be made toward arrangement for importation into those countries of whatever additional stocks of foodstuffs and clothing may be needed to meet requirements of refugees admitted into those countries. This is a renewal of assurances previously given by the British and United States Governments.

So that the course of action outlined above may be inaugurated with the least delay possible kindly endeavor to procure the prompt concurrence of the appropriate British authorities thereto. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

27 Winfield W. Riefler, economist, Special Assistant to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom.

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/6081: Telegram

[Document 604]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, May 21, 1944—11 a.m.
[Received 1:10 p.m.]

3245. American Interests Germany. Department’s A–45, February 7. Swiss note May 15 states that according letter April 21 from Swiss Legation, Berlin, German authorities appear recently to have taken up passports those internees not considered Aryan. This does not involve withdrawal as such but a control measure because passports are returned to bearers after verification their identity and nationality. When interested persons unable furnish sufficient proof of nationality it may be assumed they are transferred special Jewish camps.

Thus far Swiss Legation, Berlin, has knowledge no case where American passport not returned to bearer after control. Appears German authorities more particularly interested in bearers Palestinian and certain Latin American passports.

Swiss promise such supplementary information as may be obtained.

Harrison

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson) 840.48 Refugees/5921: Telegram

[Document 605]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson)

Washington, May 22, 1944—10 p.m.

982. The following is for the confidential information of Johnson and Olsen from War Refugee Board and forms WRB cable no. 12. It refers to the sympathetic attitude of the new Bulgarian Minister to Stockholm toward the Jewish situation mentioned in Stockholm’s no. 1628 of May 8.28

A similar situation was exploited by Hirschmann, War Refugee Board attaché in Ankara, relative to Rumanian Minister to Turkey, who was reputedly close to Marshal Antonescu29 in addition to being sympathetic on the Jewish question. Two personal interviews were arranged, with approval Ambassador Steinhardt, between Hirschmann and Cretzianu at home of Intercross representative at Ankara with whom Hirschmann is personally friendly. Both Steinhardt and Hirschmann felt a direct approach of this type would impress Rumanian Government much more than an indirect one.

An account of Hirschmann’s interviews with Cretzianu follows: Hirschmann made it clear at outset of initial interview that his sole function as representative of the War Refugee Board in Ankara was to deal with refugee problems, that discussions were to be confined to this subject exclusively and that it would be a deliberate distortion were any other interpretation placed upon the conversation either by Cretzianu or his Government. The outraged feeling of the United States at the brutal treatment being accorded the Jewish minorities and other refugees in Rumania and the United States’ determination to do all in its power to rescue those unfortunates who are in imminent danger of death and to find havens of refuge for them was then outlined to Cretzianu. Our Government, Hirschmann warned, would remember in the future any continuation by the Rumanian Government of the execution of these policies of Hitlerite persecution and that, in its own interest, the Rumanian Government would be well advised to take advantage of those opportunities to permit refugees to depart across its borders which may become available to it in the future. Hirschmann requested Cretzianu to report to his Government the substance of the above interview. Cretzianu assured Hirschmann no bodily harm would come to any of the many Jews in Transnistria, provided the Germans had not taken over from Rumania the administration of Transnistria which lies directly in the path of the retreating German Army and where many thousands of Jews were held in Rumanian concentration camps. Definite assurance was also given Hirschmann by Cretzianu that the necessary transportation and exit visas would be provided promptly on arrival of evacuation vessels at Constanza to embark up to 5,000 Jewish refugee children. Finally, transmission of urgent telegram to Bucharest recommending in strongest terms that efforts be made immediately to transfer to Rumania proper the Jewish refugees held in Transnistria was promised by Cretzianu.

In a second talk with Hirschmann, requested a few days later by Cretzianu, the former was informed that transfer of Jews in Transnistria to Rumania proper had been decided by Rumanian Government and that the transfer had begun. About 40,000 Jews have been removed from Transnistria since then, of which some have been evacuated from Constanza to Palestine.30

The conspicuous success of this direct approach to the Rumanian Government decided Hirschmann, with Steinhardt’s approval, to make a similar approach to the Bulgarian Government. A conference between Hirschmann and Minister Balabanoff of Bulgaria at the home of the Intercross representative at Ankara was arranged about March 20. This meeting opened by Hirschmann in same manner as that with Cretzianu, stating that reports of the brutal treatment accorded to minorities in Bulgaria, especially the Jews, had outraged the Government and the people of the United States and that Bulgaria would be called upon to answer therefor in the near future. Hirschmann warned, after advising Balabanoff of this Government’s determination to save refugees, that any continuation of execution of these Nazi persecution policies would be remembered by our Government in the future and that in its own interests the Bulgarian Government would be well advised to take advantage of whatever opportunities present themselves in the future which will permit the departure of refugees. The submission of Hirschmann’s remarks to Bulgarian Government was suggested to Balabanoff.

Balabanoff stated in reply that the maltreatment of minorities in Bulgaria was result of policies of Gebrowski, former Minister of Interior, who, according to Balabanoff was a German tool and no longer was a member of the Government. The Jews lately, Balabanoff stated, had been accorded much better treatment in Bulgaria and he believed that relaxation of pressure against them would continue. Immediate dispatch of a telegram by Balabanoff to his Government recommending that identical treatment be accorded Jews and all other minorities in Bulgaria to that given Bulgarian citizens, that the deplorable conditions under which the Jews and other minorities are living in concentration camps be ameliorated immediately and finally that the Bulgarian Government take immediate steps to authorize granting of visas and to provide transportation for all refugees wishing to leave for Palestine or Turkey was suggested by Hirschmann.

Hirschmann arranged a second meeting with Balabanoff about April 6. No reply had apparently been received by the latter to the telegram and long memorandum he claimed had been dispatched to his Government after the first conference. Receipt of indirect word that the Bulgarian Government was relaxing its attitude toward minorities, especially Jews, and that Jews were being allowed to leave Bulgaria by both ship and train was claimed however. The bombing of Sofia, as the possible reason for non-receipt of a reply, was mentioned. The Minister further stated that Christoff one of the leaders of his Government, had expressed himself in correspondence as sympathetic with the Jewish refugees. Nothing further has been heard from Balabanoff since that date.

It is suggested a direct approach along the lines of Hirschmann’s talks with Balabanoff be made. If, in your opinion, the newly appointed Bulgarian Minister to Sweden appears sincere in his attitude toward the Jewish refugee problem it could be pointed out in such an interview that failure of the Bulgarian Government to reply to Balabanoff’s telegram and memorandum has created an unfavorable impression on this Government, as indicative that Bulgaria has not yet determined to discard the Nazi ideology of race and minority persecution and that such a stand will be taken into consideration in the final reckoning. In a nation wide radio broadcast on May 14, John Pehle stated in reference to satellite nations: “A more liberal attitude toward the refugees can be brought about by making it crystal clear to those countries that when the time for final settlement comes the United States and the United Nations will bear in mind their treatment of minorities.”

There is no better way the Bulgarian Government can prove the sincerity of its claim made through Balabanoff that it has relaxed its attitude toward minorities, and especially the Jews, than by permitting Jews and other refugees to depart by both rail and ship to Turkey and Palestine. Despite Balabanoff’s claim to the contrary, no such organized exodus has yet come to the attention of the War Refugee Board.

A thorough canvass of the possibility of an orderly evacuation of refugees from Bulgaria to Turkey by land should be made. The Bulgarian Government may also find it to its advantage to press Bulgarian vessels into the evacuation of refugees from Bulgarian ports. The War Refugee Board would undertake to obtain safe conducts from the Russian, British and American Governments for the protection of such ships. Operation of ships by ship owners would not be expected without fair compensation. Our no. 895 of May 1231 indicates that a limited advantage of this type of arrangement may already have been taken by certain ships flying the Bulgarian flag. The desire of the Board is to begin an exodus from Bulgaria similar to that which occurred during April from Constanza and which will continue, it is hoped. The use of additional Bulgarian shipping to increase evacuations from Constanza is an alternate desire of the Board. Since the Bulgarian ships mentioned in our 895 apparently operate without benefit of German safe conducts this may solve the German delay tactics in granting safe conducts which so far have immobilized the Tari. Kindly inform us promptly of additional developments. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

28 Not printed; in this telegram the Minister requested details of any program under consideration for Bulgaria, for possible use in inducing the Bulgarian Minister to lend aid to any Bulgarian rescue program (840.48 Refugees/5921).

29 Ion Antonescu, Rumanian Premier.

30 The complete disbandment of this camp and repatriation of those interned was later confirmed by refugees reaching Turkey from Rumania, as well as by Minister Cretzianu himself in July 1944.

31 Not printed.

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/6089: Telegram

[Document 606]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, May 22, 1944—9 p.m.
[Received 10:23 p.m.]

1820. This is our No. 20 for War Refugee Board. Discussions have been completed with Lithuanian and Latvian groups mentioned in our WRB No. 14 (Legation’s No. 1738 of May 1632 ) with respect to evacuating certain groups from these two countries. Prospects of rescuing six or seven hundred political intellectual and racial refugees from each country appear fair although operations are complicated and dangerous. Time element of initiating such operations in immediate future is an important factor. Plans have been checked as carefully as possible and have been discussed on highly secret basis by Olsen with appropriate official in Swedish Foreign Office, who was cooperative and sympathetic and believes the programs have good prospects of success.

Funds to carry out these operations will approximate same as Estonian plan. Please advise as soon as possible of the likelihood of financial support being made available for these operations since it is urgent that preparations get under way.33

Johnson

32 Not printed.

33 Arrangements were made for transfer of $50,000 of War Refugee Board funds to Stockholm for use in this connection in June, and in August the Board underwrote these operations to the extent of another $50,000. These Baltic operations resulted in direct rescue of approximately 1,200 persons, and at least as many more were brought to safety in Sweden through individual initiative and facilities benefiting from underground routes and communications established by the Board.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/6139b: Telegram

[Document 607]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)34

Washington, May 25, 1944—1 p.m.

1805. The following is for Harrison and McClelland and is WRB cable no. 26.

Systematic mass-extermination of Jews in Hungary has begun according to persistent and seemingly authentic reports. The presence in Hungary of the largest possible number of foreign observers may cause restraint which will directly affect the lives of 800,000 human beings in that country. Please urge, with this end in view, appropriate authorities to take immediate steps in interest of humanity to enlarge to greatest possible extent the numbers of Swiss diplomatic and consular personnel in Hungary and to distribute them throughout the country as widely as possible.

All such diplomatic and consular representatives will use, it is hoped, all available means to urge desisting from further barbarism upon officials and private individuals. The Department should be informed immediately of extent of cooperation of Swiss Government.35

Hull

34 Substantially the same message was sent on the same date to Ankara (No. 468), Lisbon (No. 1479), and Stockholm (No. 1010); on May 26 to Madrid (No. 1515).

35 Switzerland was not persuaded to increase its diplomatic personnel in Hungary. Only in the case of Sweden was the proposal accepted; the Swedish Foreign Office appointed a Special Attaché to the Swedish Legation at Budapest (Wallenberg), and shortly after his arrival there, it was reported that several thousand persons were placed under effective Swedish protection.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/6125: Telegram

[Document 608]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, May 25, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received 9:13 p.m.]

950. For the WRB. Department’s 458, May 23.36 Ankara 63. The Turk authorities inform me that their information concerning treatment of Jews in Hungary is limited due to the fact that since former Minister Kallay took refuge in the Turk Legation in Budapest the building has been under guard by German Gestapo37 and movements and contacts of Turk Minister and his staff severely restricted.

Such information as the Turk authorities have been able to furnish me supplemented by information from other authoritative sources indicates that at time of German occupation there were approximately 750,000 Jews in Hungary including approximately 25,000 Jewish refugees mostly from Slovakia and some from Poland. Of this total, approximately 200,000 are [said] to be in various concentration camps in Hungary. Large deportations to Poland are said to have begun from these concentration camps. Up to May 15 no Jews are believed to have been removed from Budapest or its environs. A report, however, has been received since that date to the effect that transfer of Jews from Budapest to concentration camps in Hungary is imminent.

An individual by name of Joel Brandt documented as the representative of the Jewish Community of Budapest arrived two days ago in Istanbul and submitted to Barlas of the Jewish Agency38 a proposal said to have originated with Eichman38a Commissioner for Jewish Affairs to the effect that in exchange for 10,000 trucks, 2 million cakes of soap, 800 tons of coffee, 200 tons of tea and 200 tons of cocoa, Eichman would agree to stop the extermination and deportation of Jews in all areas occupied by the Germans including Rumania and would further agree to allow exit of Jewish unlimited numbers to Spain and in limited numbers to Palestine.

Steinhardt

36 Not printed.

37 Geheime Staatspolizei, the German Secret State Police.

38 M. Barlas, representative at Istanbul of the Jewish Agency for Palestine.

38a Adolf Eichmann.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Uruguay (Dawson) 710 Consultation 3 (A)/740c: Telegram

[Document 609]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Uruguay (Dawson)

Washington, May 26, 1944—noon.

297. For Sanders.39 There are in German and German-occupied territory a few thousand individuals identified with European racial and political minority groups who nevertheless possess one or another type of document or certificate, including passports and visas, issued in the name of non-European states, mainly certain American Republics. Despite circumstances which have cast doubt on the authenticity of these documents or the regularity of their issuance, the Germans have heretofore kept most of these individuals in internment camps. In according them this relatively favorable treatment, the Germans appear to have looked toward the possibility of exchanging them for German nationals abroad. In 1942, some 65 such individuals holding Palestine documents were exchanged for Germans in Palestine, but further operations under this arrangement failed because Germans remaining in Palestine declined repatriation. The only substantial source of available Germans now is the Western Hemisphere.

It has not been feasible to include these individuals in recent German-American Republics exchanges, because, in accord with Resolution XX,40 those exchanges have been limited to very small numbers of bona fide American nationals nominated by their governments, and because various American Republics had hesitated to recognize the documentation issued in their names.

In this situation, the German Government, apparently concluding that the governments concerned do not intend to protect these individuals or accept them for exchange purposes, has now manifested its intention to deprive them of their protected status and to subject them to the brutal measures uniformly applied to such minorities, such as slave labor and extermination. Authoritative sources advise that of late the Germans have intensified their persecution of such groups, that their immediate or gradual annihilation is almost certain, and that their lives may be safeguarded only by the most urgent and positive steps. The official steps required are positive assurances to Germany on behalf of the governments concerned that their documentation must be honored, followed by prompt exchange proposals on a collective basis.

The War Refugee Board and the Department have already procured most of the assurances required concerning documentation, and the Department is prepared to initiate exchange proposals. Furthermore, the Board, in cooperation with other official and humanitarian agencies, is prepared to underwrite all exchange expenses and to arrange and finance safe havens elsewhere to the extent that any individual rescued is not admissible to the country concerned.

Consideration of this subject by the Committee is desirable because the prospective exchange proposals would depart from or severely strain the pertinent strict standards established in Resolution XX. Since its adoption, the security requirements reflected by those standards have declined substantially in importance. In any event, present security needs can be met since Germans not capable of much contribution to enemy war effort are available and since adequate security can be exercised over individuals received. Committee action will also emphasize multilateral character of problem and of steps necessary for its effective solution.

Accordingly, you should present the problem to the Committee with a view to its immediate adoption of a resolution recommending to the governments that they require their documentation to be honored and that they authorize or support exchange proposals in their behalf to the humanitarian ends and under the security safeguards described above. A suggested draft resolution will be cabled to you promptly. You should draft a brief exposition along the lines stated, treating the problem as inter-American in character, and avoiding so far as possible direct reference to United States or War Refugee Board and extensive initiative they have already taken.

Hull

39 William Sanders, American member of Emergency Advisory Committee for Political Defense, meeting at Montevideo. For correspondence concerning this meeting, see vol. vii, pp. 1 ff.

40 Concerning the detention and expulsion of dangerous Axis nationals; for text, see Emergency Advisory Committee for Political Defense, Annual Report, July 1943 (Montevideo, 1943), p. 73.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) 840.48 Refugees/5842: Telegram

[Document 610]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, May 27, 1944—10 p.m.

1669. The following is for Murphy42 from War Refugee Board.

Indicated by our information that refugees have been arriving in Italy from Yugoslavia at average rate of over 1800 per week and that this flow expected to continue and augment. Appears also that military authorities are fearful facilities in southern Italy for refugees may become seriously overtaxed unless these refugees can be removed rapidly to other areas.

Discussion had with the President over whole matter. He has made it clear that there should be no discouragement under any circumstances of escape of refugees to Italy from the Balkan countries. Not only from the standpoint of saving lives of Yugoslavs is the flow of refugees from Yugoslavia to Italy important, but also that as many refugees as possible may be able to escape through Yugoslavia from other Balkan countries. Cable no. Yugos 102 from Cairo of April 29,43 indicates in this connection that Tito has promised support in rescue of Hungarian Jews. It is essential that we do what we can to facilitate the escape of Jews today in Hungary in view of their plight.

The crux of this matter is the finding of suitable places of removal for these refugees. The following should be borne in mind in this connection: (a) These refugees should be moved to camps in the Middle East in the largest numbers possible. Every effort to supply sufficient medical and other personnel is being made by UNRRA.

(b) Present plans to move as many Jewish refugees as possible should be carried out without delay. It should be borne in mind that in the case of Turkey, the policy that all Jews escaping into Turkey from the Balkan countries will be permitted to go to Palestine, has been adopted by the British. Checking of these refugees for security purposes occurs in camps in Palestine in which they are placed.

(c) The establishment by the British, with our cooperation, of havens of refuge for these people in Tripolitania and Cyrenaica has been pressed by the Board for some time. To date there have been no results.

(d) The possibility that some of these refugees might be taken to Sicily suggested by the President. The possibility of this, together with a substantial expansion of facilities on the Italian mainland, should be carefully explored.

(e) It is not considered desirable to bring refugees from Italy to Camp Lyautey at Fedhala since all accommodations of that camp must be kept available for refugees from Spain. There should be borne in mind however the possibility of establishing other camps in French North Africa for refugees from Italy.

You are requested to submit your views and recommendations as to all possible havens of refuge in which these people might be placed temporarily as quickly as possible, bearing in mind, of course, that there must be no interference with the flow of refugees into Italy from the Balkan countries.

It is requested that contents of this cable be conveyed to the appropriate military authorities, together with representatives of UNRRA and Ackermann44 of the War Refugee Board. Discussion of this whole matter with them and cooperation with them in solution this most urgent problem is requested. [War Refugee Board.]

Repeated to Naples for Kirk45 and Cairo for MacVeagh.

Hull

42 Robert D. Murphy, U. S. Political Adviser on the staff of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson).

43 Not printed.

44 Leonard E. Ackermann, Representative of the War Refugee Board in the Mediterranean area.

45 Alexander C. Kirk, American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 740.00115 European War 1939/9547: Telegram

[Document 611]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, May 27, 1944—11 p.m.

1846. Department was pleased to have information in your 2937, May 9, 10 p.m.46 and will await with interest promised further report.

Please inform the Swiss Government that the Department of State is undertaking the preliminary steps necessary in order to place a concrete proposal before the German Government or to consider any proposal that Government may wish to make.

The first step is to obtain adoption by the Emergency Advisory Committee for Political Defense at Montevideo of a resolution broadening exchange standards in its outstanding Resolution XX which at present narrowly restricts the repatriation of German nationals from this Hemisphere. Action to this end is being expedited.

Department’s proposal as at present contemplated will suggest the progressive exchange of all non-Germans interned or otherwise confined in German territory, including Jews and persons of doubtful nationality, for German nationals now resident in the Western Hemisphere. It will suggest that those bearing passports, visas or other documentation of non-European origin indicating a destination abroad would logically receive first consideration. Such a proposal will be independent of any now under negotiation and will suggest the formulation and exchange of lists for prior approval by both parties. Such exchanges would probably in the main depend for transportation upon existent neutral passenger vessels plying between the two hemispheres.

With specific reference to your 2928, May 9, 4 p.m.,47 Germans may be informed that in future exchanges of United States and German nationals provision will be made for inclusion of close alien relatives accompanying American citizens. Normally those to be included with American citizens would be limited to alien spouses and alien minor children, although other relatives might also be considered for general exchange. Provision will furthermore be made for exchange of the alien relatives still held in German internment camps of American citizens repatriated in 1942.

In view of foregoing the German Government, if contemplating the transfer of individuals susceptible of inclusion in contemplated exchanges, might wish to move them to places whence their delivery for exchange will be facilitated rather than impeded.

To assist it in its further consideration of the possibility of arranging such exchanges, the Department would appreciate receiving as soon as possible Swiss Government’s report of German Government’s reaction to foregoing possibilities.

Hull

46 Not printed; it concerned a letter of April 28 from the Swiss Legation reporting that the German Foreign Office at Berlin had no information regarding the alleged transfer of 238 persons from Vittel to prison, and a report was promised on the results of further efforts to obtain information looking toward their immediate return to Vittel (840.48 Refugees/5950).

47 Not printed; the Minister in Switzerland transmitted a report that the competent German authorities intended to deport all Jews who were interned with their American spouses to whom American authorities would not accord the right to be included in exchange groups (740.00115 EW(1939)/9547).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/3842: Telegram

[Document 612]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 3, 1944—midnight.

4413. It is essential to remove refugees escaped from enemy territory rapidly to other areas from southern Italy due to overcrowding of existent facilities in latter country. This must be done without delay so that no discouragement or impeding of flow of refugees into southern Italy may occur. The nature of this problem and its importance is indicated more comprehensively in the following cable sent to Murphy in Algiers:

[Here follows text of telegram 1669, May 27, 10 p.m., to Algiers, printed on page 1052 [Pg. 1052 includes portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610].]

Several thousand Jewish refugees, according to best information available, are now in southern Italy. An important step in helping solve the problem indicated would be taken by prompt removal of these refugees to Palestine. Information desired therefore at earliest possible moment whether Palestine certificates will be granted these Jewish refugees and their prompt removal to Palestine will be facilitated by the British Government.

The following should be borne in mind in taking up this matter with the British Government:

The British Government, since closing of the Bulgarian-Turkish frontier in May 1943, has been following the policy of authorizing the onward transport to Palestine of all Jews who succeed in escaping from enemy territory to Turkey, after a preliminary security check in the latter country. Another security check is made in camps in Palestine in which the British place these people. If found satisfactory, they are gradually released against the current half-yearly immigration quota, as legal immigrants to Palestine. The application of a similar policy in the case of Jews now in southern Italy would make possible the prompt removal to Palestine of such refugees. An early report of the attitude of the British Government in this matter is urgently requested. Unquoted portion of this message repeated to Murphy, Chapin and Ackermann for their information.

Stettinius

The British Embassy to the Department of State 840.48 Refugees/6–544

[Document 613]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

Attached to this Aide-Mémoire is the text of a telegram received by the Foreign Office from the High Commissioner, Jerusalem.50 His Majesty’s Ambassador is instructed to inform the United States Government of the proposal set out in that telegram and to put before them the reactions of His Majesty’s Government which are as follows: (a) Assuming suggestion was put forward by Gestapo in form conveyed to us, then it seems to be sheer case of blackmail or political warfare. Implied suggestion that we should accept responsibility for maintenance of additional million persons is equivalent to asking the Allies to suspend essential military operations.

(b) We could not bargain over any scheme with Gestapo and agree to trade lives against military and economic concessions calculated to stave off Germany’s defeat. Demand that we should in effect raise blockade is totally inadvisable [unacceptable]; to give Germany 10,000 lorries would bring important access of military strength to the enemy, and German stipulation of Spain and Portugal as sole exodus seems clearly designed to embarrass Allied military operations.

(c) Once committed to this kind of blackmail coupled with raising of blockade, which seems inseparably connected with it, the Allies would be driven to even further lengths.

(d) It would appear that selection of persons, if exchange were agreed, is to be in Hitler’s hands. On this we think should be borne in mind that immense numbers of Allies are held by the Germans under terrible conditions and that to arrange any exchange on a basis to be determined by Hitler, leaving Allied internees and prisoners in German hands, would lay Governments open to extremely serious protest.

(e) While however refusing to deal with this scheme and channels through which it has come, we realize importance of not opposing a mere negation to any genuine proposals involving rescue of any Jews and other victims which merit serious consideration by Allied Governments. Whole record of United States Government and His Majesty’s Government over refugees is a proof of their active sympathy with victims of Nazi terror. Accordingly if the German Government were willing to release Jews in position of extreme distress or danger, His Majesty’s Government and United States Government would be willing to examine the possibilities of moving to and accommodating in Spain and Portugal such persons as could be handled without prejudice to vital military operations.51

2. His Majesty’s Government are informing Dr. Weizmann52 in strictest confidence of this proposal, but are making no comment beyond saying that they are in touch with the United States Government. It is presumed that the latter will similarly inform Dr. Goldmann.53 His Majesty’s Government are anxious to learn at the earliest opportunity the views of the United States Government on what action, if any, should be taken. In particular they would be glad to know whether the United States Government would agree to instruct their Ambassador at Ankara, if he is approached by the Jewish Agency, to associate himself in a reply on the lines set forth above. His Majesty’s Government would suggest that Dr. Shertok54 should be told that we cannot sanction him or any other Allied citizen having any dealings with the Gestapo, but that we would agree to his conveying the substance of our observations to his Zionist friend from Hungary. This would show that, although we cannot enter into the monstrous bargain now proposed by the Gestapo, we are yet far from indifferent to the sufferings of the Jews and have not shut the door to any serious suggestions which may be made and which are compatible with the successful prosecution of the war.

3. His Majesty’s Ambassador at Ankara has been instructed to communicate the foregoing information in strictest confidence to his United States colleague, informing him that it has been transmitted to Washington in order that the reaction of His Majesty’s Government may be coordinated with that of the United States Government. His Majesty’s Ambassador has been instructed to return no definite reply to Dr. Shertok until the essential common line of action has been established between the two Governments.

4. The Department of State may be interested to know that, on being informed of the Gestapo’s proposal, Dr. Weizmann merely observed that it looked like one more German attempt to embarrass the United States and United Kingdom Governments. He said, however, that he would like to reflect on the affair and receive news of any developments.

Washington , 5 June, 1944.

50 Copy of cipher telegram 683, not printed; it reported proposal described in telegram 950, May 25, 4 p.m., from Ankara, p. 1050 [Pg. 1050 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608].

51 The Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy) stated in a letter of June 10 to the Under Secretary of State: “I think that you can take it that the War Department’s views would coincide with subparagraph e of the aide-mémoire (5 June) sent you by the British Embassy.” (840.48 Refugees/6–1044)

52 Chaim Weizmann, President of the World Zionist Organization; President of Zionist Federation of Great Britain and Ireland.

53 Nahum Goldmann of the Jewish Agency for Palestine.

54 Moshe Shertok of the Jewish Agency for Palestine at Cairo.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson) 840.48 Refugees/6007: Telegram

[Document 614]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson)

Washington, June 7, 1944—1 p.m.

1140. From War Refugee Board for Johnson for Olsen. This is WRB Stockholm cable no. 19. War Refugee Board has no assigned jurisdiction at present in general field mentioned in your 1719 May 15 (WRB no. 13). Assuming that your questions have to do with Europe generally exclusive of Sweden and other neutral countries problems will be handled by military authorities, UNRRA and Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees all of whom have had discussions and made plans. [War Refugee Board.]

Stettinius

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/6226: Telegram

[Document 615]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 7, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received June 7—4 p.m.]

4556. Department’s 2292, March 25, 5 p.m., and 3243, April 22, midnight.55 For the War Refugee Board. A letter has just been received from the Foreign Office stating that the British Government agree to the setting up of a refugee camp in Tripolitania.

Foreign Office letter goes on to suggest that it will be necessary to consider what practical measures will be needed for the working out of this scheme on the basis of joint maintenance, et cetera, to be shared between the British and American Governments.

Randall, head of the Refugee Department of the Foreign Office, has stated orally that it is his opinion that this camp in Tripolitania will be able to accommodate between 1,000 and 1,500 persons. The greatest difficulty will be in the obtaining of adequate administrative and medical personnel and the suggestions of the War Refugee Board with regard to this question are invited. Randall further stated confidentially that the political problems involved in setting up a camp in Cyrenaica are so acute that the Foreign Office had reluctantly come to the conclusion that it is absolutely impossible to establish a camp there.

Winant

55 Latter not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/6225: Telegram

[Document 616]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 7, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received June 7—5:35 p.m.]

4560. For Department and War Refugee Board. Foreign Office, after consultation with MEW, has sent Embassy following comments concerning War Refugee Board’s suggested approach to neutrals as given in Department’s 3953, May 18.

1. British are prepared to instruct their representatives in Spain, Portugal and Turkey to join with the United States representatives in giving assurances that if the country concerned adopts a more generous policy toward the reception and care of refugees, the provision of additional supplies will be arranged to meet needs of refugees. British prefer to use word “provision” in place of word “shipment” in as much as actual despatch in own ships may be rendered impossible by general shipping situation.

2. With respect to Sweden and Switzerland, British feel sure that both those countries are fully aware of our appreciation of their generous attitude toward refugees, and draw attention to the joint note sent the Swiss last January by our two Governments56 in which Swiss were assured that favorable consideration would be given requests for additional supplies to assist refugees. British also point out that in reply to an enquiry they made Sweden some time ago, they were assured that Sweden was ready to use her own resources to assist refugees. British would, however, be glad to join in renewed assurances and are instructing representatives in Stockholm and Bern to concert action with their American colleagues.

Winant

56 See telegram 561, January 20, from London, p. 985 [Pg. 985 is part of Doc. 553].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) 840.48 Refugees/6256b: Telegram

[Document 617]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, June 8, 1944—midnight.

1823. The following message is from the President for Murphy: “I am informed that there are real possibilities of saving human lives by bringing more refugees to southern Italy from and through Yugoslavia. The escape of refugees by this route I am also informed has from time to time been greatly impeded because the facilities for refugees have been overtaxed in southern Italy. Information available to me indicates that this is the situation at present and that accordingly possibilities may be lost of increasing the flow of refugees to Italy.

It is my understanding that many of the refugees in southern Italy have been and are being moved to temporary havens in areas adjacent to the Mediterranean and that efforts to increase existent refugee facilities in these areas are being made. It is a matter of concern to me that this effort be intensified to take refugees from Italy to areas close by relatively.

Simultaneously, I feel that it is important that the United States indicate its readiness to share, during the war, the burden of caring for refugees. I have decided accordingly that approximately one thousand refugees should be brought from Italy to this country immediately to be placed in an Emergency Refugee Shelter to be established at Fort Ontario near Oswego, New York, where they will remain for the duration of the war under appropriate security restrictions. Just as civilian internees from Latin American countries and prisoners of war have been brought here, these refugees will be brought in outside of the regular immigration procedure. These refugees will be well taken care of in the Emergency Refugee Shelter. At the end of the war they will be returned to their homelands.

It may be assumed by you that the Emergency Refugee Shelter will be prepared to receive these refugees on arrival. If, therefore, you will arrange for the departure to the United States as rapidly as possible, consistent with military requirements, of approximately one thousand refugees in southern Italy I will appreciate it. The representatives of the War Refugee Board in Algiers may be called upon to assist you in arranging for their departure. In effecting the prompt removal and transportation of the refugees, the full cooperation of our military and naval authorities should be enlisted.

Please bear in mind in choosing the refugees to be brought to the United States that, to the extent possible, those refugees should be selected for whom other havens of refuge are not available immediately. It is my desire however that the group include a reasonable proportion of various categories of persecuted peoples who have found refuge in Italy during the war.

Since these refugees are to be placed in a camp in the United States under appropriate security restrictions, you should bear in mind that the procedure for the selection of the refugees and arrangements for bringing them here should be as simple and expeditious as possible, uncomplicated by any of the usual formalities involved under the immigration laws in admitting people to the United States.

Please be sure however that the necessary health checks are made to avoid bringing persons here who are afflicted with any loathsome, dangerous or contagious disease. Please let me know immediately if you encounter any difficulties in arranging for the prompt departure of these refugees.[”] [Roosevelt.]

Sent to Algiers. Repeated to Naples for Kirk.

Stettinius

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 840.48 Refugees/6125: Telegram

[Document 618]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, June 9, 1944—9 a.m.

514. For Steinhardt from War Refugee Board. Kindly refer final paragraph Ankara cable 950 of May 25 constituting Ankara no. 63 to War Refugee Board concerning a proposal submitted to Barlas by Joel Brandt for the release of Jews from enemy territory.

An Aide-Mémoire was delivered to Department by Lord Halifax British Embassy on June 5 informing this Government of this proposal. Submitted with the aide-mémoire was text of a cable received by the British Foreign Office from High Commissioner Jerusalem of which the following is a paraphrase:

[Here follows paraphrase of the cable (not printed) submitted with the aide-mémoire of June 5 printed on page 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613].]

British Ambassador at Ankara has been instructed to discuss this matter in the strictest confidence with you. Board has discussed matter with Hirschmann who is leaving on June 11 for Ankara and will convey Board’s views more fully to you on arrival. This Government is in agreement with British Government that serious suggestions by the Germans to release Jews and other persecuted minorities which are compatible with the successful prosecution of the war should be given consideration and not be rejected outright. While no definitive judgment as to the character of the offer in question has been made it is felt that it is important that the door be kept open pending further exploration of the matter. In a matter of this kind although this Government could obviously not enter into any understanding with the Germans except after consultation both with the Soviet and British Governments, the Board feels strongly that pending further developments and discussions with these two Governments every effort should be made to convince the Germans that this Government is sufficiently concerned with the problem of the rescue and relief of the Jews and other victims that it is willing to consider genuine proposals.

You should accordingly arrange to convey to Joel Brandt at once through Barlas or otherwise the fact that a special representative of the War Refugee Board who is fully acquainted with the views of the Board concerning the proposal is proceeding to Ankara and will arrive within a fortnight in Ankara. Hirschmann will act only under your instructions of course. For your information the sole purpose of conveying the fact of Hirschmann’s arrival to Brandt is to let it be known that this Government has not closed the door.57

British Embassy here is being advised of this action. Kindly report urgently any further information which you may have and all developments. Sent to Ankara repeated to Moscow.58 [War Refugee Board.]

Stettinius

57 In his memorandum of June 9 to the Acting Secretary of State, the Executive Director of the War Refugee Board stated that he had mentioned to President Roosevelt the matter of “alleged German proposal re evacuation of Jews”, and he had expressed considerable interest in the proposal and “agreed with our thought that we should keep the negotiations open if possible”. (840.48 Refugees/6–944)

58  Repeated to Moscow as telegram No. 1460, adding the following paragraph:

“Convey the foregoing information to the Soviet Government calling its attention particularly to the fact that this Government is primarily interested in keeping the question open and that no understanding with the Germans will be entered into except after consultation with the Soviet and British Governments.”

The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/6257: Telegram

[Document 619]

The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, June 10, 1944—1 p.m.
[Received June 11—2:40 a.m.]

1937. For War Refugee Board from Murphy. Your 1669, May 27, 10 p.m. was received while I was in Italy. In the interval I have had opportunity to discuss this problem with the Supreme Allied Commander, Heathcote-Smith,59 Ackermann and other competent American and British officers.

I should like to make it quite clear that there has been no intention on part of AFHQ60 to discourage escape of refugees from Balkan countries. Whatever reservations may have existed in the past on this subject have related only to concern over refugees’ welfare once they are rescued.

It does not seem to me that crux of this matter is the finding of suitable places of removal for these refugees as stated in your telegram under reference, but rather that the primary difficulty lies in their rescue from enemy-occupied territory. Post-rescue treatment, as important as it is, should be far simpler of solution. There seem to be actually three main divisions of the problem: (1) The rescue work; (2) transportation, feeding and clothing; and (3) places of refuge or havens.

In the actual rescue of these unfortunates it seems to me that we leave very much to chance and to individual efforts of refugees themselves. Obviously under prevailing conditions in Yugoslavia only the hale, hearty and courageous are able to make the physical effort and run the great risk incidental to escape. It seems to me that results of greater consequence can only be achieved through military and/or paramilitary instrumentality. No schemes neglecting this basic fact can result in more than an odd refugee here and there being brought out. The present rate of arrivals in Italy from Yugoslavia is considerably lower than figure of 1800 per week mentioned in your telegram under reference. This average figure represents a period when through favorable circumstances considerable batches of refugees were successful in leaving. Present difficult circumstances in Yugoslavia have decreased this figure. According to Allied Control Commission’s recent statistics from May 1 to 31, 3540 Yugoslavs were brought across Adriatic to Italy. I am informed by Heathcote-Smith that there were no Hungarian Jews brought out during that month.

Fortunately, according to our information from that area, enemy authorities are generally so preoccupied with pressure of military events that their attention momentarily is distracted from racial question.

As you will be also aware recent happenings which have affected Marshal Tito make it extremely dubious that, temporarily at least, his cooperation will be very productive.

AFHQ has been active in a study of problem of arranging accommodation and maintenance of refugees ex-Yugoslavia over and above the total of 40,000 agreed for acceptance by Mid-east. Temporarily this quota is reduced to 30,000 pending procurement of additional medical personnel, about which Ackermann is keeping you informed. It is also studying question of preparation on a larger scale to accommodate and maintain refugees from other European countries received in Italy and elsewhere in Mediterranean theater during the next 6 to 9 months. Study has also been given to question of helping such refugees in Italy, removing them to North Africa, or possibly to such places as Sicily, Sardinia or Cyprus. (Your M 61, June 3, midnight61 ). I personally feel that mainland at [of] Italy can accommodate a larger number of refugees than it now is handling. However, serious arguments are advanced against holding ex-Yugoslavia refugees on Italian mainland because: (a) Battle conditions require use of all facilities for military operations; and (b) supply problem concerned in their feeding and care might be dealt with more readily in North Africa.

Preliminary results of AFHQ study reveal that camp equipment in Philippeville and Bone areas (Algeria) is of prime interest. In Philippeville area accommodation sites for approximately 40,000 refugees, including some buildings suitable for hospital, are available. Location of sites would permit organization of camps for 10,000 which I considered most economical size for administration. Certain construction work would be necessary, requiring at least six weeks’ notice before first camp or accommodation of 10,000 could be ready.

In Bone area there is a camp site with capacity of 10,000. This location is near Italian prisoner-of-war Yugoslav military camps.

It is anticipated, in the light of our negotiations with the French regarding the use of the camp site at Fedhala for refugees from Spain, that French authorities may resist our efforts to employ other camp sites in French North Africa for temporary lodging and care of non-French European refugees. It is believed best to treat this subject as a military matter, therefore, and accordingly it is proposed that Chief-of-Staff Allied Force Headquarters will inform French Chief-of-Staff that we propose to use whatever camp sites might be required for this purpose. After this has been done it might be desirable for the British and American diplomatic representatives here to make a joint démarche on the subject. We believe that should the French prove intransigent on this question public opinion could be rallied in support of it.

It also appears that equipment, stores and blankets on a summer basis are available for approximately 36,000 in French North Africa.

On the subject of personnel for administration of camps and hospitals the Combined Chiefs-of-Staff have been asked as a matter of urgency to provide UNRRA administrative and medical personnel ATM as military personnel is not available. AFHQ consider that acceptance of refugees in French North Africa is practicable only if UNRRA or other civilian personnel, particularly medical, is available. Could you supply any information regarding UNRRA plans and possible practical support in this connection?

With respect to feeding and care of these refugees, whether in Italy or elsewhere, question arises at what point UNRRA will be willing and able to assume this responsibility. Undoubtedly you do not consider that either the military authorities engaged in operations or the Allied Control Commission in Italy should perform this function over an indefinite period of time. [Murphy.]

Chapin

59 Clifford Edward Heathcote-Smith, representative in Italy of Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees.

60 Allied Force Headquarters.

61 See telegram 4413, June 3, to London, p. 1055 [Pg. 1055 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], which was repeated as telegram 1762 to Algiers.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 840.48 Refugees/6269b: Telegram

[Document 620]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, June 10, 1944—6 p.m.

1470. [Here follows report received from Bern on situation of Jews in Hungary.]

Members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on June 3 issued the following statement signed by Senators Barkley, Capper, Clark, Connally, Davis, George, Gillette, Green, Guffey, LaFollette, Murray, Reynolds, Tunnell, Vandenberg and Wagner: “The news that Germany has designated the 800,000 Jews in Hungary for death horrifies the people of the United States and all freedom-loving people. It is unthinkable that the people of Hungary should countenance the cold-blooded murder of innocent men, women and children. Hungary was once the haven of tens of thousands who fled the Nazi terror in other lands. Hungarians once shielded their Jewish fellow citizens. Now, however, the Hungarian Government has joined the Nazis in their ruthless determination to do away with the Jews. The people of Hungary can demonstrate that this unholy scheme is a betrayal of the true Hungarian spirit while there is still time. Jews can be hidden by them until such time as they may help them across the border to safety. They can refuse to buy property stolen from the Jews. Every means to obstruct the Nazis and those Hungarians who are in league with the Nazis can be used by them. Until the time when guilt and innocence will weigh heavily in the balance, they can keep watch and remember those who are accessories to murder and those who extend mercy. It is nearly that time.”

The OWI has broadcast the foregoing in the Balkan languages, French, German and Hungarian. Please endeavor to procure Soviet action along the lines suggested in the Department’s 1225 of May 1762 and by the Legation at Bern in view of the urgency of the situation and the considerations raised by the above quoted Bern message. Please communicate the text of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee statement in this connection to appropriate Soviet authorities in an effort to obtain Soviet action. The Department should be advised of any developments since your 1800 of May 2063 was transmitted. The above is a War Refugee Board message.

Stettinius

62 Not printed, but see telegram 440, May 17, 8 p.m., to Ankara, p. 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 602].

63 Not printed.

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/6271: Telegram

[Document 621]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, June 12, 1944—1 p.m.
[Received June 12—12:23 p.m.]

2100. No. 28. For War Refugee Board. In reply to WRB No. 24 (Department’s No. 1149 of June 864 ) and Department’s No. 112 to Helsinki.65

Last of initial groups of 100 Jews in Finland arrived during past week. Preliminary arrangements have been concluded with respect to additional group of approximately 50 Jews in Finland of German, Polish, Lithuanian, Russian and Rumanian origin who have been in Finland for many years, but are now pressing to come to Sweden. List of these persons has been obtained, permission of Finnish authorities for their departure has been granted, and only final details regarding their evacuation to Sweden and subsequent maintenance now remain. This group comprises people of advanced age, mostly unemployables, and, therefore, involves maintenance problems.

Gullion66 has seen this reply and is collaborating in program.

Johnson

64 Not printed; it inquired whether central European refugees actually had arrived in Sweden from Finland (840.48 Refugees/5669).

65 Telegram 112 of June 8, not printed; it inquired concerning issuance of Swedish visas for central European refugees (840.48 Refugees/6020).

66 Edmund A. Gullion, Third Secretary of Legation in Finland.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/6228: Telegram

[Document 622]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)67

Washington, June 12, 1944—2 p.m.

4641. From the War Refugee Board. On June 9 the President announced to the press that the army camp Fort Ontario Oswego New York has been set aside as an emergency refugee shelter to house 1,000 refugees who are being brought to this country immediately from Italy outside the regular immigration procedure. Refugees will remain in the camp for the duration of the war. The text of the cable despatched to Ambassador Robert Murphy in Algiers on June 8 was released to the press by the President and appeared in the radio bulletin of June 9.68 The War Refugee Board is charged by the President with overall responsibility for this project. The army has been directed to take the necessary security precautions to insure that the refugees remain in the camp during the war. The War Relocation Authority is to be responsible for the actual administration of the camp. The Board regards the action taken by the President as a great step forward in the efforts of this Government to rescue refugees in imminent danger of death and to afford all possible relief and assistance to such victims. This step can only be properly appraised against the background of the many vigorous measures taken by the President and the Board in the intensive effort to rescue the victims of Hitler’s extermination policies. The action taken by the President in bringing refugees from Italy to a place of safety in this country should again demonstrate clearly to the world that it is an important policy of this Government to rescue as many refugees as possible. Following this announcement this Government should be in a stronger position to urge Allied and neutral countries to expand their efforts on behalf of refugees. It is the confident hope of this Government that through the joint efforts of Allied and neutral countries many additional lives can be saved. Hopefully, the President’s action will become known in the occupied areas and should have an important psychological effect in convincing the Nazis and their subordinates throughout Europe that this Government is serious in its deep concern for the fate of persecuted peoples. Evidence is already at hand that the efforts of this Government in the refugee field have brought new hope to the persecuted people in the occupied areas and the President’s action should serve as a further manifestation of the effectiveness and security [sincerity] of the humanitarian policy of this Government. With the foregoing in mind kindly bring to the attention of the British Government the action taken by the President emphasizing its significance.

Kindly refer to Embassy’s 4557 of June 7.69 In your discussions with the British Government with respect to the question of finding new havens of refuge in the Mediterranean areas, you should make clear that this Government is determined to find havens of refuge for all who can achieve escape from German occupied areas. The President has suggested in addition to the possibilities mentioned in the Department’s 4413 of June 3 the possible availability of Cyprus.70 The President also suggested in his cable to Murphy that efforts should be intensified to take refugees from Italy to areas close by.

Consistent with the military situation every effort should be made to give publicity in the neutral countries and in enemy territories to the President’s action and its significance. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

67 Substantially the same message sent on June 14 to Ankara, Bern, Lisbon, Madrid, Stockholm (circular telegram); on June 15 to Moscow (telegram 1491); and on June 20 to certain American Republics (circular airgram).

68 For text, see telegram 1823, June 8, to Algiers, p. 1059 [Pg. 1059 includes portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617].

69 Not printed.

70 In response to Ambassador Winant’s representations, however, the head of the Refugee Department in the British Foreign Office stated that, in view of the large number of refugee Greeks who had already fled to Cyprus, it would be absolutely impossible to use Cyprus as a haven for any additional refugees.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/6018: Telegram

[Document 623]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, [June 13, 1944—6 p.m.]

2023. The cable below refers to last paragraph your 3107 May 16,71 forms WRB cable no. 39 and is for McClelland. Since principal motivating force behind the authorization to issue visas was the encouragement such authorization might give to Swiss Government to permit acceleration of entry of additional children, the Board feels that the issuance of visas to children who entered Switzerland before January 1, 1944 would not accomplish purpose for which visas were made available. Backward revision of January 1 date might assure Swiss that some refugee children now in Switzerland would not stay there after the war, but it would not focus the attention of the Swiss on the relationship between the admission of additional children and the availability of American visas.

Parallel action being contemplated by a number of governments in Latin America to that taken by the United States in this matter. In the near future Board hopes to give you details of offers to the Swiss from these governments which may provide for children who entered Switzerland before the date mentioned. Please inform the Board, should it appear with some clarity after consultation with the Minister and appropriate Swiss authorities, if the movement of children into Switzerland would be accelerated by visa issuance to children who entered before January 1.72

Kindly report, in reference Legation’s 2810 of May 373 whether any additional information regarding efforts of Stucki74 at Vichy has been received by Minister Bonna.75

Hull

71 Not printed; Roswell McClelland, the Special Attaché to the Legation in Switzerland on war refugee matters, voiced doubt therein as to whether the number of children eligible for American visas and able to reach Switzerland by July of 1944 would reach 600 and inquired whether it would be possible to make such visas available to all children reported in Switzerland at the time rather than just to those who had entered the country since the beginning of January 1944 (840.48 Refugees/6018).

72 On August 21 American consular officers in Switzerland were authorized to issue visas to refugee children arriving in that country from Hungary (811.111 Refugee Children/206b). Actually, no United States visas were granted under these authorizations to refugee children admitted to Switzerland, since no children were ever presented to receive such visas.

73 Not printed.

74 Walter Stucki, Swiss Minister to the Vichy Government, repeatedly requested the Vichy authorities to permit endangered children to leave France, but to no avail; Swiss overtures to the Germans to permit the evacuation of children likewise failed.

75 Chief of the Foreign Affairs Division of the Swiss Federal Political Department.

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Naples (Brandt) 840.48 Refugees/6290a: Telegram

[Document 624]

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Naples (Brandt)

Washington, June 13, 1944—7 p.m.

191. The following is War Refugee Board message to Tittmann for delivery to the Cardinal Secretary of State: “We know His Holiness has been sorely grieved by the wave of hate which has engulfed Europe and the consequent mass enslavement, persecution, deportation and slaughter of helpless men, women and children. His Holiness, we also know, has labored unceasingly to reinculcate a decent regard for the dignity of man, activated by great compassion for the sufferings of a large portion of mankind. The tireless efforts of His Holiness to alleviate the lot of the persecuted, the hunted and the outcast are also known to us. We are certain His Holiness is aware of the deep feeling of abhorrence aroused in the American people by the mass deportations, persecutions, enslavements and slaughters in the Balkans, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Norway, Poland and elsewhere. We are confident that His Holiness is also aware of the deep concern of the Government of the United States relative to these reversions to usages of ancient barbarism, and of the constant efforts to prevent their recurrence which it has made.

We believe it is appropriate, because of the common concern of the Holy See and the Government and people of the United States with such matters, to call to the Holy See’s attention the apparently authentic reports that the present authorities in Hungary have undertaken to persecute the 800,000 Jews in Hungary and are planning their mass slaughter both in Hungary and after deportation to Poland merely because they are Jews. The authorities and people of Hungary have been warned by the Government of the United States of the material consequences that the perpetration of such inhuman acts of barbarism will entail. It is both timely and fitting, we believe, that the moral values involved and the spiritual consequences that must flow from indulgence in the persecution and mass murder of helpless men, women and children be brought to the attention of the Hungarian authorities and people. We earnestly hope, therefore, that His Holiness may find it appropriate to express himself on this subject to the authorities and people of Hungary, great numbers of whom profess spiritual adherence to the Holy See, personally by radio, through the Nuncio and clergy in Hungary, as well as through a representative of the Holy See who might, for that purpose, be specially despatched to Hungary.”76

Hull

76  Telegram 300, June 28, from Naples, indicated that this message had been delivered on June 24 to the Cardinal Secretary of State (840.48 Refugees/6–2844).

The Apostolic Delegate (Cicognani) advised the War Refugee Board in his letter of July 7 (not printed) that Pope Pius had addressed a note to the Hungarian Regent on June 25 voicing a personal appeal and that in response, the Regent had declared that he would do everything in his power to cause the demands of humanitarian and Christian principles to prevail. For a while following these assurances there were indications that deportation as a policy had, in fact, been abandoned.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/6302: Telegram

[Document 625]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, June 14, 1944—2 p.m.
[Received June 15—7:53 p.m.]

2142. Department’s 1470, June 10, 6 p.m., regarding proposals of War Refugee Board. The Embassy has addressed a letter to Vyshinski dated May 14 communicating the text of the statement of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and renewing its requests that the Soviet Government associate itself with the President’s declaration of March 24. The letter also requests that Soviet radio stations broadcast appropriate messages to Germany and German satellite countries and that the Soviet radio messages be supplemented by leaflets.

Harriman

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/6338a: Circular telegram

[Document 626]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)77

Washington, June 15, 1944.

The President has delivered a special message to the Congress78 reporting on the efforts of this Government to rescue the Jews and other victims of enemy oppression and specifically dealing with the action which he took on June 9 in establishing an Emergency Refugee Shelter in this country.79 The message was included in the radio bulletin of June 12.

You are requested to convey the contents of this message to the Government to which you are accredited and to use all possible means to give this message the widest possible publicity, particularly in Europe.

Sent to London, repeated to Moscow, Lisbon, Madrid, Stockholm, Bern and Ankara.

Hull

77 Repeated on the same date to Algiers, Cairo, and Naples; repeated on June 19 as a circular airgram to Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela; and to Argentina for information only.

78 For the text of message of June 12, see Congressional Record, vol. 90, pt. 4, p. 5748, or Department of State Bulletin, June 17, 1944, p. 553.

79 By mid-July 1944 the Displaced Persons Subcommission of the Allied Control Commission, in cooperation with Mr. Murphy and Board Representative Ackermann, had completed the selection and processing of the applicants; a total of 983 persons subsequently left Italy aboard an Army transport, and reached Oswego, New York, in August.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/6226: Telegram

[Document 627]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 15, 1944—11 p.m.

4753. From War Refugee Board. Agreement of British Government, in reference your 4556 of June 7, to establishment of refugee camp in Tripolitania capable of accommodating between 1,000 and 1,500 persons gratifying to Board. Foreign Office should be apprized of Board’s appreciation.

British suggestions concerning practical measures required for joint establishment of refugee camp in Tripolitania now awaited by Board. We shall be advised in near future, we assume, of the precise location of the proposed camp, also given a detailed description of the necessary procedure and time required to place the camp in condition to receive refugees.

One possibility relative to the question of administrative and medical personnel is, as in the case of Camp Lyautey, to ask UNRRA to administer the camp. We shall be glad to approach representatives of UNRRA in Washington on this matter if it is acceptable to the British.

The question of havens is particularly urgent at present due to the large numbers of refugees arriving daily in southern Italy from Yugoslavia. The Tripolitania refugee project will develop with maximum speed, it is therefore hoped. Quick furnishing of the above requested details should be urged upon the British.80 [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

80 Neither of the proposed camps, Tripolitania and Cyrenaica, was actually established.

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 740.00115 European War 1939/10084: Telegram

[Document 628]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, June 17, 1944—9 a.m.
[Received 8:40 p.m.]

3871. Your 1181, April 7; 1221, April 10; 1846, May 27; and 1921, June 5;81 my 2297, April 13; and your 1400, April 22.82 Translation material part Foreign Office aide-mémoire June 13 follows.

1. Since outbreak war passports of Latin American countries (Honduras, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Guatemala, Ecuador, El Salvador, Venezuela, Haiti, Paraguay) have circulated among Jews residing in German occupied territories and especially Poland. These passports were issued by Consulates of various countries mentioned in Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, New York, Japan and perhaps Poland. When such passports of countries whose interests Switzerland protects in Germany expired and when Swiss Legation Berlin was asked by bearers to renew them instructions were requested of interested Governments. In general latter refused authorize extension those passports which they did not recognize. German authorities were not informed of this fact but Swiss Legation Berlin was henceforth deprived of possibility according protection of these people.

2. A rather large number of these passports are Paraguayan. Paraguay being represented in Germany by Spain it seems that Spanish Embassy Berlin received from Paraguayan Government a list of limited number of persons who alone should benefit from Spain’s protection. Federal Political Department does not know whether Spanish Government subsequently received instructions rectifying this situation in conformity with statement of Paraguayan Government mentioned second paragraph American Legation’s memorandum April 10 (your 1181).

3. A certain number of bearers Latin American passports generally Eastern European origin secured admission to American civilian internment camps which are under control Ministry Foreign Affairs Berlin such camps being administered by analogy in accordance with POW Convention. These persons thus virtually became candidates for an exchange of civilians between Germany and American countries. On other hand those who stayed in Poland remained under regulations governing other eastern Jews. Recently a census was taken of internees at Vittel and Compiegne and a group of Jews were removed from these, camps. This seems to have involved in certain cases bearers of Latin American passports whose validity was questioned.

4. At time contents American Legation’s April 14 notice (your 1221) was delivered German Government, German police had already removed from Vittel and Compiegne Jews who had not been able establish American nationality. From verbal statements made to Swiss Legation Berlin by official of German Foreign Office it appeared latter seemed glad of opportunity while there was still time to support United States recognition of any one claiming ties with a Latin American country as exchangeable. German Foreign Office would be ready consider in future as eligible exchange all Jews bearing Latin American identity documents interned in these camps as well as those elsewhere known to German Foreign Office against Germans in United States who desire return to Germany.

5. It would therefore seem logical to admit that desiring to establish as large a basis as possible for foreseen exchanges German Foreign Office will do all possible to exempt from deportation Jews bearing Latin American passports provided these Jews will be effectively covered in an exchange agreement.

6. According Swiss Legation Berlin there are still said to be in Poland bearers of Latin American passports who until now have neither been interned nor considered for exchange. It seems that best protection they could be given would be for interested Governments officially to recognize all Latin American passports held by Jews in Germany or German occupied territories and so to declare formally through protecting power. Of countries whose interests Switzerland protects in Germany until [only] Venezuela and El Salvador have recently made such declarations through intermediary of Federal Political Department. Honduras, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala and Nicaragua83 have not as yet individually confirmed attitude which should result from steps taken by Department of State with various Latin American countries mentioned second paragraph American Legation’s memorandum April 10.

7. Without implying any guarantee foregoing permits hope that German Foreign Office concurs with views of State Department. Concrete proposal leading to exchange of lists contained in recent communication to German Government and submitted by American Legation to Federal Political Department May 31 (Department’s 1846, May 27) should constitute a basis for practical discussion in this matter.

8. Federal Political Department must, however, submit following to attention Legation: arrangements under consideration will be effective only to extent that number of persons holding passports and other identity documents issued in names of Latin American Republics corresponds to that of German citizens whose repatriation may be considered. It has come, however, to attention of Federal Political Department that recently again documents of this type are said to have been issued by hundreds.

Information relative to success of steps undertaken with Spanish Government referred to in paragraph 2 of above note by American Embassy Madrid would be appreciated.

9. Finally essentially precarious status which one hopes to assure Jewish bearers of Latin American passports could be compromised by any publicity whatsoever given to action now being taken.

Harrison

81 Telegram 1921 not printed.

82 Telegram 1400 not printed.

83 Telegram 2316 of July 6, 1944, midnight, transmitted to Bern a paraphrased portion of a Nicaraguan communication of April 22 to the Swiss Foreign Office requesting the Swiss to ask the German Government for application to all internees in concentration camps who were bearers of Nicaraguan passports of international conventions covering prisoners of war (740.00115 E.W. 39/10084).

The Secretary of State to the President of the Emergency Advisory Committee for Political Defense (Guani) at Montevideo 710 Consultation (3)A/757a: Telegram

[Document 629]

The Secretary of State to the President of the Emergency Advisory Committee for Political Defense (Guani) at Montevideo

Washington, June 17, 1944.

I have the honor to acknowledge Your Excellency’s communication of May 31,84 transmitting to me a copy of the resolution adopted by the Committee on that date.85

I note that this resolution proposes that the American Republics concert and intensify their efforts to rescue from German hands some thousands of oppressed minorities holding non-European documentation; that this be done by joint proposals to exchange German nationals from the American Republics for these persecuted groups; and that such exchanges can be achieved consistently with security considerations surrounding exchanges previously formulated by your Committee in the interests of hemispheric defense.

My Government will be most happy to participate actively in such an inter-American program. In company with some of its sister republics and other governments it has been giving intensive consideration to this problem. The direction and stimulus the Committee’s resolution provides for the development of a joint program of larger proportions is most welcome, and is in line with those great humanitarian concepts for which the American Republics stand.

I extend to you and your distinguished colleagues the assurances of my highest consideration.

Cordell Hull

84 Not printed.

85 Resolution XXIV, Exchange of Persons between the American Republics and Germany; for text, see Emergency Advisory Committee for Political Defense, Second Annual Report, July 15, 1943–October 15, 1944 (Montevideo, 1944), p. 93.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/6334: Telegram

[Document 630]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 87

Moscow, June 19, 1944—midnight.
[Received June 20—2:46 p.m.]

2184. Department’s 1460, June 9, 9 a.m.,88 and Embassy’s 2152, June 15, 3 p.m.,89 regarding proposals of War Refugee Board. The Embassy has received a secret note dated June 18 from Vyshinski stating that the contents of the Embassy’s note of June 15 have been brought to the attention of the Soviet Government and that the Soviet Government has instructed Vyshinski to state that it does not consider it expedient or permissible to carry on any conversations whatsoever with the German Government on the questions touched upon in the Embassy’s note.90

Harriman

87 Repeated to the Ambassador in Turkey, June 20, 8 p.m., as telegram 556.

88 See footnote 58, p. 1062 [Pg. 1062 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619].

89 Not printed.

90 In Department’s telegram 557 of June 21, 7 p.m., to Ankara (repeated to Moscow as No. 1529), the Ambassador was instructed: “Please take no further action concerning this matter pending further instruction.” (840.48 Refugees/6404f)

The Department of State to the British Embassy 840.48 Refugees/6–1944

[Document 631]

The Department of State to the British Embassy

Memorandum

The Aide-Mémoire presented to the Department of State by the British Embassy on June 5, 1944 concerning the proposal for the release of Jews from enemy territory has been examined by the Department and the War Refugee Board with a great deal of interest. Prior to the receipt of the Aide-Mémoire the American Ambassador in Turkey had advised this Government of the proposal in question91 and it was receiving consideration.

The following represent the present views of the United States Government with respect to the matter: 1. Any serious suggestions by the Germans to release Jews and other persecuted minorities which are not inconsistent with the successful prosecution of the war should not be rejected until they have been given the fullest possible consideration.

2. It is not possible, upon the basis of the facts presently known, to make a definite judgment as to the character of the offer in question. However, the United States Government feels that it is important to explore the offer more fully before rejecting it and, in the meantime, to keep the door open. It is quite possible that the proposal in question is merely the forerunner of other proposals, and a flat rejection of the proposal might deny to the two Governments the opportunity of receiving and considering other offers which possibly would be more acceptable.

3. The United States Government also deems it important to keep the proposal in question under discussion as long as possible in the hope that meanwhile the lives of many intended victims will be spared.

4. In order to keep open the proposal which has been made, pending further exploration of the matter, the United States Government deemed it desirable to dispatch to the American Ambassador in Turkey the cable of June 8 [9] 194492 a paraphrase of which has been furnished to the British Government. The British Government has already been advised that the special representative of the War Refugee Board is not authorized to enter into any understanding with the Germans in this matter, but simply to explore, under the direction of the American Ambassador, at Ankara, the circumstances surrounding the proposal, thereby indicating to the Germans that the matter is still open.

5. It is the view of the United States Government that it should be made clear to the Germans by actions as well as words that the British and United States Governments will find temporary havens of refuge for all Jews and similar persons in imminent danger of death whom the Germans are willing to release. This principle does not involve any commitment as to the delivery of refugees which, of course, is subject to the necessities of military operations.

Pending the further exploration of the proposal in question, the British Government may wish to instruct its Ambassador at Ankara to take steps similar to those being taken by the American Ambassador, namely, to keep negotiations open without in any way committing the two Governments to an understanding with the Germans.

The United States Government is prepared to discuss this matter further with representatives of the British Government at their convenience.

Washington , June 19, 1944.

91 See telegram 950, May 25, 4 p.m., p. 1050 [Pg. 1050 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608].

92 Telegram 514, p. 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 618].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/6339: Telegram

[Document 632]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 20, 1944—11 a.m.
[Received June 20—10:52 a.m.]

4889. A letter has now been received from the Refugee Department of the Foreign Office answering the inquiries of the War Refugee Board regarding the eligibility for exchange of Jews now in Germancontrolled territory who hold Palestine certificates, as forwarded in Department’s 4411, June 3, 10 p.m.93

Foreign Office states that the Palestine Government in collaboration with the Jewish Agency for Palestine nominates persons whom it would be willing to exchange for German citizens held in Palestine and the names of such persons are then communicated through the protecting power (Switzerland) to the German Government. In practice, however, the German Government often declares itself unable to trace the persons named and has substituted other members of the Jewish race. Up to the present two exchanges have taken place, one in December 1941 and another in November 1942 involving about 350 German citizens and 180 holders of Palestine certificates and their next of kin. The balance is thus to the advantage of the Germans and to redress it a third exchange is now being negotiated on a basis of 110 Germans and 280 certificate holders.

With regard to the procedure to be followed in placing persons on exchange lists the Foreign Office suggests that the WRB might be told that Jewish organizations or individual inquirers should be told to communicate names of persons in whom they are interested to the Colonial Office in London,94 which would then forward them to the High Commissioner at Jerusalem and the Jewish Agency for decision as to the suitability of their being placed upon the list for exchange in the manner outlined above.

Winant

93 Not printed.

94 In telegram 5396, July 8, 5 p.m., the Ambassador in the United Kingdom indicated that the British Foreign Office stated that Jews holding Palestine certificates should not apply through the Colonial Office but that all applications from the general public for inclusion of people in the Palestine-German exchange should be addressed direct to the Commissioner of Migration and Statistics, Jerusalem (840.48 Refugees/7–844).

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/6399a: Telegram

[Document 633]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)95

Washington, June 24, 1944—5 p.m.

2149. The cable below for Harrison and McClelland is WRB no. 36.

1. Reports reaching the Department and War Refugee Board indicate that a number of unquestioned nationals and persons claiming the nationality of the United States and of other American republics are held in camps situated in Germany and German-controlled territory to which the protecting Powers and the International Red Cross have been granted no access or else such strictly limited forms of access that they have been unable effectively to assist the individuals in question. Such camps are known to exist at Belsen-Bergen near Hanover, Bergau near Dresden, Drancy near Paris and at Theresienstadt. The camp at Tost in Silesia appears to have been placed in this category since late in 1943 and there may possibly be other camps of the same character.

Please ask the Swiss Government as protecting Power of the United States kindly to investigate this situation and request that it make efforts to have its representatives visit the camps referred to for the purpose of reporting upon the claims of individuals held in these camps to citizenship of the United States or in applicable cases of the other American republics represented by Switzerland. Similar efforts should be made in respect of camps and other establishments which may be established in Hungary, Bulgaria, Rumania or any other area under the control of the authorities allied with or dominated by Germany.

The request to visit such camps should be based upon Article 86 of the Geneva Prisoners of War Convention as applied to interned civilians by mutual agreement of the belligerents. It should be pointed out that the extraordinary restrictions placed by the German authorities upon communications with these camps have deprived the persons detained there and the protecting Power of normal means of dealing with their claims to the protection of foreign states—hence that visits to these camps are essential to protect the vital interests of such detainees. Reference is made in this connection to Franz Kahn (Department’s A–199, April 2496 and previous) the verification of whose claim to American citizenship has been unjustifiably impeded by the extraordinary regulations attendant upon correspondence.

2. The Department is informed that the International Red Cross Committee has exerted itself to visit the camps in question but has so far been unsuccessful. Please express to the Committee the appreciation of the Department and of the War Refugee Board for these efforts and their hope that the efforts will not be abated.

Hull

95 Transmitted in circular airgram of June 26, 1 p.m., to the other American Republics.

96 Not found in Department files.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) 840.48 Refugees/6257: Telegram

[Document 634]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, June 26, 1944—7 p.m.

2011. For Murphy from War Refugee Board. Board will appreciate clarification of your 1937 June 10 and desires at same time to make its views in the matter clear. Board is aware that in order to increase the flow of refugees substantially from Yugoslavia it is important to find havens and to provide additional transportation facilities, clothing and food.

Consistent with military necessity and to the extent possible the Board is most anxious that additional shipping facilities be made available for evacuation and food and clothing supplied both for the relief of refugees on the Yugoslav mainland and for their care in Italy. Your recommendations with respect to what can be done in this connection will be welcomed.

In Board’s cable 1669 of May 27 the importance of finding additional havens to which refugees could be removed from Italy was stressed. Board believed that the flow of refugees from Yugoslavia should not be discouraged because of conditions in southern Italy and that refugees should be brought out to the limit of available transportation facilities.

It is the Board’s understanding that your memorandum of April 29 made the following points and was followed by the issuance of a directive by the military authorities on May 5.

“(1) We should not only not encourage the Partisans to send further refugees out of Yugoslavia but should take positive action in fact to discourage them in this effort. (2) Instructions to discourage the evacuation of refugees from that area should be issued to all Allied personnel in contact with the Partisans. (3) Instructions should be issued to Allied personnel operating landing craft used to carry provisions across the Adriatic not to provide transportation, except in such cases where it is impossible to refuse to do so, to Yugoslav refugees, when returning to Italy.”

The last information available to the Board is that the directive issued was still in effect as late as June 8. The Board is also informed that the flow of refugees decreased substantially during the month of May. Information from the War Department is to the effect that refugees had been arriving in southern Italy during the eight week period from the middle of March to the middle of May at the average weekly rate of 1,850. The flow slowed down to less than 500 persons weekly late in May. Undoubtedly the situation in Yugoslavia had some effect on this flow but the Board is concerned that the restrictive order issued by the Army may also have contributed to this reduction in movement.

The Board will appreciate being promptly advised whether any directives are still outstanding aimed at discouraging the flow of refugees from Yugoslavia.

Kindly refer to Board’s 1669 of May 27 and 1879 of June 1497 with respect to the question of finding havens of refuge in the Mediterranean area. If accommodations for refugees can be increased in Italy, as suggested in your cable, our efforts in this respect will be aided.

The Board has noted your suggestions with respect to moving large numbers of refugees for temporary stay in camps in French North Africa. The Board fully concurs in the desirability of establishing additional refugee havens there. However it is recalled that this Government has been endeavoring to move a very small number of refugees from Spain to Camp Lyautey for more than a year.

Conferences have been initiated with UNRRA with a view to providing medical and administrative personnel for refugee camps and hospitals. Likewise the whole question of when UNRRA will be prepared to assume the responsibility of feeding and caring for refugees in Italy or elsewhere has been considered. You will be kept advised.

Consistent with military necessity the Board is most anxious that every effort be made to encourage the escape of Balkan refugees. The situation in Yugoslavia and the physical condition of the refugees upon arrival, the majority of whom are reported to be women and children, high lights the importance of this movement on humanitarian considerations. Consideration should also be given to the provision of relief for those refugees in Yugoslavia who can not be evacuated to Italy immediately. The stockpiling of food and clothing in Bari for use in Yugoslavia at the appropriate time should be looked into. If Marshal Tito is at all able to assist in the evacuation and relief of refugees in the Balkan countries his assistance should of course be enlisted. The Board will appreciate any recommendations that you and Ackermann can forward as soon as possible.

This is War Refugee Board cable to Algiers no. 29. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

97 Latter not printed.

The United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Murphy) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/6–2744

[Document 635]

The United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

No. 568 [Algiers,] June 27, 1944.
[Received July 12.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit as of possible interest to the Department a copy of a letter addressed to General Bethouart, Chief of Staff of National Defense of the French Committee of National Liberation, by Lt. General Gammell, Chief of Staff, AFHQ, with regard to the accommodation and maintenance of refugees in French North Africa.

Respectfully yours,

Robert D. Murphy

[Enclosure]

The Chief of Staff of Allied Force Headquarters (Gammell) to the French Chief of Staff of National Defense (Bethouart)

[Algiers,] June 12, 1944.

My Dear General Bethouart: I wish to draw to your attention a problem which, in the opinion of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater, is becoming one of great importance in the Mediterranean Theater.

Consequent upon operations now in progress, particularly in the Balkans, large numbers of innocent civilians are being rendered homeless by German acts of terror and oppression. Also, due to the normal dislocation of war, numbers of refugees, principally women and children, are necessarily endeavoring to escape from the zones of operations.

Our forces in the Adriatic have for some time been assisting in the evacuation of refugees from Yugoslavia. The Allied authorities in Italy have made provision to receive and process these refugees and to maintain a substantial number of them. A large number have been evacuated to the middle East where Allied authorities are maintaining camps to care for these unfortunates until they can be repatriated. The facilities in both these localities are now or will shortly be extended to their capacity.

The Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater, is, therefore, preparing to use certain of the installations and facilities which are no longer required for military purposes in North Africa to house and care for these refugees until repatriation. The immediate proposal is to complete arrangements for the accommodation of approximately 10,000 Yugoslav refugees in a camp situated near Philippeville. The camp will be operated by the Allied military authorities until United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration or other qualified agencies assume the responsibility. The supply, maintenance and administration of the camp will, of course, be the responsibility of those authorities or agencies and no expenditure or other commitment in respect to the camp or its administration will fall upon the French authorities, either now or at any later period.

I am asked by the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater, to inform you of these proposed arrangements and to express his confident hope that, in view of the urgency and the humanitarian aspect of the problem, they will meet with the approval of the French military authorities.

Sincerely yours,

J. A. H. Gammell

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/6–2844: Telegram

[Document 636]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 28, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received June 28—3:28 p.m.]

5104. A memorandum has just been received from the Foreign Office with reference to the desire of the Department and the War Refugee Board to remove refugees escaped from enemy territory to southern Italy, as set forth in Department’s 4413, June 3, midnight. The memorandum goes into detail with regard to points mentioned by Randall, head of the Refugee Department of the FO, as reported in Embassy’s 4557, June 7, 5 p.m.98 Substance of memorandum which follows: 1. The British Government shares anxiety of the President and the State Department for the speedy removal from southern Italy of refugees who have escaped from enemy territory. FO states that it was aware of the large number of refugees arriving in Italy from Yugoslavia and that it agrees emphatically with the view that escape of refugees to Italy from the Balkans should not be discouraged in any way. Marshal Tito has promised cooperation and the British authorities have taken such measures as are possible to alleviate the plight of Jews in Hungary.

2. The British military authorities in the Middle East were willing and ready to accommodate 40,000 Yugoslav refugees in Egypt but as UNRRA has not yet been able to obtain the necessary medical staff the military authorities doubt that they can accommodate more than the 25,000 who have already arrived in Egypt.

FO has therefore requested the European headquarters of UNRRA to expedite provision of medical staff.

3. The British authorities are making every effort to carry out plans already completed to move as many Jewish refugees as possible from the Balkans. A British ship can be ready at 30 days notice to proceed to Constanza for the evacuation of Jewish refugees as soon as the Rumanian Red Cross, International Red Cross and Swiss authorities in Rumania in conjunction with the Jewish agency for Palestine can make the necessary arrangements. It appears, however, that the German Government will in all probability not grant the necessary safe conduct in this case any more than in that of the SS Tari for which the American Embassy to [in?] Turkey had negotiated. The matter will, however, be actively pursued.

4. The British Government have agreed to the establishment of a refugee camp in Tripolitania and are examining the proposal that Sicily should become a destination for refugees.

5. FO agrees that camp Lyautey at Fedhala should not be opened to refugees from Italy as it must be kept available for those coming from Spain.

6. With respect to the proposal that HM Government should grant Palestine immigration certificates to Jewish refugees in liberated Italy, the British, although they do not doubt the desirability of moving them for operational reasons, nevertheless feel that as they are in an area where they are safe from enemy persecution, preference for rescue under the limited quotas allotted for immigration into Palestine must be given to those Jews who are still in danger of their lives and can be got to safety out of enemy controlled territory.

FO concludes by saying that this means that while considerable numbers of Yugoslav refugees from Italy have been received in Palestine already, the alternative places of refuge should be used to the greatest extent in order that Palestine may be kept available for Jews escaping in increasing numbers through Turkey from places of danger.

Winant

98 Not printed.

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/7–344: Telegram

[Document 637]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, July 3, 1944—noon.
[Received July 4—4:40 a.m.]

4223. Notice number 1: Swiss Legation Berlin has no knowledge of camps Bostortost Silesia and Bergau near Dresden but will nevertheless immediately undertake all necessary measures with a view to establishing both nature and object thereof. Reports concerning said camps will be transmitted earliest possible.

For some time in connection with foregoing there have been held internment camp of Bergen-Belsen near Celle, Hanover whose inclusion civilian exchanges is contemplated but not possessing American citizenship or citizenship other Swiss represented countries.

“Alien relatives” that is, those close relatives of American nationals not possessing American citizenship are not being admitted internment camps reserved for nationals of American nations. While awaiting exchange they are detained in above-mentioned temporary camp in which are held, for example, persons approved for Palestine Civilian Exchange but not possessing British nationality. (Note: Please see penultimate paragraph Department’s 1846, May 27, indicating more lenient attitude in this regard.)

It is appropriate to indicate with respect to remainder of Department’s 192199 that to the knowledge of Swiss Legation no authentic national of American nations has been deported or otherwise deprived of rights resulting from his American nationality except for Venezuelan family Malkowsky and Chilean families Gorlin and Frumkin on whose behalf Swiss Legation made repeated representations as a result of their removal during April from Vittel.

German authorities continue to treat persons in question as nationals of American nations even in cases where respective governments on basis of information furnished by Swiss authorities have not definitely ruled regarding their status.

Polish and other Eastern European Jews, it is quite possible, thought it advisable to obtain a false Latin American passport. German authorities have subjected them to general treatment accorded to eastern Jews having established that these documents not authentic. As persons concerned have not had possibility approach Swiss authorities cases this character not generally known to the Legation.

Formal assurances, limited to persons who were on May 11 in civilian internment camps reserved for nationals of American continent, were only given on that date by German Foreign Office to Swiss Legation.

No protection could be assured persons possessing more or less doubtful passports in eastern territories except by furnishing appropriate lists to German Government and communicating declarations similar to those which Honduras and Venezuela recently made in stating even more the declaration regarding all identity papers of Latin American countries of every kind found to be in possession of persons concerned.

Notice 2.

A. None of persons removed from Vittel had been able furnish proof Latin American nationality according statement made May 3 by chief competent section German Foreign Office to representative Swiss Legation Berlin in reply to latter’s request. For most part these persons are Jews from east who previously claim to be Paraguayan nationals or nationals other American countries. They were assimilated on the basis of this declaration with nationals of countries at war with Germany and under protection Swiss Legation. They were consequently interned in camps reserved for nationals of Latin American Republics, United States and Great Britain.

These persons it developed in due course possessed no proof of nationality which they claimed. Consequently they were removed from camp where they had no right to be. It was further stated by competent German Foreign Office official that he could not accede to Legation’s request for list of persons removed from Vittel because question merely involved internal German police measures and persons concerned had no right to Swiss protection. (Legation’s telegram No. 3171, May 181 summarized this representation.) Deportation measures taken at Vittel and Compiegne have affected no United States national according to the statements secret Counselor Sethe. The Swiss Foreign Office transmitted during April to Swiss Legation Berlin the list bearing 238 names deported from Vittel as result of measures taken by Germans which received from American Legation.

None of these persons appeared in Swiss Legation’s register of United States nationals—it was established following examination. Swiss Consulate at Paris somewhat later forwarded list of 163 persons deported from internment camps to the Swiss Legation. The authorities of occupation furnished this list and none of these persons claimed American nationality.

United States false passports are practically nonexistent. German authorities have shown greatest reserve regarding deportation American nationals as this fact is shown [known?] to them. It is against persons claiming Latin American citizenship that “cleaning” of internment camps is directed. It rests on fact that Jewish population in Poland and other Eastern European regions is in possession very large number false Costa Rican, Guatemalan, Haitian, Honduran, Ecuadoran, Paraguayan and Nicaraguan passports.

B. It was disclosed by an examination of two lists of persons removed from Compiegne and Vittel camps forwarded to Swiss Legation that large number internees concerned alleged to be Paraguayan citizens. Swiss Legation has not been able to determine whether persons concerned have claim to Paraguayan citizenship because Spanish Embassy Berlin represents Paraguayan interests in Germany and occupied countries.

Among persons appearing on lists in question only following bearing numbers corresponding to those of list from Swiss Consulate Paris (Note: Transmitted to Department with Legation’s airmail 8466, June 122 pursuant Department’s telegram No. 2001, June 102 ) were known to Swiss Legation:

143 Saul Malcowsky, Venezuelan; 144 Sara Malcowsky, Venezuelan; 145 Maurice Malcowsky, Venezuelan; 1 Eugenia Gorlin, Chilean; 2 Anna Frumkin, Chilean; 3 Hermine Frumkin, Chilean.

Chilean Legation Bern stated in note November 4, 1943 that as passports of Gorlin and Frumkin families were issued by Chilean Consulate Kobe, they were to be considered invalid as all documents issued by this Consular representation. It was declared by Chinese [Chilean] Legation in note of March 30, 1944 that deportation above named persons had come to its attention and Swiss Legation Berlin was requested by it to undertake on their behalf all necessary representations.

German Foreign Office in notes dated May 5 and June 20 considered cases of Gorlin and Frumkin families and strong representations for return to an internment camp of these Chileans were made. On behalf of Malcowsky family similar representations made.

C. Authorization of German authorities have been sought by Swiss Legation to have representative Swiss Consulate Paris visit Vittel Camp with a view to informing American internees of communications from their Government (note: please see penultimate paragraph Department’s 1222, April 103 and its 1269, April 13). Camp will be visited near future as authorization given in principle.

D. Every opportunity taken by German authorities to reiterate that there has been deported no internee able furnish proof Latin America citizenship or American nationality. Relatively large number of persons, German authorities observed, claimed citizenship of South America Republic supporting this with documents evidently false or being able [unable] furnish slightest proof. These persons never left Polish territory and Spanish is not spoken by them. Right is claimed by German Foreign Police to assimilate bearers of false documents with rest of population of Poland or other occupied countries and not to recognize subject false document.

Swiss Legation Berlin following representation made by American Legation to chief of Federal Political Department requested and on May 11 obtained from German Foreign Office formal assurance that henceforth there would not be subjected to deportation action even bearers of doubtful Latin American identity papers on the condition that persons concerned already in internment camps for citizens American continent. On May 15 Swiss Minister at Berlin forwarded to chief of Federal Political Department a circumstantial report on subject. No new case of deportation bearers South American identity papers reported since this representation. It has not been possible to provide any assurance for bearers of doubtful South American identity papers who were not already on May 11 in internment camps.

E. With regard to request that Swiss authorities protest to German authorities against their action in passing on “merits of individual claims of persons holding United States or Latin American documentation” it must be pointed out in admitting that above quoted term envisages priority claims for civilian exchange that Swiss Legation has often indicated to German authorities that North and South American citizens included in civilian exchange groups were often persons other than those proposed and recommended by Swiss Legation and in whom greatest interest shown by American Government.

German Foreign Office replied to these strong oral representations that German Government also had to accept persons in whom it had only secondary interest and had no voice in composition German civilian repatriation groups in America. German authorities unable in circumstances to admit that strong American representatives [representations] were well founded.

According to view Swiss Legation owing to the fact that exchange groups constituted in Germany by domestic authorities particularly police no substantial consideration being given to Swiss Legation’s suggestions satisfactory composition exchange groups can be only obtained through exchange by interested governments prior to departure of groups of formal lists. Except in cases of Malcowsky, Gorlin and Frumkin families no person able show valid claim to citizenship of American country has been deprived of rights pertaining thereto during 1944 to knowledge Swiss Legation. Additionally several hundred citizens of United States and Latin America protected by Swiss Legation whose papers forwarded through intermediary competent authorities (“pending case”) not yet recognized countries concerned. Nevertheless these persons thus far permitted remain in internment camps foreseen for citizens of American Continent. German authorities in certain number cases this category already awaiting decision for one or two years formerly [formally] inquired recently whether one or another citizens of American countries is effectively recognized by his government as such and whether he is accepted for civilian exchange.

F. All Latin American countries represented in Germany by Swiss Legation Berlin except that Sweden represents Mexico, and Spain represents Bolivia and Paraguay. The matter in question (note: recognition of individual claims to nationality of Latin American countries pending review of case by government concerned) has been taken up with Swiss Legation by no Latin American country which Switzerland represents. Only Venezuela and Honduras during first half of June signified to German authorities that all bearers of identity papers issued by Venezuelan [and] Honduran Governments are to be treated in accordance with international regulations applicable civilian internees.

Harrison

99 Telegram 1921, June 5, 5 p.m., not printed.

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

3 Not found in Department files.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/6225: Telegram

[Document 638]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 4, 1944—9 p.m.

5269. With reference to paragraph 1 your 4560 of June 7 the telegram quoted below has been forwarded to the American Ambassadors at Ankara, Madrid and Lisbon.

“It has been agreed by the Governments of the United States and Great Britain that in furtherance of their joint policy to use every means available consistent with the successful prosecution of the war to bring about the rescue of the victims of German persecution in imminent danger of death a joint approach in the sense of the following should be made to the blank Government: ‘The assistance already rendered by the blank Government to refugees who have fled from German controlled Europe as a result of persecution on account of race, religion or political belief is appreciated by the Governments of the United States and Great Britain. It is believed however by the Governments of United States and Great Britain that if the persecuted minority groups still remaining in German controlled Europe have further assurances that, if they are able to make their way to neutral territory, they will be received and their minimum material needs provided for until such time as they can be moved onward to other havens of refuge or repatriated to their homelands, the rescue might be effected of still greater numbers from inhuman oppression. It is feared that the death toll among persecuted minority groups win continue to increase if such assurances are not forthcoming.

In furtherance of their joint policy to use every available means consistent with the successful prosecution of the war to bring about the rescue of victims of German oppression in imminent danger of death the Governments of the United States and Great Britain appeal to the humanitarianism of the blank Government in behalf of the persecuted persons in the hope that the blank Government will find it possible to adopt as regards the reception and temporary care of refugees from German controlled Europe an even more liberal policy than heretofore.

For their part it is the desire of the Governments of the United States and Great Britain to assure the blank Government that they will be glad to arrange for the provision of such additional food and other supplies as may be required to meet the added burden on blank resources resulting from the temporary care of refugees. If needed, funds may also be supplied as well. It is the further desire of the Governments of the United States and Great Britain to assure the blank Government that they will make every effort to arrange for the onward movement of such refugees as may be received by the blank Government to other havens of refuge.’

Your British colleague is expected shortly to receive instructions substantially in the above sense and you are requested to concert with him. Joint approaches of a similar character are being made to the Governments of Sweden, Switzerland, Spain, Portugal and Turkey.”

The hope is entertained that the British Government will immediately instruct its Ambassadors in a similar sense at these three capitals.

As proposed in Department’s 3953 of May 18, telegrams have also gone forward to Bern and Stockholm. The British Ministers there, it is understood, have already received similar instructions.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson) 840.48 Refugees/7–644: Telegram

[Document 639]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson)

Washington, July 6, 1944—9 p.m.

1349. The following War Refugee Board cable no. 42 is for Johnson and Olsen.

For your information and guidance as well as Wallenberg’s4 in your discretion there is herewith repeated to you the substance of a message sent by the Board to Amlegation Bern: “In view of consistent neutral press reports carrying Berlin and Budapest datelines and other information to the effect that the 800,000 Jews in Hungary are being segregated in ghettos and concentrated in camps, there seems little doubt that the pattern heretofore set in Poland and repeated elsewhere is again being followed. In an effort to develop means to forestall the effectuation of the ultimate ends of such program, that is mass-executions either before or after deportation, consideration has been given to the advisability of requesting the Swiss Government to address an inquiry on behalf of this Government to appropriate authorities in Hungary asking them to state their intentions with respect to the future treatment to be accorded to Jews in ghettos and concentration camps and specifically whether they contemplate forced deportations to Poland or elsewhere or the imposition of discriminatory reductions in food rations, or the adoption other measures which like those mentioned will be tantamount to mass-execution. At the same time, the Swiss Government would be requested to remind the same authorities of the grave view that this Government takes with respect to the persecution of Jews and other minorities and of the determination of this Government to see to it that all those who share the responsibility for such acts are dealt with in accordance with the President’s statement of March 24, 1944.5 Also at the same time the fact of this Government’s request of the Swiss Government and the nature thereof would be given the widest possible publicity in Hungary through broadcasts in the Hungarian language and such other means as may be practicable.”

The reply received is in substance as follows: “A note requesting transmission of inquiry to Hungarian Government, as suggested, has been delivered to the Swiss Foreign Office. This note requests an indication of the intentions of Hungary as regards further treatment of Jews with special reference to forced deportations, discriminatory reductions of food rations or adoption of similar measures that amount to mass execution and reminding them of the grave view which the United States takes regarding persecution of Jews and other minorities and the United States’ determination to punish those sharing the responsibility in accordance with the March 24 warning by the President.

The Foreign Office has accepted the note as presented and will transmit verbatim as annex to the note to the authorities of Hungary. It has been agreed by the Swiss to report the date of the delivery of the note.6

It is recommended that the foregoing be given no publicity pending receipt of information of delivery of the note by the Swiss to the Hungarians and that no mention of Swiss intermediary be made should publicity then appear to be advisable.”

Board expects verbatim text of note and date of Swiss action momentarily. You will be kept advised so that Wallenberg may be in a position at your discretion to note and report any reaction and take advantage thereof if circumstances favorable.

Hull

4 Raoul Wallenberg, Swedish Minister in Hungary.

5  Post, p. 1230 [Pg. 1230 includes portions of Doc. 770 and Doc. 771].

6 Telegram 4260, July 5, 1944, from Bern, reported that the Swiss Minister at Budapest delivered the note to the Hungarian Foreign Office on June 27 (840.48/Refugees/7–544).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 840.48 Refugees/6334: Telegram

[Document 640]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, July 7, 1944—2 p.m.

1641. Kindly refer to Department’s 1460 of June 97 and 1529 of June 218 and to your 2184 of June 19. Additional facts are now available as follows: (1) After having previously proceeded to Jerusalem for discussions there, Joel Brandt is now being held in custody at Cairo. Discussions have taken place between the American and British authorities, Brandt and Shertok of the Jewish Agency for Palestine in Cairo.

(2) Brandt’s companion Gyorgy9 who arrived with him from Vienna on May 9 was taken into custody by Turkish officials on May 25, released a few hours thereafter, and later proceeded to Cairo where he is held in custody.

(3) With permission of the British Government Shertok of the Jewish Agency is now in London pursuing conversations with officials there.

(4) The Jewish Agency has received word that the Gestapo are very angry over the failure of Brandt and Gyorgy to return to Budapest. It is alleged that the Gestapo have indicated that Brandt’s journey was but a preliminary to later discussions to be carried on in Lisbon by a Gestapo agent named Schroeder. It has been proposed by the British Government that Brandt and Gyorgy be permitted to return to Budapest with the report that Allied circles appear to be concerned with the fate of Jews and to be ready to consider any practical plan for their relief and that Brandt assumes that the Allies will convey their views through the protecting power and that the German Government might expect to hear something through this source shortly.

(5) It now appears that Brandt has indicated in several informal conversations that the German Government would be willing to agree that the 10,000 trucks would not be used on the Western Front.10 This information was not included in our earlier reports on this matter nor in Brandt’s original statement.

(6) Ambassador Steinhardt is being requested to forward promptly to you Ankara despatches to the Department 676 of June 5 and 679 of June 811 which will supply additional background information.

(7) Your British colleague in Moscow has cabled the British Foreign Office suggesting that the information on the trucks will increase the possibility of a completely negative response from the Soviet Government. It is the feeling here nevertheless that this information should be presented directly at this time so that the Soviet Government may be fully informed. Your British colleague also believes that Brandt and Gyorgy should not be permitted to return to Budapest until the Soviet Government has had an opportunity to express its attitude on this point.

(8) Two additional proposals for the release of Jews from enemy territory have been received through Stockholm and Bern, the details of which will be sent to you promptly for transmission to the Soviet Government.

You are requested to discuss this matter with the Soviet Government in such manner as you deem appropriate bringing all the facts to the attention of the Soviet Government in your discretion and in concurrence with the British Ambassador in Moscow.

Emphasis should be given in the presentation to the Soviet Government to the fact that neither the British Government nor this Government has been deceived as to the character of this alleged offer of the German Government and that the two Governments are convinced that the offer is part and parcel of the psychological warfare effort of the German Government. The alleged German willingness to guarantee that the trucks would not be used on the Western Front bears this out.

The reluctance of the British and American Governments to shut the door completely on any offer will be readily understood by you. It is expected that other offers of this nature will be received and eventually one may be received which can be considered seriously. By appearing to explore such proposals it is the view here that lives may be saved while the discussions are going on and at the same time the way may be left open for further offers which are anticipated and which may be made in good faith.

The Soviet Government should be informed that the British and American Governments are fully aware of the undesirability of such direct contacts with representatives of the German Government and that they are searching for a method of rescue which may be worked out through the intermediary of the Swiss. The Soviet Government will of course be currently informed of developments and details of any practical proposal will be communicated immediately. No action will be taken without prior agreement with the Soviet and British Governments.

You should consult fully with your British colleague with respect to this matter and make it clear in discussions with the Soviet Government, assuming the British Ambassador is in agreement, that the British Government concurs in the views expressed by you. The British authorities are in agreement here.12

Sent to Moscow. Repeated to Ankara, Cairo and London.

Hull

7 See footnote 58, p. 1062 [Pg. 1062 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619].

8 Not printed.

9 André Antol Gyorgy, Hungarian Jew.

10 For summary of German proposal concerning exchange of 10,000 trucks and other items for cessation in extermination and deportation of Jews in all German-occupied areas, see telegram 950, May 25, 4 p.m., from Ankara, p. 1050 [Pg. 1050 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608].

11 Neither printed.

12 The offer was rejected, and the Soviet Government fully advised.

The Chargé in Spain (Butterworth) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/7–1044: Telegram

[Document 641]

The Chargé in Spain (Butterworth) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, July 9, 1944—11 p.m.
[Received July 10—9:42 p.m.]

2389. Department’s 1889, July 4, 3 p.m.13 Embassy has been informed by Spanish Ministry of Foreign Affairs that subsequent to receipt of our note 2410 of May 11 Ministry instructed Spanish Embassies in Berlin and Vichy to endeavor to obtain return to Vittel persons reported to have been transferred to unknown German prison but no positive results have as yet been reported.

High official of Ministry has also stated that all Spanish diplomatic and consular representatives in areas under German occupation or control including Hungary have been instructed to render all possible assistance to Jews and other persons in imminent danger of death or persecution regardless of nationality and that their efforts have been responsible for the saving of an unknown number of lives.

Spanish Government has already been instrumental in saving from imminent deportation to Poland approximately 500 Sephardic Jews who have been allowed to leave German concentration camps and proceed to Spain on strength of documentation provided by Spanish diplomatic and consular representatives. Majority of these persons have been transferred to Fedhala center and Spanish Government is now negotiating with German Government for similar release of additional 160 Sephardites together with group consisting of approximately 50 Jewish Rabbis and their families. It is also cooperating with representatives of Jewish organizations in Tangier in effort to bring 500 Jewish children out of Hungary to temporary haven in Spanish Morocco.

Embassy has throughout endeavored to keep Spanish Government fully informed as to attitude of United States Government in these matters as set forth in numerous telegrams from Department and War Refugee Board and can report that Spanish Government itself appears to be seriously concerned over inhuman persecution of innocent persons and disposed to cooperate in their rescue.

Repeated to Lisbon by courier.

Butterworth

13 See message quoted in telegram 5269, July 4, 9 p.m., to London, p. 1087 [Pg. 1087 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638].

The Consul at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/7–1244: Telegram

[Document 642]

The Consul at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, July 12, 1944—1 p.m.
[Received July 13—10:02 a.m.]

2366. From Murphy for WRB. Your 2011, June 26, 7 p.m. My 1937, June 10 was prepared and sent after full consultation with Allied military authorities at AFHQ who are in final analysis best qualified judges as to how much can be done in connection with general subject of refugees consistent with military duties.

From second paragraph of your telegram under reference, it seems evident that the WRB is not aware that Allies do not have a single port on Yugoslav mainland and that practically everything that is going into that country now is by air and priorities are fixed in accordance with close coordination between Marshal Tito and military officials at AFHQ.

As reported in Algiers’ 2217, June 30, midnight,14 the military directive referred to in fifth paragraph of your message was removed by Supreme Allied Commander on June 14. The memorandum referred to in your telegram was based on staff study prepared at AFHQ. The substance of the staff study was that these instructions had been issued at a time when the shortage of medical personnel in mid-East had become acute and facilities for receiving additional Partisan refugees both in Italy and mid-East were on point of exhaustion. The communication as of that date shows that 21,489 out of a total of 25,000 persons agreed for acceptance had already been evacuated to mid-East. 8638 persons were being held in Italy where new arrivals were averaging 1722 per week. An added consideration at that time was the presence at AFHQ of a mission of Marshal Tito’s which on the one hand was endeavoring to obtain a commitment for the acceptance of additional Partisan refugees at a rate of from 4 to 5 thousand a month while on the other there were complaints that facilities and arrangements provided in mid-East were inadequate and that the refugees already in Egypt should best be moved to a suitable climate. In these circumstances further complicated by fact that AFHQ was quite understandably according first priority with respect to both transportation and accommodation facilities to Partisan wounded, it seemed advisable temporarily to discourage an increase in rate of evacuation of refugees from Yugoslavia pending a solution of the problem. At same time immediate negotiations were initiated with mid-East with a view to raising quota for acceptance in that area and a general investigation was instituted of possibility of developing reception facilities in other areas elsewhere in North Africa. The latter part of May mid-East agreed to raise its quota to 40,000 on condition that UNRRA would provide the necessary medical personnel MERRA–UNRRA had previously applied for.

With regard to statement in paragraph 5 of your message under reference, that flow of refugees decreased substantially during month of May, I am authorized by AFHQ to inform the WRB for its secret information that an extensive German campaign against Partisan forces of Marshal Tito was largely responsible for this delay and even Partisan officials have admitted this fact. There may have been some slowdown due to this order but there is little doubt in minds of highest military officials that military events were the large factor in connection with drop in evacuation of refugees for month of May 1944. There are now no restrictive measures outstanding aimed at discouraging flow of refugees from Yugoslavia.

With regard to your inquiry as to finding havens of refuge in Mediterranean area, everything possible is being done for increased accommodations and facilities in Italy. Mr. Ackermann who has been in Italy for almost a month has been canvassing the situation.

As I reported in an earlier message today, French authorities have given their agreement in principle to establishment of a refugee camp at Philippeville (see my 1937, June 10).

I should like to invite attention of WRB to fact that the various officials of AFHQ have always been most sympathetic and understanding in connection with refugee question and are doing everything possible under very difficult conditions to alleviate refugee situation in Balkans and Italy. They are disappointed, however, that UNRRA has not yet been able to operate on a substantial scale. A further complication from military point of view is fact that considerable pressure has been brought to bear on the SAC in connection with evacuation of large numbers of military wounded from Yugoslavia. [Murphy.]

Lawton

14 Not printed.

The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/7–1244: Telegram

[Document 643]

The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, July 12, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received 11:30 p.m.]

2371. For WRB from Murphy. Reference my 1937, June 10, 9 [1] p.m. In connection with proposed establishment of refugee camp near Philippeville reply has now been received from French authorities accepting in principle Allied proposal for establishment of such camp and suggesting the setting up of a commission composed of representatives of the Inter-Allied General Staff, of representatives of the FCNLP15 and eventually a representative of Yugoslav Government, which would establish without delay rules and regulations for administration of the refugees for duration of their stay in North Africa and establish conditions under which Allied authorities will coordinate with French authorities all arrangements necessary in connection with lodging, feeding and maintenance of such refugees. [Murphy.]

Chapin

15 The French Committee of National Liberation, which assumed the title of the Provisional Government of the French Republic on June 3, 1944.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/7–1344: Telegram

[Document 644]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, July 13, 1944—midnight.

2407. The following for Harrison and McClelland refers to Bern’s 3871 of June 17 and is 64 from War Refugee Board.

Board requests expression to Foreign Office of its sincere appreciation for latter’s cooperation. Switzerland’s deep concern for the fate of victims of Nazi persecution recognized by Board which is confident that some degree of success must result from continued efforts of Swiss and American Governments.

1. The United States practice, as you know, relative to renewal of passports held by persons in enemy territory, is not to authorize extension thereof beyond their validity period of two years. Swiss identity certificates nevertheless being issued to holders of such passports by Swiss authorities. Adoption of similar practice is suggested, if necessary, in the case of passports issued in the names of other American republics, whose interests in enemy territory are protected by Switzerland. Premise on which this suggestion based is that while a passport’s duration as a travel document is limited to the period of its validity, its value continues as prima facie evidence of nationality. The Board accordingly understands that the request to Switzerland to extend protective action to all persons threatened with enemy persecution who hold passports and other documents issued in the name of the American republics applies without regard to the time limit indicated in any such passport until affirmatively advised to the contrary by the Government concerned. Less value would be attached to a passport than to a simple consular letter certifying national status if it were held otherwise. Discussion of this matter with appropriate Swiss authorities requested, also endeavor to obtain their cooperation in developing some procedure that, regardless of their extension, will assure continued protection of holders of expired Latin-American passports. In the interest of avoiding delay it is greatly hoped that the Swiss can carry out foregoing without communicating further with any of the governments concerned. Please advise regarding such governments and the changes of procedure required to achieve the foregoing however if this result cannot be procured by the Swiss without instructions from the governments whose passports were issued.

2. Extension of protection to all holders of Paraguayan documents requested by Paraguay of Spain in May it is understood. The United States and certain other American republics requested Spanish assistance in accomplishing return of deportees from Vittel. The Spanish Government on April 19 stated it would try to learn the facts at earliest possible time with view toward attempt arrangement these refugees return. In reply to request by Nicaragua the Spanish Foreign Minister early in June offered the use of his good offices to procure the return thereto of any bearers of Nicaraguan passports who might have been removed from Vittel.

3. Assistance of Swiss authorities in ascertaining identity and whereabouts of all persons holding passports or other documents issued in the name of any American republic removed from Compiegne and Vittel and other civilian internment camps, and their utmost efforts to secure the return to such camps of such persons is earnestly requested.

4. The German readiness to consider all Jews interned in these camps who bear identity documents as well as those elsewhere known to the German Foreign Office as eligible for exchange against Germans desiring to be repatriated has been noted, also the German readiness to accept, as a basis for the treatment and eligibility for exchange of such persons, the recognition of their status by the United States. Consequently, it is assumed German authorities henceforth will not pass on the validity of Latin-American documents. Kindly confirm. Recognition of status by the United States will alone suffice, it would appear, with the Germans not considering affirmative approaches by individual Latin-American countries as essential. Please explore with Swiss authorities, on assumption that we properly state German attitude, the possibility of proceeding on this basis. The circumstances making action on this basis desirable in speedily achieving humanitarian results are fully known to the Swiss we assume.

5. This Government has been authorized by Honduras and Costa Rica, to transmit to Switzerland their requests for the protection of persons holding passports issued in their names. It is assumed that word relative thereto has been forwarded to the appropriate Swiss authorities. In this connection, please refer to Department’s 1632 of May 10 regarding Honduras and 1993 of June 10 concerning Costa Rica.18 A similar communication is being sent you by Guatemala. According to information received here, a telegram requesting safeguarding of persons claiming Ecuadoran nationality was sent by Ecuador to Swiss Government early in May. Similar instructions, it is also understood, were cabled from Montevideo on June 15 to Uruguayan minister at Bern, relative to persons holding Uruguayan documents.

6. Your attention is drawn, relative to persons eligible for exchange, to the problem of persons in enemy-controlled areas in whose names Latin-American documents have been issued, but who, because delivery has been impossible, are not in physical possession of these documents. Please obtain from available sources names, ages and last known addresses of such persons, in order that they may not be disadvantageously placed due to this circumstance beyond their control. Please consult Saly Mayer,19 Riegner,20 Sternbuch21 and other representatives of rescue organizations on this subject. When such list is formulated, please notify Board, stating your views and informal opinions of Swiss authorities regarding advisability, in effort to protect such persons, of making the same available to the Germans.

7. Hungary is included, it should be noted, in the term “German controlled” territory, as used in this message and in all other communications dealing with protection of persons holding documents issued in the names of American republics. The Swiss authorities may be informed accordingly and requested to transmit such information to the German and Hungarian authorities, if there is any possibility of doubt on this score. Please inquire and report in this connection which American republics, if any other than the United States, are represented in [by?] Switzerland and [in?] Hungary. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

18 Neither printed.

19 A Swiss citizen, leader of the Swiss Jewish Community and representative in Switzerland of the American-Jewish Joint Distribution Committee.

20 Gerhard Riegner, Swiss representative of the World Jewish Congress.

21 Isaac Sternbuch, representative of the Union of Orthodox Rabbis of the United States and Canada.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/6–2844: Telegram

[Document 645]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 14, 1944—7 p.m.

5529. Reference to your 5104 of June 28 made in following from War Refugee Board.

Whole-hearted agreement of British Foreign Office with the President that there must be no discouragement of escape of refugees from the Balkans to Italy noted with satisfaction by Board. Non-conformity with this Foreign Office policy of other branches of British Government indicated by recent action taken in London however. Interposition by British Military of conditions to appointment of Board’s Special Representative in Italy indicative of such non-conformance.

The War Department early in May sent a cable at request of Board to Supreme Allied Commander of Mediterranean Theater stating that Board deemed it imperative to have Special Representative in Italy who would investigate for it all possibilities of rescue and relief of minority groups in enemy occupied territory who are in imminent danger of death existent in areas adjacent to Italy. Designation of such a representative in Italy of Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees requested by Board.

The Supreme Allied Commander of the Mediterranean Theater on May 27 consented, subject only to the condition that he be attached to ACC22 headquarters, to the appointment of a Special Representative of the Board for territories adjacent to Italy. The Board agreed immediately and proposed to designate Leonard E. Ackermann, who is now its Special Representative for the Mediterranean area, as such representative in Italy. Understood by Board that only formal notification by Combined Chiefs of Staff in Washington was necessary before final designation of Ackermann by Mediterranean Theater Command.

Board now advised by War Department the following additional conditions to confirmation of Ackermann’s appointment been proposed by British Joint Staff Mission acting on instructions from London: (1) No increase of flow of refugees into Italy to extent which would place any additional burden on British Military Authorities must ensue through Ackermann’s activities there; (2) Close liaison with Displaced Persons Sub-Commission and Intergovernmental Committee’s representative must therefore be maintained by Ackermann; (3) His activities must be confined strictly to investigation of all possibilities of rescue and relief of minority groups in enemy territory in imminent danger of death.

Imposition these additional conditions to Ackermann’s appointment would seriously interfere with Board’s program of rescuing victims of enemy oppression in imminent danger of death, therefore please advise appropriate British officials that Board objects thereto.

The first condition is particularly objectionable, it being inconsistent not only with view of the President (Department’s 4413 of June 3), but also with British Foreign Office concurring view that escape of refugees from the Balkans to Italy should be discouraged in no way.

The Board fully intends, relative to second condition, that Ackermann will cooperate to the fullest with agencies named. If there is any intention to subject or subordinate him to the authority of those agencies then Board objects to having such cooperation made a condition to his appointment.

Third condition is objectionable insofar as it contemplates that his activities will be “strictly confined” to investigation even though his functions in Italy will consist primarily of investigation of all possibilities of rescue and relief of minority groups in enemy territory in imminent danger of death. It might well be impossible under this limitation for the Board’s representative to take action necessary to carry out the President’s mandate to the Board (circular cable 634 of January 25), but not inconsistent with the successful prosecution of the war.

Notwithstanding the conditions involved and in order to avoid further delays, the Board has consented to Ackermann’s appointment. It would be appreciated however if you would discuss this matter with the appropriate British authorities to the end of prompt rescinding of the conditions to which objection is made. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

22 Allied Control Commission.

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/7–1944: Telegram

[Document 646]

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State 23

Lisbon, July 19, 1944—3 p.m.
[Received 5:15 p.m.]

2222. “In connection with the Jewish problem the following proposals have been received and approved of by the Hungarian Government:

From the Swedish Government: To permit the emigration to Sweden or Palestine of Jews who have relations living in Sweden or have business connections there;

From the Swiss Government (on behalf of the British Government): The formerly effective but meanwhile suspended permission for Jews possessing valid entry visas to emigrate to Palestine;

From the United States War Refugee Board (by way of Switzerland): To permit assistance by the Red Cross for Jews in camps or ghettos and dispatch Jewish children under ten years of age to Palestine.

While these measures are being carried out, the deportation from Hungary of Jews for purpose of labor abroad (for which only part of them have been employed while the rest similarly to gentile Hungarians are doing labor service within the country) is suspended.

Lisbon, July 20, 1944”

Norweb

23 The Ambassador in Portugal informed the Secretary in his telegram 2223, July 19, 3 p.m.: “The communication sent in our 2222 July 19 was handed to us by Wodianer [Hungarian Minister in Portugal] who obtained it from Ujpetery [Hungarian First Secretary of Legation] puppet representative through an intermediary. Copy was also handed to British Embassy.” (840.48 Refugees/7–1944)

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/7–1944: Telegram

[Document 647]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, July 19, 1944—10 p.m.
[ReceivedJuly 19—12:08 p.m.]

4604. Your 1945, June 6; my 4260, July 5.24 Foreign Office note dated yesterday states according telegram from Swiss Legation, Budapest, Hungarian Government has authorized departure from Hungary all Jews in possession entry permit for another country, including Palestine.25

According same message German Government will permit transit through occupied territories. Necessary measures for evacuation will be taken soon as possible by Swiss Legation in collaboration with Palestinian Bureau, Budapest. Travel documents will probably be Hungarian police passports.

Harrison

24 Neither printed.

25 For original statement on Hungarian offer made public in Switzerland by the Intercross on July 18, see circular telegram of August 18, p. 1127 [Pg. 1127 includes portions of Doc. 667 and Doc. 668].

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/7–2144: Telegram

[Document 648]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, July 21, 1944—midnight.

2490. The following WRB cable 78 is for Harrison and McClelland. Sincere appreciation of Department and Board for its efforts and cooperation shown in your 4223 of July 3 should be expressed to Swiss Foreign Office. According to your 4295 of July 627 and all other information available “general treatment accorded to eastern Jews” is synonymous with cold-blooded murder. Consultation with appropriate Swiss Foreign Office officials requested therefore in urgent effort to obtain their prompt further help by intervention and otherwise in rescuing Frumkin, Gorlin and Malkowsky families from such treatment.

Request continuance representations in strongest terms on behalf of these families and in compliance requests those Governments on behalf of all others holding documents issued in name of any American republic. This Government considers that German action in declaring some documents invalid is arbitrary and inconsistent with generally accepted rule that the question as to validity of passports is to be determined by the government in whose name they are issued, therefore only the government in whose name documents are issued and not Germany can deny validity. Furthermore this Government considers untenable the distinction sought to be drawn between holders of such documents now in internment camps and those holders situated elsewhere, whether such persons know Spanish or any other language and whether settled in Poland or any other country. German consignment of any persons holding documents issued in name of any American republic to the “general treatment accorded to eastern Jews” therefore viewed most seriously by this Government which must insist that all persons removed from internment camps reserved for nationals of American republics for consignment to the above mentioned general treatment or similar treatment be returned to such camps by the Germans.

The sense of the following should be conveyed in your discretion to appropriate German and satellite officials in foreign offices and foreign police through any unofficial channels available to you: they must expect to bear personally the consequences should they be responsible for the consignment to the above mentioned general treatment or to similar treatment of any person bearing documents issued in the name of any American republic. Horrified by the bestiality and brutality of Nazi mass-murder some American republics have accorded the protection of their passports or other documents to certain persons. Individual German and satellite foreign office and police officials should be anxious to avail themselves of the opportunity to save human lives offered by the presentation of such documentation. They assume the responsibility and invite the consequence therefor if, instead, they indulge in fine reasoning and take action tantamount to sentencing such persons to persecution or death. Strong evidence of their concurrence with Jew and civilian population mass-murder policy and their participation in such crimes (President Roosevelt’s statement of March 24 covered consequences thereof) would furthermore be adduced from their failure to seize every available opportunity to save lives.

The safety of United States citizens is the paramount concern of this Government, but it is believed the Swiss Foreign Office recognizes that the American people and Government, regardless of nationality thereof, greatly concerned with safety all victims of Nazi persecution. Creation of War Refugee Board, solemn warnings issued by President Roosevelt, Secretary of State Hull,28 Senate Foreign Relations Committee and House of Representatives Foreign Affairs Committee are manifestations of this grave concern. The Swiss Foreign Office will understand why German contention that removal from internment camps of persons claiming American republic nationality for subjection to the “general treatment accorded to eastern Jews” involves only “internal German police measures” is unacceptable to this Government, in light of above mentioned concern and policy of exterminating Jews and other civilian peoples openly expressed by Germany. We are confident, account Switzerland’s centuries old humanitarian traditions, that Swiss Foreign Office will discover method further intercession towards obtention adequate assurances of Germany for safety of bearers of American republic passports or other documents regardless of their present whereabouts. Additional attempt to obtain for Board list of all claiming American republic nationality deported from Vittel and other camps requested. The 238 names supplied to Swiss by you, as well as list of 163 names from Swiss Consulate, Paris, presumed contained your airmail 8466 of June 12.30 The fact that persons named in Department’s 2046 of June 16 [14]30 are relatives of United States citizen emphasizes importance of obtaining such lists, as well as taking of other measures indicated herein.

Position this Government against German determination on “merits of individual claims of persons holding United States or Latin American documentation” (Section 4 your 4223 of July 3, notice number 2, Part E) relates to recognition of persons making such claims as being eligible for exchange, and extension to them of treatment to which nationals of country to which they claim nationality are entitled and not to priority of exchange or method of selection of individuals to be exchanged.

Further efforts being made to have various Spanish or Swiss protected governments request suitable action in Madrid or Bern (see Department’s 2407 of July 13, WRB’s 64 and Department’s 2316 of July 6,31 WRB’s 71 regarding notice number 2, Part F). Efforts should be persistently continued, without awaiting such requests, to get results on basis attitude this Government, and attitudes those governments have communicated with Switzerland already. Please discuss with Swiss officials informally in this connection desirability of most liberal construction possible and speediest possible action upon any communications relating to protection of persons from cruelty and persecution received from any American republic. Sole object thereof is rescuing people from unprecedented brutality. Delays in action caused by strict adherence to technicalities proper under ordinary circumstances merely result, in these abnormal times, in ruthless killing of additional number of innocent people. Believe this clearly understood by Swiss officials.

Special efforts should be devoted, in view Hungarian situation, to procurement German and Hungarian assurances concerning protection, eligibility for exchange, etc., of any persons in Hungary holding documents issued in name of any American republic. Please request that all necessary representations to this effect be made by Swiss authorities. Your recommendation in last paragraph of notice 1 of your 4223 noted in this connection.

Hull

27 Not printed.

28 For statements of July 14 on Nazi atrocities in Hungary and Greece, see Department of State Bulletin, July 16, 1944, p. 59.

30 Not printed.

30 Not printed.

31 See footnote 83, p. 1072 [Pg. 1072 is part of Doc. 628].

Memorandum by the Delegate of the International Committee of the Red Cross (Zollinger) 840.48 Refugees/7–2444

[Document 649]

Memorandum by the Delegate of the International Committee of the Red Cross (Zollinger)32

Washington, July 24, 1944.

We have received today the following communication from the I.C.R.C. in Geneva:

The Hungarian Government is willing to make possible the emigration of certain categories of Jews and has advised the I.C.R.C. of its readiness in this respect.

Very obviously from the viewpoint of maintaining the principle of neutrality, which in effect is based on reciprocity, the I.C.R.C. feels that the number of emigrant Jews to be admitted to the United States should be substantially increased, and that a corresponding number of Entry permits should be accorded.

It would, furthermore, be desirable if the United States Government would make a public statement on this subject, indicating the number of Entry permits accorded. The I.C.R.C. is of the opinion that such a statement would impress the Hungarian Government as the visible sign of a favourable reaction to their decision to cease the persecution of the Jews also on this side. Moreover, the possibility of an eventual withdrawal of the concession granted would be made difficult by a public declaration, as suggested above, which would at the same time also forestall an attempt on the part of the countries of emigration to throw the blame for an eventual failure on the countries of immigration.

The I.C.R.C. would like to be informed whether the United States Government would be willing to transmit and support this proposal to the Governments of South American Republics or whether the I.C.R.C. should do so directly.

The I.C.R.C. reserves the right to issue a communiqué concerning this proposal, which has simultaneously been submitted to the Government of Great Britain.

Alfred E. Zollinger

32 Handed personally to the Adviser on Refugees and Displaced Persons (Warren) and duplicate transmitted to the Executive Director of the War Refugee Board (Pehle).

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/7–2644: Telegram

[Document 650]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, July 26, 1944—noon.
[Received 1:19 p.m.]

4775. Department’s 2351, July 8;33 London’s 198, July 1.34 International Committee of Red Cross replied substantially as follows on July 21 with reference to proposal that ICRC approach German Government regarding willingness Swedish Government to receive certain refugee children from any part of Europe under German control: “Since as a result of steps taken by ICRC Hungarian Government has just assured that certain categories of Jewish people could leave Hungary, among whom would be all children under ten, we consider action such as suggested should now be undertaken. Having in mind importance of whole problem, we are approaching German Government as well as Swedish and certain other neutral governments.

From information received from American Legation on July 6, it is understood that United States Government envisions that ICRC should select children. This requires very special consideration because of great responsibility and various technical difficulties involved which are known to British and American Governments. ICRC, however, will report result of its examination of this particular problem and the answers received from various governments to be approached”.35 Ekneld.

Harrison

33 Not printed.

34 Sent to Department as telegram 5228, not printed; the Minister in Switzerland was instructed (in accordance with the Department’s wishes) to concert with his British colleague in a joint approach to the International Red Cross concerning child evacuation plans (840.48 Refugees/7–144).

35 The International Red Cross made the suggested representations to the Germans but no affirmative reply was ever received.

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/7–2644: Telegram

[Document 651]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, July 26, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received July 27—6:17 a.m.]

1370. For Pehle WRB from Hirschmann. The Bulgarian Minister to Turkey in an interview today arranged by Simond of the Intercross informed me (Ankara’s 107) that his Government had accepted the proposals which I had made and authorized me to transmit the following decisions of his Government.

1. The Jews are gradually having restored to them the status which they held before the war.

The “restrictions, oppressions, persecutions and abuses” are being eliminated.

2. Facilities have been officially authorized which will permit them to leave Bulgaria with all possible assistance and a minimum of formalities.

3. Instructions will be issued to expedite the departure from Bulgaria of vessels containing refugees.

4. The departure by rail will be authorized by approximately 400 to 500 refugees weekly provided the Turk authorities grant transit visas en route to Palestine.

Balabanoff stated that the above measures were being communicated to the leaders of the Bulgarian Jewish Community. He emphasized that the change of policy was definitive but the steps would be gradual in order not to “fly in the face of the Germans”. I urged upon Balabanoff the immediate withdrawal of the two notorious oppressive anti-Jewish Bulgarian laws. Balabanoff replied that these would definitely be cancelled within a brief time.

With respect to the technical difficulties involved in securing the necessary certificates to permit departure from Bulgaria, Balabanoff said that these difficulties would be relieved within technical possibilities. I thereupon urged that children be given first priority since they required few certificates, to which he agreed with the proviso that we define children as under 15 years of age. I told the Bulgarian Minister that the new policy of his Government in regard to refugees would be presented as a gesture of good will to Washington, and I suggested that the release without delay of large numbers of refugees would receive favorable publicity in America which the present Bulgarian Government is seeking.

Balabanoff stated that his Government’s new regime was essentially liberal in policy and was attempting to find the best and quickest ways to “get out from under the Nazi yoke” being at the same time very sympathetic to the Soviets whom they hold in high regard but not without some fear.

Balabanoff said that his Government agreed to the proposal concerning the sailing of the SS Tari to a Bulgarian port and return to Istanbul without a German safe conduct, provided the Bulgarians [were?] granted the necessary authorization, to which a Turk official had agreed with Ambassador Steinhardt and Simond. I will report further on this project which has been revived.36

At the conclusion of the interview, I requested Balabanoff to confirm in writing the agreement of his Government to the foregoing. The Embassy’s next numbered telegram will contain a translation of Balabanoff’s letter.37 [Hirschmann.]

Kelley

36 The necessary safe conducts were never forthcoming and hope for the use of the Tari was eventually abandoned.

37 Telegram, 1371, July 26, 5 p.m., not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/7–2744: Telegram

[Document 652]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 27, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received 9:45 p.m.]

5956. Reference Embassy’s 5811, July 22, 5 p.m., and despatch No. 17024, July 24.38 Director IGC has just informed Embassy by letter of discussion with representative of International Red Cross delegation London regarding Horthy offer.39

Intercross representative is most anxious that positive response to offer be made as soon as possible since otherwise fears offer will be withdrawn or at least reduced in scope on ground that other countries especially Great Britain and United States are not really interested. Chief delegate IGC strongly urges that American and British Governments decide what they intend to do in response to offer and then make necessary provision for IGC to carry out operations decided upon. IGC most anxious to arrange for places of asylum, transport and maintenance of Jews allowed to leave Hungary and wishes to correlate action with WRB. Please inform WRB. Full text director’s letter being airmailed.40

Winant

38 Neither printed.

39 Adm. Nicholas Horthy, Regent of Hungary; see circular telegram of August 18, p. 1127 [Pg. 1127 includes portions of Doc. 667 and Doc. 668].

40 Despatch 17147, July 28, not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/7–2844: Telegram

[Document 653]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 28, 1944—midnight.

5948. The following cable is from Department and War Refugee Board. Message from Legation Bern, substantially as follows:

[Here follows substance of telegram 4604, July 19, 10 p.m., from Bern, printed on page 1099 [Pg. 1099 includes portions of Doc. 646 and Doc. 647].]

American consular officers in neutral countries being authorized to issue immigration visas to every person dwelling enemy controlled areas since December 8, 1941, to whom American immigration visa was issued or authorized on or after July 1, 1941, effective date present security checking system, provided such person has not been subject of subsequent adverse report or not affirmatively found to have become disqualified for a visa. In the discretion of consular officers the issuance of such visas will not be subject to interdepartmental review procedure. Naturally visas will be issued only after arrival in neutral countries of such persons. Transmission of substance of the foregoing and of a request for release to neutral countries of persons in above categories to the German, Hungarian, Bulgarian and Rumanian Governments and to existent authorities in Slovakia being asked of the Swiss. Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish, Swiss and Turkish Governments being requested to permit entry of such persons upon assurance of their adequate maintenance and that evacuation arrangements will be made covering all such persons admitted into their territories found to be unqualified for issuance of such visas.41 The informing of Germany and its allies of their willingness to receive such persons also being requested of the above governments.

Government of Turkey being asked to inform enemy governments of its willingness either to issue transit visas to all holders of Palestine certificates in enemy controlled areas or to admit such persons into Turkey in transit to Palestine without formal visa issuance.

Responding further to message from Legation, Bern, the substance of which is quoted above, this Government is prepared to inform the Hungarian and neutral governments that all Jews arriving in neutral countries from Hungary will be afforded havens in United Nations territory as rapidly as military considerations permit, neutral governments to be given adequate assurances as to the maintenance of such persons in the meantime and to be requested to advise the Hungarian Government of their willingness to admit such persons to their territory. You are requested to ascertain from the Foreign Office whether the United Kingdom government will join this Government in this effort to save the lives of refugees and to report results. Instructions have been sent to American missions in neutral countries to act in collaboration with their British colleagues if possible, alone if necessary, along these lines. The British missions should be informed of Foreign Office views promptly, as time is important.

Kindly bring foregoing to attention of Sir Herbert Emerson of IGC and try to obtain some indication from him as to extent of availability of IGC funds for maintenance of such refugees from Hungary as may arrive in neutral countries following such approaches. The earliest possible response to this inquiry would be appreciated by Board.

It might prove tragic under circumstances if utmost advantage of present opportunity were not taken. You are requested urgently, therefore, to propose to the Foreign Office the necessity of making substantial additional numbers of Palestine certificates available to Jews in Hungary immediately. The possibility should not be over-looked, in this connection, that, after arrival of holders of such certificates in Turkey or Spain, should circumstances be deemed to preclude their entry into Palestine, they may be routed to havens elsewhere. It is requested that such views as the Foreign Office may express be reported immediately.

Stettinius

41 Sweden and Turkey subsequently agreed to cooperate in this program and advised the Hungarian Government accordingly; Turkey also agreed to receive holders of Palestine certificates.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/7–2944: Telegram

[Document 654]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 29, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received July 29—3:55 p.m.]

6040. For Department and WRB. Hungarian authorities have informed International Red Cross Committee that Jewish children under 10 years of age, who have necessary visas, may leave Hungary. British FO42 is today telegraphing your British colleague42a instructing him to approach the Government to which you are accredited to express hope that it is prepared to receive these children and to reaffirm previous assurances that any necessary supplies will be made available through the blockade for the care of these children. Although we have received no specific instructions from the Department concerning these particular children, the approach to be made by your British colleague is clearly in line with general instructions previously received by this Embassy from the Department and War Refugee Board, and is consistent with the policy we have been directed to further. Embassy suggests, therefore, that you may wish to concert action with your British colleague.

Foregoing sent Stockholm as No. 295, Bern as No. 230, Lisbon as No. 142, Madrid as No. 116 and Ankara as No. 46. This suggestion is being made to you directly by Embassy in view of our understanding that FO is requesting the British representatives to take immediate action and there is, therefore, insufficient time to refer the matter to the Department.43

Winant

42 Foreign Office.

42a See first sentence of last paragraph of this document.

43 Substantial relief was later provided by the Red Cross in Hungary; private funds which the Board had arranged to have sent abroad for relief purposes were spent by the Red Cross in connection with these activities.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) 840.48 Refugees/7–2944: Telegram

[Document 655]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, July 29, 1944—6 p.m.

667. The following War Refugee Board 86 is for Hirschmann.

The Board is highly pleased with your efforts to increase the refugee movement from Bulgaria referred to in your 1344 of July 22.44

For your information an informal memorandum has been given to the Bulgarian Minister at Stockholm through Legation contacts. This memorandum which was prepared along the lines suggested by the Board and of which you were orally advised prior to your departure has apparently been forwarded by courier to the Bulgarian Foreign Office. Meanwhile the American Legation in Stockholm has received an informal reply from the Bulgarian Minister stating substantially the following: “Bulgarian actions with respect to Jews have been enforced with leniency and sympathy by all of our Government branches. It is a well known fact even among the Bulgarian Jews that the late King Boris, as well as the head of the Orthodox Church of Bulgaria, have made every effort to insure that Jews were treated with compassion. This is no less true of the general Bulgarian population which has maintained a sympathy for Jews which even today will be readily admitted by the Jews. It is a fact that Jews today are living under circumstances not worse but better than those faced by large group of Bulgarian citizens who have been driven from their homes when they were destroyed by American bombing and who have lost all possessions.

The Government of Bulgaria has never turned a deaf ear to humanitarian considerations or those of tolerance. All Bulgarians are mindful that only through moral integrity can a small nation find strength. No less today than heretofore do we stand ready to give consideration to suggestions for the protection of Jews and other refugee groups, but we insist that those advancing such proposals should themselves be in a position to show leadership in humanitarian principles.

The air forces of the United States have been engaged in acts of great violence and cruelty against defenseless civilian populations in Doupnitza, Vratza, Sofia, Skopie, Velles, Plovdiv and others. A most arbitrary violence has been done to the Chateau of Vrana where the Queen, only recently made a widow, is residing with her two fatherless children of 7 and 12 years. The Chateau, which was far removed from any objective of a military nature and even far removed from other habitations, was totally destroyed.

If the people of Bulgaria can be assured that there are people in the United States of such a character who sincerely deplore these outrages and cruelties; if those who control the policies of the powerful American Republic, instead of directing threats, were to give assurances that the destruction and violence of their military leaders would be replaced, and that hereafter there would be no further ruin and slaughter of an innocent civilian population, then it may be said without question that the Government of Bulgaria would be prepared to recognize the moral justification and right of the United States to advance humanitarian pleas, and the Bulgarian population would readily welcome and approve action consistent with such advice.”

The Board suggested that the Legation consider replying informally to the Bulgarian Minister in the following vein: “The problems arising from aerial bombings are not within the province of the War Refugee Board, but in considering such patters informally and objectively one cannot overlook the bombings by forces with which Bulgaria continues to be allied, of such civilian centers as Warsaw, Rotterdam, Belgrade, Amsterdam, London and Coventry. The methodical persecution and oppression of Jews and other helpless civilian minorities as heretofore and presently practiced in German controlled and German allied areas is quite separate and apart and over and above civilian suffering on both sides incident to military action, particularly aerial warfare. This Government has taken the unequivocal position that those responsible for the oppression, persecution, deportation or extermination of such civilian minorities as has been and is being witnessed in Germany, France, the Lowlands, Czechoslovakia, Poland, the Baltic states, the Balkan countries and elsewhere will be punished for their crimes.”

After quoting the appeal of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee of May 31 [June 3?] to the people of Hungary to protect the Jews, the Board’s cable to Minister Johnson continued as follows: “The same applies to other Axis countries, including Bulgaria. Those to whom these warnings are applicable have it within their power henceforth so to act with respect to Jews and other helpless civilian minorities as to invite more favorable consideration than their conduct up to now may warrant, and to demonstrate a resurgence of that moral integrity which alone gives nations, large or small, strength.

For your information and guidance, the informal response transmitted in your telegram under reference45 has, of course, made a very unfavorable impression. Whether the Bulgarian Minister or his principals realize the seriousness with which the American people and Government consider the unspeakable treatment accorded Jews and other minorities by Germany and her satellites seems doubtful. It is likewise doubtful whether they realize the determination of this Government as expressed in the President’s statement of March 24 and repeated by implication in the statement above quoted to see to it that those who share the responsibility therefor will be punished.”

[War Refugee Board]
Stettinius

44 Not printed; it concerned a request that Bulgarian authorities facilitate refugee movement from Bulgaria to Turkey, of not less than 500 persons per week (840.48 Refugees/7–2244).

45 Telegram No. 2122, June 13, 3 p.m., not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/7–3144: Telegram

[Document 656]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 31, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received July 31—5 p.m.]

6087. ReDeptel 5948, July 28, midnight. Response of Foreign Office to suggestion for joint action to assist departure Jews from Hungary and transit neutral countries is cordial. Foreign Office points out it recently instructed British Embassy, Washington, to advise Department of its readiness to cooperate in this connection. Instructions in the premises to British representatives in neutral countries will probably be repeated.

Foreign Office has received from British Legation, Bern, information similar to that contained in telegram under reference but with one exception. This is that Hungarian Government will re-commence deportations of Jews as soon as categories allowed to leave Hungary have all departed.

Foreign office doubts wisdom of requesting Turkish Government formally to declare its willingness to waive visa requirements for refugees entering Turkey. It believes that much is being accomplished in this direction by informal and unofficial leniency of Turkish authorities and frontier guards, that Turkish Government is unwilling to regularize this situation officially and that it might be disadvantageous to attempt to force it to do so.

With regard to issuance of additional Palestine certificates, Foreign Office states this question must be referred to Colonial Office. It adds that reluctance of Colonial Office to accede might be lessened if work were hastened in preparation of havens elsewhere for excess Jews admitted to Palestine. In this same connection Foreign Office states British Embassy, Washington, has been instructed to suggest to Department joint approach to Latin American Governments with aim of persuading them accept more refugees; also to Portugal in view of possibility Angola.

IGC found message under reference most encouraging and will report as soon as possible as to extent of funds available for maintenance, also transportation, of refugees reaching neutral countries from Hungary.

Winant

The Department of State to the British Embassy 840.48 Refugees/7–3144

[Document 657]

The Department of State to the British Embassy

Memorandum

The following communication has been received from the International Committee of the Red Cross in Washington:

[Here follows text of memorandum of July 24 by the Delegate of the International Committee of the Red Cross, printed on page 1103 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 649].]

Careful consideration has been given to the foregoing proposal. In this connection there have also been examined the telegrams from the British Foreign Office dated July 20th and July 22nd respectively, which were transmitted to the Department of State on July 26, 1944,46 and a telegram from the American Legation at Bern dated July 19, 1944.46a

The foregoing communications relate to a proposal by the Hungarian Government to make possible the emigration of certain categories of Jews, a proposal which apparently has resulted from warnings and appeals addressed to the Government of Hungary to cease the deportation of Jews.

The following are the views of the United States Government with respect to this matter: (1) However repugnant to principles of justice and humanity the proposal and its motivation may be, the practical situation requires that such proposal be accepted as quickly as possible in an effort to save the lives of the largest possible number of people.

(2) In present circumstances, it is not likely that any substantial number of refugees can or will be moved from Hungary with such speed that we could not cope with this situation as it develops. In any event, it is the strong view of this Government that the acceptance of the Hungarian Government’s proposal should not be couched in terms of specific numbers of people for whom it is now thought possible to find temporary asylum in each of specified countries. It is also the view of this Government that such acceptance should not await the outcome of any census of possible locations for such refugees as may be able to leave Hungary. This census can be taken as the movement from Hungary proceeds. The urgency of the matter does not permit of any protracted discussion if lives are to be saved.

(3) The fact must be faced that the obligation of accepting the Hungarian proposal is the responsibility of the United States and British Governments, and these Governments must act at once without waiting to consult or solicit the aid of other governments if the action is to be effective. In the judgment of this Government, the acceptance of the Hungarian proposal should not be handled through the Intergovernmental Committee which, of necessity, would have to consult and receive the approval of its several members, some of whom are neutrals. To delegate the matter to the Intergovernmental Committee would in the judgment of this Government in the circumstances, be understood in Hungary and elsewhere as a delaying gesture. Any such delay would not only jeopardize lives, but would enable the Hungarian Government to proclaim that its offer to release Jews has in effect been refused by the United States and British Governments. For the same reason, there is insufficient time in which to consult the South American Governments. Their support can be obtained later.

(4) It is the considered view of this Government that the two governments acting in conjunction should request the International Committee of the Red Cross to advise the Hungarian Government that the two governments will undertake to care for all Jews who are permitted to leave Hungary and who reach neutral or United Nations territory and to find havens of refuge where they may live in safety. This statement should be clear and unequivocal and should be publicly announced. Only this kind of an acceptance will in the eyes of the Hungarians and of the world constitute a genuine expression of willingness to save the Jews of Hungary. Havens to accommodate a substantial number of such persons are already available. The question of finding additional havens as needed for such persons can be worked out as the movement develops. In this way the two governments will be in a position to act upon the basis of the numbers involved as well as the problems of transport. Although the basic responsibility for finding havens of refuge will be that of the two governments, as the need develops, requests can be made for the cooperation of other governments such as the governments of the other American republics and of appropriate international organizations. Any other process, we are convinced, would prevent effective action in time to save the lives of those in jeopardy.

In view of the foregoing, and with the firm conviction that such action should be taken without delay, this Government proposes to take the following steps: (1) To request the International Committee of the Red Cross to advise the Hungarian Government that the Government of the United Statese is prepared to arrange for havens of refuge for all Jews who are permitted to leave Hungary and who reach neutral or United Nations territory.

(2) To make public in the widest and most effective manner possible this joint acceptance of the Hungarian proposal.

Attached hereto is a draft of a cable47 which this Government proposes to send to the International Committee of the Red Cross not later than August 7, 1944. It is extremely important that the British Government take parallel action, and it will be appreciated if the assent of the British Government is received prior to August 7, 1944, in order that the cable may indicate that the action is the joint action of the two governments. In the event of concurrence the British Government would presumably send similar instructions to its representative in Bern.

Washington , July 31, 1944.

46 Not printed; for substance of telegrams, see telegram 2657, August 2, midnight, to Bern, infra.

46a No. 4604, p. 1099 [Pg. 1099 includes portions of Doc. 646 and Doc. 647].

47 Quoted in telegram 2657, August 2, midnight, to Bern, infra.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/7–1944: Telegram

[Document 658]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, August 2, 1944—midnight.

2657. Your 4604, July 19. For your information with reference to offer of Hungarian Government to permit departure of Jews from Hungary the British Embassy here on July 26 presented two cables from the British Foreign Office48 suggesting that the matter of surveying and coordinating possible places of refuge for the Jews from Hungary be placed before the Intergovernmental Committee for action. The messages also stated that the possibilities of receiving refugees in Palestine at Casablanca and at Philippeville in Algeria would need to be reviewed. The War Refugee Board and the Department on July 31 delivered a memorandum to the British Embassy suggesting that the responsibility for dealing with the Hungarian offer rests on the British and United States Governments and expressing the judgment that the Intergovernmental Committee, because of the need of consulting other governments, cannot act in time to be effective. The following draft of a proposed cable to Bern was included in the memorandum to the British Embassy with the request that the British Government concur in the transmission of the cable to Bern no later than August 7.

“Amlegation Bern. [Here follows the substance of memorandum of July 24 from the ICRC in Washington, printed on page 1103 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 649].]

ICRC should be requested by you to advise the Hungarian Government in the following sense: ‘The ICRC has advised the United States Government of the willingness of the Hungarian Government to permit the emigration from Hungary of certain categories of refugees. Despite the substantial difficulties and responsibilities involved this Government has consistently made clear its determination to take all practicable steps to rescue victims of religious or political oppression.

Taking into account the humanitarian considerations involved concerning the Jews in Hungary, this Government now repeats specifically its assurance that it will arrange for the care of all Jews permitted to leave Hungary in the present circumstances who reach neutral or United Nations territory and will find temporary havens of refuge for such people where they may live in security. The Governments of neutral countries have been advised of these assurances and requested to permit the entry of Jews from Hungary who may reach their borders. Information concerning the concrete steps to be taken by the Hungarian Government to carry out its proposal is now awaited by this Government.’

The foregoing proposal has also been addressed to the British Government which is taking parallel action. You may wish accordingly to join with your British colleague in conveying this expression of joint action to the International Committee of the Red Cross.

The ICRC should be advised that in the opinion of this Government it is considered unnecessary in view of the above assurances to consult at this time the governments of the South American Republics.

It is a matter of urgency that the International Committee of the Red Cross convey the foregoing representations without delay to the Government of Hungary. Appreciation should be expressed to the ICRC for its cooperation in this matter. Kindly report promptly the results of the action taken by you.”

To avoid any possible misunderstanding it is repeated that the foregoing draft cable to Bern is now before the British Government for clearance and concurrence and is sent to you at this time solely for your information and understanding. You are not to take the action suggested until specifically advised to do so. In the meantime you are authorized to advise the ICRC informally that the British and United States Governments are in consultation on the matter and that a reply to the ICRC note will be forthcoming shortly.

Sent to Bern. Repeated to London, as Departments 6096 of August 2.

Stettinius

48 Neither printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics 840.48 Refugees/8–344: Circular airgram

[Document 659]

The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Representatives in the American Republics 49

Washington, August 3, 1944—11 a.m.

Please refer to previous communications regarding persons affiliated with persecuted European groups in enemy controlled areas holding documents issued in the names of American republics and efforts to safeguard their lives. Intense persecution of such groups, including forced deportation and mass extermination has been introduced into Hungary, where persons holding documents issued in the names of American republics are reported to be in danger because of absence of representation in that country. Amlegation Bern cables: “With regard to general question of Latin American documentation in German controlled countries, the suggestion that such Latin American Governments as have not previously made arrangements for their interests in Hungary to be taken care of urgently ask Switzerland or other neutral country to assume such representation is made by the Legation for the consideration of the Department. All Latin American countries without direct representation in Hungary except Uruguay, Chile, Brazil and possibly El Salvador, would seem to be concerned in this.”

Please consult appropriate officials of the Foreign Office in an endeavor urgently to secure representation in Hungary by Switzerland for the Government to which you are accredited. Although such government’s interest in Hungary may be nominal, its representation in Hungary preferably by Switzerland is an essential first step to the humanitarian effort to save the lives of persons there holding documents issued in such government’s name, and the approach to the Foreign Office should be on that basis. If the government to which you are accredited agrees to this measure, please request it to instruct the protecting power substantially as follows: (1) Passports and other documents issued in its name to persons in Hungary subject to persecution, are recognized and confirmed; (2) Hungarian Government to be so advised and that it is expected that persons holding such passports and other documents will be accorded the treatment, rights, privileges, and immunities of nationals of the government to which you are accredited, and (3) the United States is authorized to negotiate for the exchange of such persons. You may assure the Foreign Office that in the event of such negotiation every preference will be given by the United States to unquestioned nationals of the government to which you are accredited, and that such government will not be expected physically to receive other persons, who, if exchanged, will be routed to other havens.

If desired this Government would be willing to act as a channel of communication in representation matters between it and the Swiss or other neutral Government to which it wishes to entrust its interests in Hungary.

Please advise the Department promptly of the results of your approaches.50

Stettinius

49 Sent to Bolivia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay, and Venezuela.

50 As a result of affirmative responses received in reply to these representations, the protective offices of the Swiss were formally insured.

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/8–544: Telegram

[Document 660]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, August 5, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received August 6—12:56 p.m.]

5040. With reference to note verbale No. 257, June 26, 1944,51 concerning a communication regarding the inquiry of American Government with respect to treatment of Jews in Hungary, Royal Hungarian Ministry has the honor to inform the Swiss Legation of the following: As in most European states Jewish question has particularly in recent decades also become one of the greatest economic, social and political problems in Hungary. Jewish problem became especially difficult as Jewry, thanks to liberal organization of the State, had been able secure prominent position in economic, political and cultural life. Also in those large states where race problem was far less important—as for instance Negro question in the United States—government was obliged to take corresponding measures for the protection of its own race. In consequence various governments of Hungary were obliged to strive against excessive influence of this foreign race as Hungarian Jewry constitutes far greater danger for Hungary than for instance Negroes or Japanese for white population of United States. Jews not only possessed most important economic positions in Hungary but thereby exerted very strong influence on national life of the country as a whole which threatened degenerate foundations of the national character of the people.

Recognizing this danger as in other European states the Hungarian Governments of the time also undertook solution of Jewish question. Articles of law XV of 1938 IV of 1939 and XV of 1941 formed legal basis for measures which tended toward solution Jewish question.

Military events on eastern front and approach of Soviet Army to Hungarian frontier made it necessary fully to mobilize all military material and moral forces of country for defense of nation’s existence. This also meant elimination of everything that would undermine or diminish the country’s resisting power. As defeatist propaganda and agitation of Jews—as in 1918—became more and more perceptible in this decisive phase of the war and in order to prevent repetition of tragic events of 1918–1919 government was obliged to eliminate on increased scale influence of Jews. They were consequently separated from rest of population and put to more useful work—either in country itself or abroad. In so doing Government and its functionaries did not fail consider laws of humanity and justice. If individual cases of injustice occurred they were always due to sporadic [actions] of some subordinate organs which in each case responsible.

Numerous Jews were placed at the disposal of German Government as workers as was case for years for tens of thousands of workers of Hungarian nationality and Christian faith.

Treatment of Jews working in Hungary is similar to that accorded other workers in work camps (for example students, et cetera).

With respect to food rationing non-working Jews do not receive certain more or less luxury articles (such as rice, fowl, butter, poppy); concerning basic necessities however they are on same basis as rest of population.

It may be added in supplement that during recent weeks situation of Jews has been notably improved. Enclosed note gives details regarding these concessions. At the instance of some foreign organizations (International Red Cross, War Refugee Board) Hungarian Government has made it possible for Hungarian Jews to receive material help and for a considerable number of Jews to emigrate to neutral states, respectively, [especially?] to Palestine.

2. Translation from French of enclosure to above follows: Present status of action taken by Hungarian Government regarding Jews is following:

I

1. Deportation of Jews for work abroad temporary suspended.

2. View proposals presented by Swedish Red Cross by Swiss Legation acting behalf Palestine Immigration Commission as well as by War Refugee Board, Hungarian Government authorized emigration Jews Sweden, Switzerland, Palestine and other countries. a. Jews who obtain from King Swedish nationality can emigrate Sweden in accordance with action of Swedish Red Cross.

Jews who have relatives Sweden or who have commercial contact for certain time with that country can emigrate Sweden or Palestine. This category includes about 400 or 500 persons.

b. Several thousand Jews are authorized emigrate Palestine aided by Palestinian Immigration Commission through intermediary Swiss Legation Budapest.

Persons indicated above can emigrate Palestine if bearers “Certificate d’Immigration” delivered by British authorities.

c. On basis of proposals mentioned above from War Refugee Board, Hungarian Government authorized Inter-Cross to arrange sending Jewish children under 10 years age to Palestine. War Refugee Board will be authorized materially assist Jews interned Hungary.

II.

In addition concessions above mentioned following mitigations accorded in treatment Jews: 1. Deportation baptized Jews for work abroad stopped.

2. a. Administration behalf baptized Jews entrusted “Counsel [Council?] for Baptized Jews” established July 6, 1944;

b. Jews baptized prior to August 1, 1941, remain in the country but their segregation from non-Jewish persons will be ordered;

c. They are obtaining all facilities in exercise of their religion.

3. a. Facilities ordered for baptized residing Budapest will be extended to baptized Jews outside of capital;

b. Revision of situation of baptized Jews sent to work in Germany foreseen.

4. It will be decided as soon as possible who are to be considered as converted Jews and such action will affect not only Jews aged 16 to 60 but Jews all ages.

5. Following exempted bear Jewish star: a. Family members of ministers of Christian religion (parents, brothers and sisters, wives and children of Protestant ministers); b. Bearers ecclesiastical (Papal) decorations; c. Members of Order of Holy Sepulchre.

III.

1. a. Discretionary right reserved for regent in exemption certain number of Jews. There will be exempted: b. Jews living in marriage with persons of Christian origin, c. Jews bearing certain war decorations (golden medal military bravery, et cetera); d. Jews of certain special merits; e. Ministers of Christian religions.

2. Departure Jews for work abroad will take place under conditions accordance humanitarian laws and Hungarian Red Cross will have possibility exercise control.

3. It will be permitted to send via Red Cross food parcels to persons interned concentration camps.

Harrison

51 On June 16 Minister Harrison delivered to the Swiss Foreign Office for transmission to the Hungarian Government a note inquiring into the intentions of Hungary with respect to the future treatment of Jews and reiterating the grave view which this Government took regarding the persecution of Jews and other minorities.

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/8–744: Telegram

[Document 661]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, August 7, 1944—2 p.m.
[Received 9:35 p.m.]

1439. For Pehle WRB from Hirschmann. Ankara No. 120. In a conference today with Mikhailov, First Secretary of the Russian Embassy in Ankara, I expressed the hope that his Government would make special efforts to distinguish between the victims of fascism and the Fascists themselves when the Red Army enters enemy territory. Mikhailov assured me on behalf of the Soviet Government that all citizens in enemy territory would be treated alike as this was a fundamental principle of the Soviet regime and that the victims and those who were incarcerated would be treated with special solicitude. [Hirschmann.]

Kelley

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Australia (Johnson) 840.48 Refugees/8–1244: Circular telegram

[Document 662]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Australia (Johnson)52

Washington, August 12, 1944—8 p.m.

Reference previous communications regarding refugee children. In view of the situation in Hungary and the recent statement by Admiral Horthy that his Government would grant exit permits to, and suspend deportations of, all Jewish children for whom havens may be provided outside Hungary, would you request the government to which you are accredited to extend its acceptance in principle to children from Hungary as well as from France.

You may assure appropriate officials of that government that no detailed plans have as yet been developed for the actual immigration of refugee children into its country. Should such plans become necessary at a later date, they will not be developed without previous consultation with the government to which you are accredited.53

Stettinius

52 Repeated on the same date to Canada, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Ireland, Nicaragua, Paraguay, and Peru.

53 Governments accepting extension of this principle included Ireland, the Dominican Republic, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Paraguay. Ecuador agreed to accept 300 European children and Brazil to receive 500 Jewish refugee children from Hungary. Offers of asylum for Jewish children from Hungary were made also by Sweden and Switzerland.

The Acting Secretary of the State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/8–1244: Telegram

[Document 663]

The Acting Secretary of the State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 12, 1944—midnight.

6408. Kindly deliver following message to Josiah DuBois, General Counsel, War Refugee Board who is with Secretary Morgenthau.54

An offer regarding emigration and treatment of Jews has, as you will recall been communicated to the United States and United Kingdom governments by that of Hungary. On August 11 the American Minister in Bern was instructed to deliver the following paraphrased reply to the offer in question to Intercross.

[Here follows paraphrase of draft message contained in telegram 2657, August 2, midnight, to Bern, printed on page 1114 [Pg. 1114 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658].]

The British Government was informed on July 29 of the reply this Government proposed to deliver on August 7 to Intercross and was requested to take parallel action. The British Foreign Office on August 5 requested this Government to delay the delivery of its reply to the Intercross for several days until the British War Cabinet could discuss this matter. This Government advised the British on the same day that delivery of our reply would be postponed until August 11. Instructions accordingly were sent to the American Minister in Bern.

The British Embassy here transmitted to this Government on August 10 a message from the British Government which stated substantially in part that: “Hungary’s offer should be accepted and His Majesty’s Government agree to make joint declaration to that effect with the United States Government. Naturally there must be agreement between us as to the terms of the declaration.

As the United States Government knows it cannot be sufficiently emphasized that British capacity to accommodate refugees has now become limited and thus while we accept an indefinite commitment in order to meet the wishes of the United States Government we count on them to take their fair share of the burden and not to face us with the impossible in practice.”

The British Government also has raised certain practical problems of accommodation which must be considered in implementing the Hungarian offers acceptance.

The British Embassy here was advised on August 10 following the receipt of the British Government’s communication that the American Minister in Bern would deliver this Government’s reply on August 11, but that publication of such action would be deferred until the two Governments had a chance to agree on a joint statement to be given to the press. Suggestion was made to the British Embassy here that the British Minister in Bern should be instructed by his government to deliver an identical reply to Intercross. Suggestion also made that British Government consider question that text of American reply delivered to Intercross on August 11 be made the basis of a joint public declaration, after necessary slight changes were made. The foregoing suggestions, it is understood, were immediately cabled to London by the British Embassy.

The following is the substance of message sent by the British Government to this Government on August 11.

“The following suggested text of joint Anglo-American declaration approved by the War Cabinet as being the most suitable in all the circumstances should be communicated to the United States Government.

‘The offer made by Hungarian Government of which they have learned through the Intercross has been considered by the United States Government and they undertake to care for all Jews permitted to leave Hungary and to reach neutral or Allied Nations territory (even though all may not come within the classes of persons included in the Hungarian Government’s offer).

‘The offer of the Hungarian Government has also been made known to His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom and it, to the end of relieving suffering of the Jews in Hungary will, as far as it can, cooperate with the United States Government in care of Jews allowed to leave Hungary and reach territory of neutrals or United Nations.’

His Majesty’s Government, if United States Government is unable to agree to joint declaration in this form and proceeds to publicize acceptance of offer independently, proposes to publish the second portion of the foregoing declaration and through His Majesty’s Minister in Bern, to make an appropriate communication to the ICRC.”

Through the British Embassy here the British Government has been requested to consider prompt concurrence in the issuance of a joint declaration since the public statement suggested by the British Government is regarded as unacceptable. The joint declaration follows: “An offer of the Hungarian Government with respect to the emigration and treatment of Jews has been communicated to the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom by the Intercross. The two Governments because of the desperate plight of the Jews in Hungary and the overwhelming humanitarian considerations involved are advising the Hungarian Government, through the Intercross, that despite the substantial difficulties and responsibilities involved, arrangements for the care of all Jews leaving Hungary who reach neutral or United Nations territory will be made by the two Governments and they will find for such people temporary havens of refuge where they may safely live. The governments of neutral countries who are being requested to permit the entry of Jews who enter their borders from Hungary are being apprized of these assurances. In accepting the offer the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom emphasize that they do not condone in any way the action of the Hungarian Government which as an alternative to persecution and death is forcing the emigration of Jews.”

The joint declaration suggested by the British is not a commitment by that Government to the Hungarians in the opinion of the Board but merely a promise of qualified cooperation in carrying out the commitment made by the Government of the United States. The joint declaration suggested by the British, you will note, permits [omits?] any assurance by either Government to find havens of refuge for Jews who reach the territory of either United Nations or neutrals.

It is considered important that: (1) the British Government, if it has not already done so, instruct its Minister in Bern to deliver to Intercross a note identical with that delivered on August 11 by the American Minister.

(2) it notify the neutral governments of the action it takes, and requests such countries to permit the entry of Jews who reach their borders from Hungary.

(3) it agrees to the simultaneous issuance in the form suggested by us of a joint statement.

We have tried to make clear the following point of view in our discussions of this matter with the British. The action of the Hungarians in forcing the emigration of the Jews as an alternative to persecution and death is neither approved nor agreed to, and we obviously hope that circumstances will still induce Hungarian authorities to permit Jews now in Hungary to stay there in safety and that a large scale wartime migration will not be insisted upon by the Hungarian Government. This Government is not prepared, however, to give Germany and Hungary any excuses whereby extermination or deportation of the Jews may be continued. This Government’s insistence on an early notification to the Hungarians of our joint acceptance without awaiting a final determination of all considerations of accommodation and transport is for this reason. An endeavor has also been made to make clear to the British that, after notification of acceptance of the Hungarian’s offer by both Governments and the publication of such acceptance, we shall be glad to discuss with it the different considerations of transportation, accommodation, et cetera, including among others the question of cooperation of the Intergovernmental Committee and Latin-American Governments.

The above is for your information and any appropriate action you may be enabled to take. It is suggested Ambassador Winant and Secretary Morgenthau be consulted.

Stettinius

54 Henry Morgenthau, Jr., Secretary of the Treasury.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/8–1444: Telegram

[Document 664]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 14, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received August 15—2:30 a.m.]

6521. Reference Deptel 5791, July 24, midnight;55 Embtel 6005, July 28, 5 p.m.; Deptel 6097, August 2, midnight; Embtel 6292, August 5, 10 p.m.56 IGC has furnished Embassy copy of telegram number 9 August 4, from Heathcote-Smith regarding Papal intervention on behalf non-Italian refugees north Italy. Substance of this message is as follows: Taylor had audience with Pope and furnished him information in all telegrams exchanged with Washington on this subject. Heathcote-Smith saw Pope August 2. Pope will request German Ambassador to endeavor stop further deportations and to furnish Vatican with figures on numbers of Jews and others in north Italy still awaiting deportation. Pope will also suggest Axis should permit these people reach some refuge. These requests will be made as though originating with Pope himself. Pope told Heathcote-Smith neither history nor his conscience would forgive him if he did not make this effort. Heathcote-Smith learned of report from Papal Nuncio in Switzerland to effect that 50 Jews in concentration camp near Modena were murdered by Axis authorities July 31.

IGC communicated this telegram to Foreign Office which replied August 11 in substance as follows: “It is noted from Heathcote-Smith’s telegram number 9 of August 4 that the Pope will take up the question of internees in northern Italy with the German authorities.

In the meantime we have asked His Majesty’s High Commissioner in Rome59 to inform us as to what accommodation, if any, may be found for these refugees in liberated Italy, but we know that our resources there are greatly strained and our military authorities insist that the number of refugees which can be brought in is definitely limited.

It is clear that Heathcote-Smith is not too well informed of the problems facing us at present. We are confronted with the likelihood of a substanital influx of refugees from the Balkans; also considerable difficulties are being encountered in connection with arrangements for medical personnel and supplies. The military authorities are not likely to agree to the maintenance of many thousands of refugees in Italy until these problems can be resolved.

I shall inform you of Sir Noel Charles’ reply which I hope will be favorable, but there are many difficulties to be overcome, as I have pointed out.”

The IGC summed up the whole situation in its telegram of today to Heathcote-Smith, paraphrase of which follows: “Your telegram number 9, August 4, regarding rescue internees threatened with deportation received August 8. Your telegram July 15 and report July 18 received respectively July 19 and 25 but your telegram July 14 not received until July 31. We proposed to American and British Governments on July 26 that they should request Vatican’s intervention for relief foreign civilian refugees held in northern Italy giving assurance that they would arrange transportation to southern Italy or elsewhere and for maintenance either through IGC or in some other way. American Government on July 29 furnished us with message which they repeated to Taylor and we were further informed by them on August 5 that they found our proposal acceptable. In accordance with their suggestion we had three-cornered discussion with representatives of Foreign Office and American Embassy and have furnished copies of your latest telegram to both governments. Today we received letter from Foreign Office stating that Charles has been asked to report as to what accommodations if any may be available south of the battle line in Italy. Foreign Office emphasizes possibility of large influx from Balkans simultaneously with difficulties relating to medical personnel and supplies. British opinion is being conveyed to Washington by American Embassy. Congratulations to you and Taylor for successful approach to Pope. We will keep you informed of further developments.”

Winant

55 Not printed; it concerned report on deportation by Germans of Jews from Italy to concentration camps (840.48 Refugees/7–2444).

56 None printed.

59 Sir Noel Charles, British Ambassador in Italy and High Commissioner and British Member of Advisory Council for Italy.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/8–1644: Telegram

[Document 665]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 16, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received August 16—4:05 p.m.]

6601. ReDeptel 5529, July 14, 7 p.m. Embassy is airmailing reply of Foreign Office to Embassy’s note conveying objections of WRB to alleged contradictions in British policy regarding escape of refugees to Italy from Balkans.

Foreign Office reiterates that refugees must not be discouraged from escaping to Italy and regrets that WRB should have misconstrued intention of conditions under which Ackermann was appointed to Italy.

Foreign Office, however, agrees with military authorities that influx of refugees into Italy should not increase to an extent to overtax supply and transport there nor place additional burden on military in respect of operation of refugee camps in Middle East and North Africa. It points out that Supreme Allied Commander Mediterranean had already informed Combined Chiefs of Staff that existing facilities could not be expanded unless adequate assistance were forthcoming from UNRRA.

Foreign Office also explains that it was not intended to subordinate Ackermann to Displaced Persons Sub-Commission or to confine his activities to investigation only and that conditions mentioned in this connection were rather to ensure his cooperation with other bodies dealing with refugees and to ensure that other organizations concerned would be consulted by him before he might undertake any negotiations with enemy aliens.

Winant

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/8–1644: Telegram

[Document 666]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 16, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received 9:56 p.m.]

6608. For War Refugee Board from DuBois.

Section 1: Refer your 6408 of August 12 relating to the offer concerning emigration and treatment of Jews communicated by Hungarian Government to the United States and British Governments. The exact text of a joint declaration which has been agreed upon by the British Government is contained in message No. 6609 immediately following this message. This joint statement has been agreed upon here and will be released over the BBC on midnight Thursday, August 17. It will appear in the Friday morning British newspapers.

Section 2: This declaration was agreed upon after consultation between Ambassador Winant and Foreign Minister Eden and after considerable discussion with the Foreign Office. It has been approved by the British War Cabinet.

Section 3: The following change was made in the joint declaration suggested in your 6408. The words “have accepted the offer of the Hungarian Government to the release of Jews and will make arrangements for the care of such Jews” was substituted for the words “will make arrangements for the care of all Jews”. The purpose of this substitution was to meet the British objection to stating that the two Governments were prepared to receive all Jews as distinguished from the Jews referred to in the Hungarian offer. It is our feeling that the language which we have agreed upon as a substitute, while meeting the British objection, at the same time both to the world and to the Hungarian Government will be substantially as effective as the language suggested in your 6408. This is particularly true with respect to its effect on the Hungarian Government in light of the fact that the message which has already been delivered to Intercross by the United States Government is worded in terms of receiving all Jews. If it is felt that in light of the fact that the note which the United States Government delivered to Intercross contained the words “all Jews” these words should therefore be included in any public announcement made by the United States Government. This point could be taken care of by the United States Government at the same time that it releases the text of the joint declaration releasing the text of the note which the United States Government delivered to Intercross.

Section 4: Further details concerning the discussions with the British will be furnished to you by DuBois upon his return to Washington.

Section 5: The British Government will convey the text of this joint declaration to Intercross and also convey the text to Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and Turkey.

Section 6: Please acknowledge at once the receipt of this message and the immediately following message. [DuBois.]

Winant

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/8–1644: Telegram

[Document 667]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 16, 1944.
[Received August 16—2:45 p.m.]

6609. For the War Refugee Board from DuBois. The following is the exact text of the joint declaration agreed upon by the British Government:60 Intercross has communicated to the Governments of the United Kingdom and the United States an offer of the Hungarian Government regarding the emigration and treatment of Jews. Because of the desperate plight of the Jews in Hungary and the overwhelming humanitarian considerations involved the two Governments are informing the Government of Hungary through Intercross that, despite the heavy difficulties and responsibilities involved, they have accepted the offer of the Hungarian Government for the release of Jews and will make arrangements for the care of such Jews leaving Hungary who reach neutral or United Nations territory, and also that they will find temporary havens of refuge where such people may live in safety. Notification of these assurances is being given to the governments of neutral countries who are being requested to permit the entry of Jews who reach their frontiers from Hungary. The Governments of the United Kingdom and the United States emphasize that, in accepting the offer which has been made, they do not in any way condone the action of the Hungarian Government in forcing the emigration of Jews as an alternative to persecution and death.

[DuBois]
Winant

60 Released to the press by the Department of State on August 17, Department of State Bulletin, August 20, 1944, p. 175.

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Representatives 840.48 Refugees/8–1844: Circular telegram

[Document 668]

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Representatives 61

Washington, August 18, 1944.

Radio bulletin of August 17 contains the joint declaration of the British and United States Governments in response to the offer of the Hungarian Government to permit the emigration of certain categories of Jews from Hungary. As you have done with previous press releases on refugee matters, kindly secure the widest possible distribution for this declaration. The original offer of the Government of Hungary was made public in Switzerland by the Intercross on July 18 as follows: “Following steps taken in Budapest by ICRC in Geneva. Hungarian authorities have given the committee official assurances that transportation of Jews beyond Hungarian frontiers has ceased and that the ICRC are authorized to furnish relief of Jews who are interned or in forced residence in Hungary. The committee are furthermore empowered to cooperate in the evacuation of all Jewish children under ten years of age who are in possession of visas to reception countries and all Jews in Hungary holding entrance visas to Palestine will receive permission from the authorities to leave for that country.”

Hull

61 Sent to Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and Turkey; and to the U.S. Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters at Caserta, Italy.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/8–1944: Telegram

[Document 669]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, August 19, 1944—10 p.m.

2863. The following for McClelland is WRB 130 and refers to portion of section 3 of your 5040 of August 5.

1. Similar information contained in note of Hungarian Legation, Stockholm to Swedish Foreign Office is substantially as follows: “The right of supervision by Hungarian Red Cross representative so that further charges of brutality may be avoided has been granted to future deportees for labor service.”

2. Please suggest to Intercross, because of issue involved which is possible extermination of 400,000 Jews said to have been already deported, the urgency of contacting Hungarian officials and Hungarian Red Cross regarding immediate establishment Red Cross supervision over all camps which in the past have housed Jews deported from Hungary.

3. Transmission to appropriate Hungarian authorities of message substantially as follows should be requested of Swiss Foreign Office: “Referring again to Hungarian communication (see your 5040 of August 5) the United States Government notes the explanation regarding Jews from Hungary contained in said communication that such Jews have been ‘placed as workers at disposal of German Government as for years was the case of tens of thousands of workers of Christian faith and Hungarian nationality.’

The United States Government would appreciate a statement, in view of German Government policy concerning Jews which United States Government assumes is well known to Hungarian Government, of measures which have been taken and are being taken by Hungarian authorities to safeguard Jews placed at Germany’s disposal against starvation and other forms of persecution and to insure humane treatment thereof.

Unless such measures are taken regarding all Jews ‘put at disposition of Government of Germany’ the Hungarian authorities will readily perceive that the explanation offered would seem to vary markedly from the facts and that the Hungarian authorities responsible for placing such Jews at Germany’s disposal would be responsible for any cases of abuse.

The Government of the United States awaits with extraordinary interest an early reply to the inquiry made herein.”

Naturally you may adjust the language in your discretion in transmitting the foregoing to the Swiss Foreign Office.

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/8–2244: Telegram

[Document 670]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 22, 1944—1 p.m.
[Received August 22—10:16 a.m.]

6784. Embassy represented at informal conference yesterday evening discuss steps to be taken to implement acceptance of Hungarian offer respecting Jews. Present were two members refugee section Foreign Office, Director and Vice Director IGC and representatives of Ministry War Transport, Admiralty and Treasury. Professor Arthur Goodhart who is to represent the War Refugee Board also attended.

Director IGC submitted memorandum proposing following steps be taken immediately by American and British Government in order to get relief program under way without delay: 1. American and British Governments to ask Intercross: (a) To carry on necessary discussions with Hungarian Government.

(b) To use its influence toward good treatment of Jews in Hungary and especially toward cessation deportations.

(c) To inform American and British Governments and IGC of all developments particularly any renewal deportations.

(d) To select persons to make up early contingents of Jews leaving Hungary.

(e) To provide relief inside Hungary.

(f) To report on practical routes of removal refugees from Hungary.

(g) To cooperate with special Swedish Government representatives in Hungary handling refugee matters.

Remaining paragraphs director’s memorandum are explanatory of points covered above and give certain views of director. They are substantially as follows:

2. Persons included in early contingents should be (a) children and (b) persons to whom Palestine certificates available. Canada should be approached to grant 1,000 visas to supplement 5,000 American visas transferred from children in France to children in Hungary. Portugal might also be asked to give temporary refuge 3,000 children.

3. Pending Intercross report best routes apparently are (a) to Switzerland, (b) overland through Bulgaria to Palestine (c) overland to Sweden (d) to Rumania thence by sea to Palestine. Intercross might be asked investigate safe conduct possibility for (d).

4. Regarding maintenance in Hungary Intercross should be encouraged to press Hungarian Government to allow Jews to use own resources for self-support. If necessary to provide maintenance Intercross can use private funds available to it through licenses issued by United States Treasury to JDC.62 If these insufficient further funds may be made available by IGC. American and/or Swiss currency should be sent to Hungary if sufficient Hungarian currency cannot be bought in Switzerland. Private funds should be used as long as they last after which IGC should request further funds from British and American Governments under operational expenditure arrangements.

5. [If?] IGC is given responsibility for maintenance refugees in neutral countries it should be associated with approaches to those countries. IGC feels it should handle such maintenance. Switzerland and Sweden may well refuse to accept outside financial assistance but will undoubtedly want guarantee regarding additional supplies. American and British Governments might wish to reaffirm guarantees already given.

6. Arrangements for exit through Balkans best handled by Intercross and American British Ambassadors Ankara in cooperation with WRB and with Jewish agency for Palestine when destination is Palestine.

7. Foregoing proposals would enable immediate beginning of action and early start is considered essential. Looking further ahead in addition to neutral countries temporary refuge could be arranged Tripolitania and Fedhala camp might accommodate a thousand. Brazil and Mexico might respond if American and British Governments show they are taking practical measures to receive considerable numbers in their own territories.

This ends summary of director’s memorandum.

Respecting finance Treasury representative said estimate of cost would be required in order draft special appropriation bill but had no anxiety regarding obtaining amount needed. Ministry War Transport representative said evacuation ship could be ready on 30 days notice but safe conduct essential. Admiralty representative emphasized impracticability water transport without safe conduct because of hazards of Aegean Sea dominated by German air power.

Foreign Office representative said IGC proposals (a) through (g) were in agreement with views of British Government and that they would be cabled with explanatory comments to British Legation Bern.

In answer to specific question Embassy representative said that while he was without instructions and could give no formal assurances he had discussed whole subject with DuBois WRB and believed that proposals were in accordance with views of WRB.

Director IGC said he desired IGC to take more active part in meeting Hungarian offer than acting merely as fiscal agent.

General consensus was that quick action by American and British Governments most necessary even though rapid development military situation may actually render large migration from Hungary superfluous.

Please inform WRB.

Winant

62 American-Jewish Joint Distribution Committee.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/8–2244: Telegram

[Document 671]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, August 22, 1944—8 p.m.

2888. Refer Department’s 2737 August 9 WRB 112.63 For Harrison and McClelland. Communication has been received from IGC substantiating reports of deportations of holders of Latin American documents from civilian internment camps subsequent to May 11.64 lists of names and full details have been supplied. Such deportations took place about May 16 and July 18 from Vittel. Internees at Vittel were informed erroneously by Camp Commandant that transport was to be sent to Bergen-Belsen. They were also advised by the Commandant that neither Latin American documents nor Palestine certificates would have validity in the eyes of the German authorities unless an exchange actually took place to South America or to Palestine.

Please request Swiss Government to inform German Foreign Office that if facts are substantially as reported to it this Government protests against this action as a violation of the assurances previously given by Germany to Switzerland, reported in your 4223 of July 3. Please also request Swiss Government to press for the immediate return of all deportees to civilian internment camps and to secure renewed assurances that such removals from civilian internment camps will not be repeated. It is requested moreover, that the German authorities be advised that failure to return those removed from Vittel subsequent to May 11 to civilian internment camps where refugees are held for exchange will not only be considered as a violation of assurances previously given but further that all interested governments will have no alternative but to consider that those deported, claimants to the protection of these governments, have been disposed of contrary to the rules of humanity and international practice. Further in this connection use may be made of the argument contained in paragraph 3 of Department’s 2490 of July 21.

In view of the fact that the German assurances that there would be no further removals of Latin American document holders from civilian internment camps after May 11 were given to the Swiss Government, it is not only hoped that the Swiss Government will find it possible to transmit the above protest but that it may also support it in its own name.

This is WRB Bern cable 127.

Hull

63 Not printed.

64 According to telegram 5109 of August 8 from Bern, a sharp protest against these actions was lodged through the Swiss Government, but the Germans denied the right of the Swiss to intervene for the protection of persons who were allegedly not nationals of the countries under Swiss protection (840.48 Refugees/8–844).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/8–1444: Telegram

[Document 672]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 23, 1944—5 p.m.

6722. For Winant from War Refugee Board. Reference is made to your 6521 of August 14 concerning plight of refugees in German-occupied Italy and views on this matter of Heathcote-Smith and the Foreign Office.

Position taken by Foreign Office considered inexplicable. Strongly felt that every effort should be made to effect rescue of Jews still alive in Northern Italy, even though real possibilities thereof may be nonexistent. Also agree with statement attributed to Pope that if this attempt not made neither history nor our conscience would forgive us.

It is confidently believed that ingenuity and resources of American and British Governments are such as to avoid a situation in which these people, who otherwise would be rescued, would be consigned to deportation and death, if German Government attitude is such that rescue of any thereof is possible, which frankly is very much doubted.

You are requested therefore to press this matter actively with the British Government toward a joint British and American request to the Pope to appeal to the German authorities that rescue be permitted, with the assurances that the Allied authorities will receive and care for any persons rescued.

Kindly inform DuBois of this cable, also Emerson if you deem it advisable. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 840.48 Refugees/8–2344: Telegram

[Document 673]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, August 23, 1944—5 p.m.

735. Please refer to your No. 1516 of August 18 (Ankara No. 135).65 The War Refugee Board cable 104 below is for Hirschmann.

You are authorized to indicate to the Bulgarian authorities through appropriate channels that this Government is continuing to watch with great interest the status and treatment of Jews in Bulgaria and the action of the Bulgarian authorities with respect thereto. You may also indicate that if the Bulgarians are really interested in this matter, they will not only bring to an end immediately persecution of Jews in Bulgaria and the legal dispositions which made this possible but will also permit the entry into Bulgaria of Jews escaping from Hungary and furnish to them temporary havens of refuge.

It is our view that an appropriate occasion for any favorable publicity concerning the attitude of the Bulgarian authorities would present itself only after effective action has been taken by them.

We assume that you will inform us of any such specific action.

Your efforts in this whole matter are greatly appreciated.66

Hull

65 Not printed.

66 The question of revocation of anti-Jewish measures was included on the agenda of a special session of the Bulgarian Parliament convened on August 17, 1944. On August 28 the Nuremberg anti-Jewish laws were formally withdrawn.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/8–544: Telegram

[Document 674]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, August 23, 1944—10 p.m.

2900. The following for McClelland is WRB 129 and refers to your 4604 of July 19 and 5040 of August 5.

1. Please express to the Foreign Office the appreciation of this Government for the information contained in your 4604 and 5040, in addition to taking action requested in Department’s 2715 of August 7.67 You may make available to appropriate officials of the Foreign Office the text of the reply given on August 11 by this Government to Intercross in accordance with Department’s 2657 of August 2 and 2715 of August 7, in order that the Swiss Government may be fully informed of the attitude of this Government.

Although this Government has noted the communication reported in your 5040, it does not accept the reasoning contained therein and reserves the right to return at a later date to the purported facts related therein. Please request the Swiss Foreign Office so to inform the Hungarian authorities. They should be informed further that the Hungarian Government’s assurances are too limited in character to be satisfactory. The United States Government therefore reiterates its public warning that there will be brought to justice all those who share the responsibility for the persecution of Jews and other minorities. They should also be informed that the deportation of any category of Jews is included in the foregoing and that there must be extended to all categories of Jews as a minimum permission freely to emigrate and Red Cross supervision of treatment and living conditions.

2. Communications and reports regarding Hungarian Government’s offer relating to treatment of Jews show wide discrepancies. Position this Government based for obvious reasons on version sent through Swiss Foreign Office and contained in your 4604. It proposes to maintain this position, but nevertheless is anxious to ascertain precise nature of offer and attitude of Hungarians. It is requested, therefore, that without departing from above stated position of this Government, you make discreet and informal inquiries concerning following principal uncertainties from such sources as are available to you.

Is there definite stoppage deportations of all categories? If suspended only, for what categories and for how long?

Is it possible to expect continuance of stoppage of deportations and other forms of actual danger to life even in the absence of actual sizeable emigration of Jews from Hungary during hostilities? If so, to what extent?

To what extent are Jews over ten years of age permitted to emigrate to countries other than Palestine?

Might emigration be conducted so as to prevent breakup of families? (Related to question of separation from parents of children under ten.)

Will Jews in Hungary be permitted and, in fact and aside from Intercross action, enabled to obtain food and other necessities through ordinary commercial channels? If so, to what exent?

In view of Hungarian internal situation to what extent can Hungarian promises be counted on as being made effective and continuing for the duration?

Answers to any of the above questions should be submitted as soon as possible.

It appears here, in light of current political and military situation, that main emphasis should now be placed on inducing appropriate Hungarian circles to maintain and strengthen the recently reported relaxation of Jewish regime in Hungary and to apply such relaxations to all categories of Jews therein. Assistance in clandestine escapes of groups and individuals seems less important now than prevention of deportations and assurance of tolerable living conditions for all Jews in Hungary. Kindly report any information and developments thereon.

The broad program envisaged above and in Department’s 2657 might be jeopardized by narrow scope of approach suggested by 23068 from London Embassy. It is not thought advisable therefore that you limit your démarches to items covered in London’s 230, namely children under ten and the supply problem. Naturally however you are authorized to give the assurance, in line with 230 from London, concerning availability of supplies for Hungarian refugees through blockade.

Repeated to London.

Hull

67 Not printed; Minister Harrison was instructed to transmit to Intercross on August 11 the text of the reply sent to him in Department’s telegram 2657 of August 2, midnight, p. 1114 [Pg. 1114 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658] (840.48 Refugees/6–1344).

68 Telegram 6040, July 29, 5 p.m., from London, sent to Bern as No. 230, p. 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654].

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/8–1244: Telegram

[Document 675]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, August 24, 1944—7 p.m.

2918. The following for Harrison and McClelland from Department and War Refugee Board is WRB 133.

(1) The policy of this Government, in reference to section 2 of your 4983 of August 3,69 is not to deal in specific numbers. However, in your discretion you may authorize Swiss Foreign Office to answer inquiry of German Legation, Budapest, by referring to position of this Government indicated by paragraphs 2 to 6 inclusive of Department’s 2605 of July 28,70 Department’s 2877 of August 21,71 and Department’s 2657 of August 2 and paragraph 3 hereunder.

(2) This Government intends to pursue further the reported offers of Hungarian authorities as typified by your 4604 of July 19 notwithstanding recent developments as indicated in your 5197 of August 11,72

(3) Kindly therefore request appropriate Swiss Government officials to inform enemy governments, especially Germany and Hungary, that issuance of immigration visa to the alien husband, wife, parent and unmarried minor child of an American citizen, and the wife and unmarried minor child of an alien resident of the United States who have been in an area controlled by Germany or any of Germany’s allies has been authorized, provided that such person present himself to an American consular officer in a neutral country and is found not to be disqualified therefor. Simultaneously kindly try to obtain prompt agreement of Swiss Government to inform enemy governments that persons falling within categories described above will be permitted entry into Switzerland. Swiss officials may be assured that any such persons so admitted will be adequately maintained and that any found not qualified for visa issuance will be evacuated at earliest possible time. Portugal, Spain, Sweden and Turkey are being similarly approached.73

(4) Authorization to issue immigration visas to any alien who is the husband, wife, parent, or unmarried minor child of an American citizen and on whose behalf nonquota or first preference status has been established by the approval by the Department of Justice of a petition filed by such citizen relative, or who is the wife or unmarried minor child of an alien lawfully admitted into the United States for permanent residence and as such is entitled to second preference immigration status is hereby given to consular officers in Switzerland. However, visa issuance is subject to the provisos that (1) such person is not affirmatively found by the consul under the law to be inadmissible into the United States, (2) the consul does not consider the case to be one which should be recommended for consideration under the committee procedure, or (3) such person other than a child under 16 years of age is found upon telegraphic reference to the Department for security check not to be the subject of an adverse report or to be open to reasonable suspicion because of case’s circumstances such as those attending the release of a military aged male applicant.

The foregoing is being brought to attention of private agencies so that filing of petitions by citizen and resident alien relatives of victims of persecution may be expedited, and names of persons whose status is established within the above mentioned categories will be cabled to you periodically. Please inform Board promptly of names of persons and the names and addresses of relatives claimed to reside in the United States, if any persons within such categories arrive in Switzerland after Swiss have informed enemy governments in accordance with paragraph 3 above, but before establishment of their status is communicated to you.

(5) Any developments in this program should be reported. Kindly express to Pilet-Golaz,74 in reference your 5042 of August 575 and 5248 of August 12,76 our deep appreciation of his active interest.

Hull

69 Not printed; it concerned a note from the Swiss Foreign Office with respect to a communication from the German Legation in Hungary indicating the desire of the German Government “that part of Jewish emigrants from Hungary be accepted by the United States” and the desire of the Swiss Legation at Budapest “to be informed how many of these emigrants may be accorded permits enter the United States.” (840.48 Refugees/8–344)

70 Not printed, but see telegram 5948, July 28, midnight, to London, p. 1106 [Pg. 1106 includes portions of Doc. 652 and Doc. 653].

71 Not printed; it concerned authority to permit the issuance by consular officers in Switzerland of visas to refugee children arriving in Switzerland from Hungary (811.111 Refugees/206b).

72 Not printed.

73 Hungary was so advised on September 22.

74 Marcel Pilet-Golaz, Chief of the Swiss Federal Political Department.

75 Not printed.

76 Not printed; it reported the consent of Swiss Government to give temporary refuge to 8,000 holders of Palestine certificates from Hungary in addition to proposed asylum for expectant mothers and children (840.48 Refugees/8–1244).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) 840.48 Refugees/8–1444: Telegram

[Document 676]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb)

Washington, August 24, 1944—11 p.m.

2331. The following WRB cable no. 81 is for Dexter77 from Pehle.

In view of recent military developments in France the War Refugee Board feels that no further efforts should be made to rescue either children or adults from France through Spain. This matter has been discussed with Dr. Nahum Goldmann who agreed and it is understood that the JDC is cabling its Lisbon office along the lines of the Board’s decision. You should advise those persons and organizations in Portugal interested in rescue operations of this decision of the Board and ask them to advise their associates in Spain. In the event that any of such persons or organizations are planning to continue such rescue work from France through Spain you should promptly advise me by cable.78

Since the above-mentioned rescue operations are ended insofar as the Board is concerned, I would appreciate your views concerning what, if any, worthwhile projects consistent with the Executive Order creating the Board remain to be carried out in or from Portugal.

With reference your WRB 154 (Embassy’s No. 250979 ), Mann80 is going to England shortly where he will study problem and submit recommendations to the Board for its consideration regarding any action which it should take. [Pehle.]

Hull

77 Robert C. Dexter, Special Attaché to the Embassy in Portugal on war refugee matters.

78 In telegram 2657, August 29, noon, from Lisbon, Mr. Dexter indicated that he had communicated the decision to all private organizations concerned and that no further efforts would be made to rescue either children or adults from France through Spain, and their representatives would be so notified (840.48 Refugees/8–2944).

79 Dated August 14, 1 p.m., not printed; suggestion was made that the War Refugee Board send a representative into France for study of refugee problem following liberation (840.48 Refugees/8–1444).

80 James H. Mann, Assistant Executive Director of the War Refugee Board.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/8–2244: Telegram

[Document 677]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 25, 1944—7 p.m.

6808. From War Refugee Board. Kindly refer to Embassy’s 6784 of August 22 regarding implementation of acceptance of Hungarian offer discussed in conference on August 21.

Quite forcefully suggested to Board by recent events that in actuality neither time nor opportunity exists for large scale rescue operations from Hungary. Recent indications received that Germans will not permit Jewish emigration from Hungary except as part of unacceptable ransom scheme make this appear particularly true.

This Government is anxious to continue doing everything possible to relieve precarious situation of Jews in Hungary despite the foregoing. The Board therefore has examined with much interest the suggestions of IGC and other groups present at above mentioned conference. You are authorized to indicate to various groups represented that the suggestion that the IGC assume active responsibility and leadership in this matter meets with general agreement of Department and Board.

Various cables sent or repeated to you have indicated that this Government has taken unilaterally many, if not all, of steps both as regards Intercross and neutral governments suggested in memorandum submitted by the IGC. Confirmation from Intercross that it is pursuing actively many lines, both as to rescue and relief, now suggested by IGC has already been received. Also, this Government has requested all neutrals to communicate to the Hungarian authorities their willingness to receive refugees from Hungary, and guarantees of financial aid and prompt evacuation have been given the neutrals. Their willingness to receive refugees has been indicated to the Hungarians by nearly all neutrals. The neutrals and the Hungarians have also been informed that, in addition to making 5,000 children’s visas available for children from Hungary or other European countries, other action concerning granting of American visas to Jews in Hungary has been or is being taken. Willingness to receive refugees for duration of war has been indicated already by Mexico.

Please indicate to British Government and IGC that while this Government has already taken the foregoing action, it is anxious to cooperate in working out such further measures as may be deemed necessary or advisable, and is in general agreement that such steps be taken under IGC leadership. The Board desires however to take advantage of coming visit of Goodhart81 to Washington to effect an exchange of views, so as to avoid confusion in planning for future action and to keep abreast of rapidly changing military and political situation. The Board in addition is sending James H. Mann, Assistant Executive Director, to London immediately. He will be able to give complete information regarding action already taken by this Government to implement acceptance of the Hungarian offer to IGC and interested British Government agencies. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

81 Arthur L. Goodhart, an American who was at this time professor of jurisprudence at Oxford University, who (according to telegram 5278, July 4, 10 p.m. from London) had a knowledge of the workings of the British Government, the work of UNRRA and IGC, and had been helpful to the American Embassy on many occasions (840.48 Refugees/7–444).

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/8–2644: Telegram

[Document 678]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, August 26, 1944—10 a.m.
[Received 10:35 a.m.]

5579. For WRB from McClelland. In course recent conversations ICRC, recommended that our Government in concert with British Government indicate to Hungarian Government its willingness to transport to some specified haven of refuge in Allied territory a certain number of Hungarian Jews whose removal is not based on possession Palestine certificates and who do not intend to go to Palestine. ICRC feels that such an offer might have greater chance of success than present proposals of emigration to Palestine for Hungarian Jews as it would offset German disapproval of Palestine emigration based on alleged German desire not to jeopardize their good relations with Arabian Mufti.82 ICRC is of opinion such evacuation could best be effected via Rumania as more practical and safer route than transit German-controlled territory to come to Switzerland. I feel proposal worth a try as it has definite points in its favor and would involve Hungarian Jews who would ultimately desire to return to their country. In this respect, WRB’s attention is called to Tangier’s offer of 500 entry visas.

In line with Legation’s 5397, August 19,83 it is strongly recommended that propaganda pressure on Hungarian Government be maintained. Hungarian Government is showing tendency to “relax on its laurels” following its “generous” offer to allow Jews to emigrate, meanwhile passively permitting Germans to carry out further deportation of people who are after all Hungarian nationals. Fact such acquiescence constitutes common guilt with Germans for which Hungarians will also be held responsible after war. This sort would also strengthen hand those Hungarians of good will in country who have opposed such Jewish persecution from the start. Competent Hungarian circles here commend use of Hungarian language pamphlets as well as radio warnings. [McClelland.]

Harrison

82 In telegram 6276, September 22, 9 a.m., from Bern, it was stated that the German Foreign Office intimated “that they would view more favorably departure these Jews if latter were going to British or American territory.” (840.48 Refugees/9–2244)

83 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Murphy) 840.48 Refugees/8–3044: Telegram

[Document 679]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Murphy)

Washington, August 30, 1944—7 p.m.

85. The following for Ackermann is WRB 46.

Please refer to our 431 of August 4, 1944.84 For your information the British have agreed to a joint approach to the Pope to request him to appeal to the German authorities to release refugees deported from Allied Italy, if he has not already done so, and to assure him that Allied authorities will receive and care for all such persons released by the Germans. The text of the cable received from Ambassador Winant is as follows: “Attention of the War Refugee Board.

This morning discussed with refugee section of the Foreign Office the Papal intervention on behalf of refugees of northern Italy.

Sir Noel Charles’ reply to inquiry as to accommodations was received this morning by the Foreign Office. According to Charles’ report, an additional 5,000 refugees may be accommodated in liberated Italy and use of North African camps was also suggested.

It is the understanding of the Foreign Office that there are far more than 5,000 refugees north of the battle line, but since it believes the military situation is changing so rapidly that the problem of accommodating this 5,000 additional will not arise, it feels that it will be safe to give assurances of accommodation without numerical limitation. The Foreign Office, however, does not know whether or not the Pope has already appealed to German authorities and presuming we will take parallel action, they will take the following steps:

Issue instructions to Charles to ascertain whether or not an appeal has been made by the Pope. Provided he has not, to request him to do so with assurance that the persons rescued will be cared for and received by Allied authorities. Provided he has made an appeal, to suggest that these assurances be repeated by him.

It is hoped by the Foreign Office that this action will meet with the approval of WRB and that appropriate instructions will be issued to our representative in Rome.”

We have advised the British that the proposal is satisfactory to the Board and the Department and instructions have been cabled to Myron Taylor to join with his British colleague along the lines suggested in the above quoted cable.

Hull

84 Not printed.

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/8–3144: Telegram

[Document 680]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, August 31, 1944—9 a.m.
[Received 2:26 p.m.]

5689. Swiss notice dated August 26 contains following with reference numbered paragraph 1 of Department’s 2407, July 13.

Swiss Legation Berlin in recent report on situation in Germany of bearers identity papers issued in name Latin American republics set forth difficulties encountered in efforts protect such persons.

It appears particularly that German authorities beginning differentiate between passports held by persons possessing nationality of countries in question by birth and those issued with view protecting Jews against action which might be taken against them.

They refuse recognize right of interested persons to claim Latin American nationality not because of expiration validity of passports but because antecedents of Jews concerned and nature of identity document in their possession constitute in view said officials sufficient proof that they acquired these documents “ad hoc”.

Swiss Legation expresses view that extension these passports “ad hoc” is not the essential matter but that it is fundamental that said Legation be informed in some manner of presence these Latin American citizens who do not appear its registers. As bearers identity documents this character have not in many cases been reported to Swiss Legation, it might happen in case German authorities should inquire whether particular person is among those protected by it that said Legation would not be able furnish information regarding nationality claimed by interested person.

Swiss Legation suggests in order facilitate its representations to German Government that governments in whose name identity documents issued, prepare lists as complete as possible of bearers these documents with accompanying declaration that these governments recognize these persons as their nationals.

Harrison

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/8–3144

[Document 681]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

No. 17785 London, August 31, 1944.
[Received September 22.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith copies of letters85 exchanged between myself and Mr. Eden regarding the recent joint declaration issued by the American and British Governments accepting the offer of the Hungarian Government with respect to the emigration and treatment of Jews.

My letter to Mr. Eden, acknowledging the limitations on British capacity to accommodate refugees and British reliance on the United States to assume its fair share of the burden, was made at the suggestion of the Foreign Office in order to obtain the War Cabinet’s approval of the joint declaration as subsequently issued. It was believed that sufficient authority existed to make this acknowledgment since assurance had already been given unilaterally by the United States Government to the International Committee of the Red Cross, and prior to any parallel action on the part of the British, that the United States would take measures for the care of all Jews permitted to migrate from Hungary to United Nations or neutral territory, and that it would find havens of refuge for such persons. (Department’s telegram No. 6408 of August 12, midnight, and previous.) In view of this commitment on our part to assume all of the burden, if necessary, it was felt that there would be no objection to assuring the British that we would bear a “fair share” of it.

This obligation to assume a “fair share” was limited to the Hungarian proposal only, and with respect to the refugee problem in general there is no outstanding obligation in relation to this letter.

Respectfully yours,

John G. Winant

85 Not printed.

Memorandum by the Director of the Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees (Emerson) to the International Red Cross Delegation at London 840.48 Refugees/9–144

[Document 682]

Memorandum by the Director of the Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees (Emerson) to the International Red Cross Delegation at London 86

[London,] 31 August, 1944.

The Vice-Director and I had a talk with Mr. Burckhardt of the International Red Cross Delegation in London regarding, first, the present position in Hungary, and second, the possible means by which advantage may be taken of the offer of the Hungarian Government. He has shown us a message received from the International Red Cross, Geneva, dispatched on the 26th August, 1944, regarding the present situation of the Jews in Hungary. This, like other recent information, is not re-assuring, and since it was sent events have been moving rapidly in Roumania and Hungary. With regard to the specific matter mentioned in it, I have ascertained that the British Government has already authorized the Swiss Consul in Budapest, through the Swiss Government, to make the necessary endorsement on the travelling documents of those who are on the list for immigration to Palestine, which will enable the International Red Cross to satisfy the German Authorities that there will be no difficulty about their entrance into Palestine. These endorsements will also facilitate the issue of transit visas by the Governments of the countries through which they may have to pass.

2. We have informed Mr. Burckhardt that, following discussions with the American and British Governments, it is probable that the Intergovernmental Committee, acting in close collaboration with the War Refugee Board, will be the authority responsible for coordinating the work of: (a) Finding temporary homes inside Europe for those who cannot proceed direct to their places of asylum outside.

(b) Providing maintenance where necessary, and

(c) Assistance in transport arrangements. For those who are proceeding to Palestine, the necessary discussions in regard to certificates, etc., will be carried out by the Jewish Agency with the British Government, but the Intergovernmental Committee will keep in touch with the Jewish Agency and also with the British Government.

3. The responsibility of the Intergovernmental Committee will not extend to negotiations with the Hungarian Government, which will, it is hoped, be continued by the International Red Cross to whom the offer was made by the Hungarian Government.

4. The action required at present would seem to be as follows: (a) For the London Delegation of the International Red Cross to inform Geneva of the position of the Intergovernmental Committee.

(b) To request Geneva to keep the Intergovernmental Committee fully informed of all developments through the London Delegation.

(c) To concentrate on two groups as offering the most favourable prospects, first, children, and second, those on the Palestine list.

5. With regard to children, the immediate possible places of asylum would seem to be Switzerland and Sweden, if the children can be transported there pending reception outside Europe. Of these transport to Sweden may be an insuperable difficulty. We shall be glad of views of International Red Cross on this. Transport to Switzerland seems more promising, but here again, we should like to know the prospects.

6. With regard to the Palestinian group, recent events presumably rule out the Balkan routes. If this is so, the immediate course would seem to be to obtain temporary sanctuary for them in Switzerland until they can be removed by other routes to Palestine, which events in France should facilitate.

7. If maintenance has to be provided for those received in neutral or other countries, this will probably be done through the Intergovernmental Committee in pursuance of the Declaration of the American and British Governments.

8. The Intergovernmental Committee looks forward to the closest co-operation with the International Red Cross.

H. W. Emerson

86 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 17816, September 1; received September 6.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/7–2944: Telegram

[Document 683]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, September 2, 1944—midnight.

3040. The following cable for Harrison and McClelland from the Department, War Refugee Board and Foreign Economic Administration is WRB 109 and refers to Legation’s 4874 of July 2987 regarding Sternbuch scheme.

We concur in your view that it is not feasible presently to undertake the transaction in question, for reasons clearly indicated in Department’s 2656 of August 2, WRB’s 106.88

It is feared, however, in view of contents of paragraph 4 of your above mentioned cable, that you may misapprehend United States Government policy regarding, for refugee rescue and relief purposes, the licensing of financing operations in and communications with enemy territory. The decision not to undertake the Sternbuch proposal, it must be emphasized, changes in no way nor derogates from the licensing policy effective since before establishment in January of War Refugee Board. The following, for your information and guidance, is a statement of policy of this Government regarding rescue and relief purposes licenses communicated to the British Government several months ago and explained to Mr. Dingle Foot of MEW in person and detail.89

“With approval of the Department of State, the Treasury Department and the War Refugee Board a number of licenses have been issued by the United States Government to private organizations authorizing such organizations, in an effort to save the lives of oppressed peoples, to finance operations in and communicate with enemy territory. The basic provisions of these licenses have already been communicated to the British Government. It is known by the British Government that only if it is not feasible to procure local funds by other prescribed methods do such licenses permit the acquisition of the necessary local funds, goods or services from persons in enemy or enemy-occupied territory against payment in free exchange or free currency notes.

In issuing these licenses the United States Government has concluded that the saving of lives far outweighs any danger involved in permitting the enemy to acquire relatively inconsequent amounts of foreign exchange. It is felt that every effort should be exerted towards making available adequate funds for assisting refugees to escape or to otherwise save their lives as experience has shown that in many cases this end can be attained only by the use of money.

The Government of the United States is convinced that operations of this character are necessary, in addition to those the Intergovernmental Committee will undertake in extension of credit operations which private organizations have conducted previously.

Motivated by humanitarian considerations the United States Government intends to continue the policy in connection with the issuance of licenses to private organizations which it has now been pursuing for several months. This Government is most anxious there be no unilaterality in its efforts in this regard and that a common line will be followed by the two Governments so that, as in the case of operations through the Intergovernmental Committee, there may be full cooperation in this matter as well.

The United States Government accordingly hopes that adoption of a similar policy relative to authorization and encouragement of transmission of funds by private agencies to neutral countries for the rescue and relief of enemy oppression victims will be decided upon by the British Government. The two Governments will, in this way, be able to carry out most effectively the policy agreed upon heretofore to take all measures possible for the speedy relief and rescue of the oppressed minorities of Europe which are consistent with the successful prosecution of the war.”

In continuing and intensifying our humanitarian efforts to rescue the victims of enemy oppression it is important that the policy indicated be your guide. Your attention is further directed in this connection to the Department’s cable 856 of March 15.90

Adequate care, we know, is being taken not to make free currency or free exchange available except where other prescribed methods of procuring local funds are not feasible and, from reports furnished us, we are not disturbed about the quantity of free currency and free exchange being obtained. Also, we do not regard these activities as conflicting with the various negotiations this Government is now conducting with the Swiss Government and Swiss banks to deny free Swiss francs to the enemy to the greatest possible extent, and expressly to prevent a last minute flight of capital into Switzerland, attempting to avoid military and economic control of the United Nations.

Hull

87 Not printed; it concerned a proposal involving simple ransom money payments (840.48 Refugees/7–2944). For American policy toward transactions of this character, see Department of State press release of November 24, 1942, “German attempts to extort ransom payments for persons in occupied countries”, Department of State Bulletin, November 28, 1942, p. 962.

88 Not printed.

89 Memorandum by the Department of State to the British Embassy, June 20, 1944, in response to aide-mémoire of March 27 from the British Embassy, neither printed; the conference between Mr. Foot and Mr. Pehle on the license operations of the War Refugee Board took place in the Executive Director’s office on June 14, according to a memorandum of June 15 from the Adviser on Refugees and Displaced Persons (Warren) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) (840.48 Refugees/5979).

90 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 740.00115 E. W./7–1944: Telegram

[Document 684]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, September 6, 1944.

3082. American Interests—Europe, Repatriation. Please inform Swiss Government for guidance of its representatives in Europe in charge of American interests that following classes of individuals are established in order to permit United States Government to designate which classes of individuals eligible for exchange are to have priority in any given operation. Lists for any specified exchange will be made up from one or more of these priority groupings depending upon the administrative, transportation and other circumstances attendant upon each exchange. The priority groupings are as follows: A. Persons receiving financial assistance through the protecting Power under authorization of the government to which they owe allegiance, and their spouses and/or children. Under this heading unqualified first priority shall be extended to those persons who are ill, mentally afflicted or aged but able to travel, and unqualified second priority shall be given to those women and children who are unaccompanied by the head of the family. Among the rest, priority shall be accorded to those arrested or interned over those who are at liberty.

B. Persons not receiving financial assistance who have otherwise been extended formal recognition of their nationality through the protecting Power since the outbreak of hostilities. Priorities under this heading shall be the same as under A. Spouses and/or children are to be included.

C. Immediate family members, regardless of the state of their documentation, of citizens of the United States or of the other American republics who were repatriated in earlier exchanges. This heading is intended to cover spouses and/or children. Other categories of relatives or dependents should not be included under this heading unless specifically authorized by the Department.

D. Bona fide nationals of the Western Hemisphere countries, regardless of the state of their documentation, who are confined in institutions for the mentally or incurably afflicted. This covers also the spouses and/or children of such persons.

E. Individuals whose lives are in jeopardy whose claim to nationality is not questioned but whose right to protection may be doubtful because of extended residence abroad, lack of ties in the Western Hemisphere or some other technical reason. Within this category the same priorities shall be applied as under A. Spouses and/or children shall be included.

F. Individuals whose lives are in jeopardy and who bear documentation reflecting a right to exercise citizenship of or, alternatively, a right of protection by or admission into one of the republics of the Western Hemisphere, the circumstances of whose cases preclude adequate examination of the juridical basis of such right by the interested government until peace is restored in Europe or appearance is made before a consular or diplomatic officer of the respective republic, whichever first occurs. Priorities within this group shall be the same as under A. Spouses and/or children are included.

The Department is notifying the other American republics of the foregoing priorities system with the invitation to join with the United States in its adoption and inform their protecting Power accordingly with the request that lists of their nationals desiring repatriation be compiled in accordance with the foregoing categories.91

Hull

91 On November 9, 1944, a seventh category was added to the priorities groupings (airgram No. A–540, November 9 to Bern, and amendment noted in telegram No. 4289, December 20 to Bern, neither printed); this classification, Category G, comprised immediate family members (spouses and/or children), regardless of the state of their documentation, of American citizens and of alien residents of the United States or of other American Republics. (740.00115 EW/7–1944)

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/9–644: Telegram

[Document 685]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, September 6, 1944—2 p.m.

3074. The following for McClelland is WRB 159.

The Board has received unofficial reports that Intercross believes Theresienstadt a privileged camp and considers no action calculated to bring its inmates within scope of Intercross activity to be necessary.

However, it has also received repeated reports of recent deportations from Theresienstadt to extermination camps which, if true, indicate no security enjoyed by its inmates. Please so inform Intercross which, in light of above, may have no knowledge thereof. Unless adequate precautions are taken the well known tendencies in certain German official circles to exterminate maximum number of Jews before end of war may make sudden deterioration of position of Jews in Theresienstadt and elsewhere likely. An expressed or tacit approval of reported Intercross position would mean moral responsibility for possible loss of human lives involved. Board is unable to assume this responsibility and it is convinced that bearing of such responsibility would be displeasing to Intercross.

Earnestly hoped by Board therefore that protective activities of Intercross will be extended to Theresienstadt inmates including distribution of Palestine certificates and other documents entitling them to partial assimilation with civilian internees, general Intercross supervision, eligibility for exchange, et cetera.

Please submit in diplomatic manner Board’s view to Intercross that in dealing with Jews in German controlled territory in the coming critical weeks attempts to correct unsatisfactory situations already in existence are insufficient and it’s opinion that it is urgent, in light of present circumstances, that all measures to deal with sudden deterioration be taken. Intercross is earnestly urged, therefore, to take preventive as well as corrective action, however much this may go beyond the traditional pattern of its program. This line of action may be unprecedented, but the situation is likewise.

Please discuss foregoing points with Huber92 personally, if possible.

Hull

92 Max Huber, President of International Red Cross.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 840.48 Refugees/9–744: Circular telegram

[Document 686]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)93

Washington, September 7, 1944—6 p.m.

The following WRB cable no. 106 is for Hirschmann. Several requests have already been received by the War Refugee Board for financial assistance in the relief of refugees in areas liberated by the Allied military forces.

For your information and guidance War Refugee Board activities are to be strictly limited to the rescue and relief of the victims of enemy oppression who are in imminent danger of death, that is, who are still in enemy-occupied territory. Refugee problems in liberated areas are not regarded as being within the Board’s functions. Accordingly, if you receive requests limited to the relief and assistance of refugees in areas liberated from the Germans, you should refer such problems to UNRRA, the appropriate military authorities, the Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees, private refugee organizations, or other national or international groups which are authorized to deal with matters of this nature.

The foregoing shall not be construed to limit the activities of the Board dealing with arrangements for the removal of refugees in liberated areas whose presence serves to discourage or prevent the rescue of additional refugees from enemy-occupied areas.

This message has been repeated to the other WRB Special Representatives abroad.

Hull

93 Repeated on the same date to Stockholm, Lisbon, Caserta, London, and Bern.

The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/9–844: Telegram

[Document 687]

The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Rome, September 8, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received September 9—10:02 a.m.]

317. Department 114, August 30, 7 p.m. and my 302, September 4, 5 p.m.94 According to note dated September 8 from the Holy See the approach to the German Government through Vatican channels by the Pope requesting the release of about 9000 refugees in Northern Italy to be transported to Southern Italy or elsewhere was made by the Nuncio in Berlin (Taylor’s 309)95 with the result that Germany claimed that the authority for these persons rested with the Italian Socialist Republic. The Vatican further indicated that they had no communication with that body. Full text follows by air.96

Kirk

94 Neither printed.

95 Reference is made to a communication of September 8 from Mr. Myron C. Taylor, President Roosevelt’s Personal Representative to Pope Pius XII, conveying information repeated herein.

96 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/8–2644: Telegram

[Document 688]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, September 9, 1944—6 p.m.

3120. The cable below for McClelland is WRB 158. Please refer paragraph 1 your 5579 of August 26. Attention of Intercross may be drawn to text of this Government’s reply of August 11 (see Department’s 2657 of August 2) to Intercross in which it undertook to arrange for care of all Jews allowed to leave Hungary under current circumstances, who reach United Nations or neutral territories and to find temporary refuge havens for them. No limitation to Jews possessing Palestine certificates or planning to enter Palestine was implied in that reply.

Attention of Intercross may also be drawn to special provisions made (Department’s 2605 of August 1 [July 28])97 in favor of persons to whom American immigration visas were issued or authorized after July 1, 1941; to extension of children’s visa facilities (Department’s 2877 of August 2198 ) to Jewish children from Hungary; to provisions (Department’s 2918, of August 24) in favor of close relatives of American citizens and alien legal residents; and to assurances (Department’s 2978 of August 29)98 procured by this Government from Ireland and Honduras in favor of children from Hungary. In addition, admission of 100 children from Hungary has been agreed to by Nicaragua, and willingness to give emergency shelter for duration of war to refugees from enemy territory has been expressed by Mexico.

This Government has also requested the cooperation of Switzerland, Sweden, Spain, Portugal and Turkey regarding admission of such Jews as are allowed to leave Hungary. Partial success has attended these requests, 2,000 visas have been authorized by Spain. Admission of children, numerous adults, and persons to whom American visas were issued or authorized after July 1, 1941, is reported as being agreed to by Sweden. Rumania is cooperating, but current events on its Hungarian border probably preclude evacuation thereto.

You may reiterate, in pointing out foregoing to Intercross, this Government’s refusal ever to limit its undertakings regarding emigration of Jews from Hungary to any number or particular category of Jews or to Jews bound for any particular country and its protest against the attempt to introduce such arbitrary limitations made by the German and Hungarian authorities.

Board appreciates and is acting upon recommendation contained in final paragraph of your 5579 in reference above.

Hull

97 Not printed, but see telegram 5948, July 28, midnight, to London, p. 1106 [Pg. 1106 includes portions of Doc. 652 and Doc. 653].

98 Not printed.

98 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) 840.48 Refugees/9–544: Telegram

[Document 689]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, September 11, 1944—9 p.m.

2518. The following is from War Refugee Board. Reference is made to your 3044 of September 5.1 Department’s 2331 to Lisbon dated August 24 was limited to rescue activities out of France and does not cover situation in areas still under German control.

With regard to Department’s 2361 of August 242 to you, while the actual passage of Jews from Hungary and other Axis areas through Spain may perhaps be rendered unnecessary by military developments, neutral visas and permission for unobstructed exit of beneficiaries of such visas are still of great importance in safeguarding the lives of Jews in such areas, and you are requested to continue your efforts in this respect. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

1 Not printed; it concerned issuance of Spanish visas to persons in German-occupied territories (840.48 Refugees/9–544).

2 Not printed; it concerned entrance of refugee children into Spanish Morocco (840.48 Refugees/8–1244).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/9–1144: Telegram

[Document 690]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 11, 1944—11 p.m.
[Received September 11—7:54 p.m.]

7473. From Mann for Pehle WRB. This evening Browne3 and I at request of Malog [Mason], Chief of Refugee Department of Foreign Office, attended a meeting at his office at which Sir Herbert Emerson was also present. Mason read a telegram received Saturday4 from British Minister in Bern a paraphrase of which is as follows: “The Swiss Government understand from the German Government that the latter are not ready to allow a party of 2100 Jews from Hungary to leave the country if they are to go to Palestine since they do not wish to disturb the Arabs. They would, however, if the group were to have a destination in British or American territory, view their departure more favorably.

Moreover, the German Ministry for Foreign Affairs have requested that the Swiss Legation at Budapest should hand a nominal list to the German Legation there stating that on security grounds, they cannot allow the departure of the group until each individual case has been examined.

The Swiss Government wish to know whether instructions to this effect should be sent to their Legation at Budapest.”

There was no indication that McClelland was advised of the foregoing.

This German move cuts at the very heart of the joint declaration of the American and British Governments since it rejects the offer to place Jews coming from Hungary in neutral and United Nations territory and substitutes instead American or British territory excluding Palestine. While composition of 2100 is not known, it is presumed that they are principally holders of Palestine certificates and acceptance of the offer as made would put American and British Governments in position of invalidating Palestine certificates at least temporarily even if condition were accepted only for duration of war. Failure to accept German conditions with concrete offer puts Germans in position to say they would let Jews go but we would not take them. Also possible that if conditions accepted in this case, they will be made applicable to all others seeking to escape. Presumably, the purpose of the German maneuver is to embarrass the two Governments.

British propose to instruct their Minister in Bern to reply to Swiss Government along following lines: “It is assumed that security check is for purpose of expediting and not delaying departure of Jews. With that understanding which Swiss should emphasize, there is no objection to putting list in hands of Germans provided Swiss first assure themselves that Germans will not use such list for purposes of victimizing prospective evacuees. It is assumed that list will show that persons named thereon are holders of Palestine certificates. British Government has no intention of taking any action which would invalidate such certificates. Please ascertain from Swiss if they are prepared to give temporary haven to group with the maintenance guarantees previously given until such time as they can be evacuated. If so, they should advise the Germans that they have agreed to give temporary haven to the 2100 refugees.”

Obviously the proposed reply does not meet the German conditions. It might stand some small chance of success. However, it is altogether possible that the Germans would ask the final destination of the Jews or that the British position with regard to Palestine certificates would be taken for granted in the absence of a statement to the contrary. The British understandably feel that they must preserve the validity of Palestine certificates in view of public and Jewish opinion.

Browne and I attempted to ascertain what were the possibilities of removing the 2100 from Switzerland to British or American soil. We could get no suggestions from Mason who said he would have to consult the Colonial Office to ascertain if any British soil were available. Consequently, it is safe to say that if the German conditions were accepted even temporarily, aside from the other complications, British or American soil means only the latter. Sir Herbert continually asked if we were prepared “to open more camps like the one at Oswego”.

Until I know how far our Government is prepared to go in this matter, it is difficult to make recommendations. I believe the best solution would be an offer on our part of the nature of that resulting in Fort Ontario camp, making clear that such refuge was only for the duration of the war and that after the war, such refugees might return to their own land or a land of their choice willing to accept them. It seems doubtful that the 2100 could be evacuated before the end of the war but it is possible. Also their evacuation through France might raise problems with the military.

Urgent reply requested giving Board’s and Department’s views on suggested reply or any alternative proposals which our Government cares to put before British. They will not reply until your views are received. Should suggested reply be acceptable, it should not be transmitted until the two Governments are in agreement concerning answer should Germans insist on knowing destination of group. Emerson agrees with proposed British reply and their stand on Palestine certificates. He considers it most important that the two Governments agree on all action to be taken before any reply is made.

Please instruct McClelland to repeat to me important messages to Board and it would be appreciated if Board would repeat replies. [Mann.]

Winant

3 Sidney H. Browne, Second Secretary of Embassy and Consul.

4 September 9.

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/9–1444: Telegram

[Document 691]

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, September 14, 1944—11 a.m.
[Received 10:52 p.m.]

2864. WRB 188. Portuguese Foreign Office, while sympathetic humanitarian aims expressed Embassy’s notes 498, August 17 and 515, August 31, feels it impossible to admit refugees falling in classifications outlined Department’s telegrams 2118, July 285 and 2332, August 246 without more effective guarantees from United States that all of these people, whether given US visas or not, will be speedily removed from Portugal by US if admitted. Ministry and government fear end of war and consequent decline US interest. Specifically object to statement that recipients of US visas after July 1, 1941 will only be admitted to the US subject to US immigration law and other limitations. Also object to indefiniteness of statement that US will evacuate those not given US visas as soon as possible. Desire US guarantee definite time limit on stay in Portugal for all coming under classifications Deptel 2118 and 2332. Also statement regarding specific country which has in advance accepted those unable secure US visas, and guarantee transport for evacuation of all visa and non-visa within comparatively short period. If above requirements impossible to meet, and they seem very formidable, doubt if Portugal will take affirmative action above notes. Embassy is asked for definite written guarantee along above lines.

Norweb

5 Not printed, but see telegram 5948, July 28, midnight, to London, p. 1106 [Pg. 1106 includes portions of Doc. 652 and Doc. 653].

6 Not printed, but see telegram 2918, August 24, 7 p.m., to Bern, p. 1135 [Pg. 1135 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675].

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/9–1444: Telegram

[Document 692]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, September 14, 1944—10 p.m.

3180. The cable below for McClelland is WRB 164. Please ask Swiss political department, when replying to Swiss notice of August 26 (reference your 5689 of August 31) to emphasize that this Government, notwithstanding the German arguments, cannot recognize any right of the German authorities to pass upon the validity of documents other sovereign governments have issued in their names. In addition, in justice to their own interests, none of the American republics, upon whose documents this German procedure is being practiced, can permit that practice to pass unquestioned. This Government therefore reiterates the stand it took in paragraph two of Department’s 2490 of July 21 and rejects as irrelevant any attempts by German officials to question the validity of Latin American documents on the basis of the type of identity papers, the basis of antecedents of Jews involved or any other.

In this connection it should be emphasized that German attitude at first was to doubt the eligibility of persons involved for exchange and the acceptance by the issuing governments of the documents involved. German officials are now introducing new excuses for their failure to comply, since eligibility for exchange has been confirmed and the validity of documents notified to Germany, through protecting powers, by the several issuing governments. This Government definitely rejects all these excuses and requests that the serious consequences of their attitude be brought to the attention of such German officials.

Please advise in this connection if the message contained in paragraph 3 of Department’s 2490 of July 21 has been conveyed to the proper quarters. In the light of the military situation it is believed it may be possible to sway German officials by confronting them with a sufficiently emphatic statement of position of this Government.

Regarding suggestion in final paragraph of your 5689 concerning lists of bearers of Latin American documents, disturbed war conditions have interfered with communications between Latin American Governments and their European Missions resulting in difficulty in compilation of such lists due to incomplete records. It is believed, however, so as to assist the Swiss in this matter, you should endeavor to procure in cooperation with the local representatives of organizations that have records on the subject, lists which are as complete as possible with a view of submitting them to the Swiss officials. The urgency of confirming to the Swiss authorities the authenticity of such lists will be suggested to various Latin American Governments by the Department. However, it is hoped that the Swiss officials will agree to transmit the lists to Germany even without such confirmation in view of the humanitarian considerations involved and of this country’s status as Power handling exchange of persons whose eligibility would be established by placement on the list. The persons envisaged in paragraph number 6 of Department’s 2407 of July 13 may be included in such lists.7

Such lists cannot be considered complete. Please so inform the Swiss and German authorities. It is suggested, should Germany inquire of Swiss Legation or Government whether any particular individual not appearing on such lists is protected by Switzerland, that an answer along the following lines would be both calculated to save human lives and substantially correct: Because of wartime conditions, Swiss records regarding citizens of countries under Swiss protection are incomplete and so are records of the several Latin American legations in Bern; inquiry will be made of the government of the country concerned, if Germany informs Switzerland of the claimed nationality of any person; and the Swiss will consider it understood that such person will be treated as and accorded all the rights and privileges of a citizen of the country whose nationality is claimed pending receipt of an answer to such inquiry.

2. Our Embassies in various countries have forwarded the following information. It is transmitted for your information and guidance in connection with representation in Hungary, shelters for Jewish children from Hungary and protection of victims of enemy persecution:

Admission for temporary refuge Hungarian Jewish refugees, preferably in lots of three to four hundred agreed to in principle by Portuguese Government, which has already informed Hungarian Government of its interest in such people. The Hungarian Government has been persuaded to issue exist visas and Portuguese visas have been granted to a number of them, but permission to depart is still refused by Germany. Portuguese Legation in Budapest is now giving asylum to some of these persons. Portuguese interest in this problem is therefore well known to Hungarian Government.

Lisbon Legation of Venezuela has been authorized to visa passports of Jewish refugees, especially children, traveling to the American continent, even though they may not be proceeding to Venezuela. Swiss Political Department has also been requested to extend its protection of Venezuelan interests to Hungarian territory and other countries of Central and Eastern Europe for the purpose of aiding persons in those regions who bear Venezuelan passports.

Plan to bring 500 refugee children to Brazil has been approved by President thereof, provided expenses of transportation to and maintenance in Brazil will not be incurred by Brazilian Government. Accordingly he has charged General Ivo Soares, Chairman of Brazilian Red Cross, with making of suitable arrangements for care of such children with appropriate Jewish welfare agencies in Brazil. Official announcement will be issued soon.

The admittance of 500 refugee children has been agreed to by Uruguayan Government.

3. Haitian Legation in Bern, with reference to Department’s 2485 of July 21,8 was instructed on July 31 to request the Swiss to present to the German Government a declaration of the Haitian Government which was substantially as follows: “The Haitian Government declares, since certain individuals of the Jewish race in pursuance of the Decree-Law of May 29, 1939, naturalized as Haitians abroad, were living in German and Italian controlled territories and since by reasons of force majeure they have been detained there continuously from the declaration of war by Haiti until this date: that compliance with the Decree-Law of February 4, 1942, enjoining, under penalty of the loss of Haitian nationality, all those who had acquired Haitian naturalization abroad to return to Haiti before August 5, 1942, was impossible to persons in the above mentioned category. Therefore, it is hereby made known to whom it may concern that the Decree-Law of February 4, 1942 does not affect such persons.”

[Here follows description of a test case and request to insure treatment of two individuals as Haitian nationals.]

Instructions not to question at present the validity of Haitian passports held by persons now in occupied territories and who could be the objects of persecution by the enemy until they arrive in a place of safety have been issued to the Haitian Legation.

Hull

7 In telegram 7613, November 18, 1944, from Bern, it is stated that although Swiss authorities forwarded these lists to the Swiss Legation in Berlin for its information, the Swiss Foreign Office took the position that the lists alone could not serve as the basis of establishing the right to claim Latin American nationality unless officially confirmed by the interested Governments (840.48–Refugees/11–1844).

8 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/9–1144: Telegram

[Document 693]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, September 14, 1944—midnight.

7485. The cable below for Mann is WRB 3 and refers Embassy’s 7473 of September 11.

The following message has been sent to Bern.

Your considered judgment desired as to whether actual offer to permit 2100 or any other number of Jews to leave Hungary provided they depart for American or British territory has been made by German or Hungarian authorities. We cannot judge whether such a concrete offer has been made or whether the message from the British Minister in Bern quoted above represents merely the opinion of various agencies and individuals that the Germans might possibly be more willing to allow Jews to depart for some territory other than Palestine. In this connection see your 5579 of August 26. A prompt reply would be appreciated, as a specific answer to this question is necessary before any decision in this matter can be taken by this Government.

Undoubtedly you will desire to ask British Minister in Bern, Intercross officials, and all other appropriate groups and individuals whether any further information in the matter is available to them.

No decision is possible until reply from Bern is received. Meanwhile, transmission of any additional information that you may procure is confidently assumed.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Paraguay (Frost) 840.48 Refugees/8–3144: Airgram

[Document 694]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Paraguay (Frost)9

Washington, September 18, 1944—5:20 p.m.

A–253. The following is from War Refugee Board. Reference is made to our earlier communications on the subject of holders of Latin American documents in enemy territory.

At the suggestion of Swiss authorities, and in order to safeguard the lives of holders of documents issued in the names of American republics in German-controlled territory, this Government is endeavoring to compile lists of such holders for transmission to the German Government. A portion of a cable dated September 14, 1944 to the Legation at Bern follows:

[Here follows paraphrase of paragraph 4 of telegram 3180, September 14, printed on page 1154 [Pg. 1154 is part of Doc. 692]].

Please discuss this matter with the government to which you are accredited with a view of obtaining its confirmation of the authenticity of the list submitted by the Legation at Bern.

In making this request, you may explain that the assurances previously given on behalf of this Government that the government to which you are accredited will not be expected to grant physical admission to the persons involved and that no objection will be raised to an examination by that government of status of such persons once they are safe from enemy persecution, fully apply to the persons whose names will be included on the lists herein envisaged.10

Should the government to which you are accredited, in addition to sending such communication, be in a position itself to compile and submit to Spain a list of holders of documents issued in its name or other persons under enemy control to whom it desires to give protection, this Government would be glad to extend to such persons the benefit of its activities intended to safeguard their lives. If desired, this Government will gladly transmit any such list to the Spanish Government.

Sent to Asunción. Copy to La Paz, Bolivia. [War Refugee Board.]

Hull

9 Substantially the same airgram, sent as a circular, was repeated on September 19 to diplomatic representatives in Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, Uruguay, and Venezuela.

10 The submission of these lists to the Swiss was subsequently generally; endorsed by the other American Republics, and Swiss authorities in turn made them the subject of specific representations to the Germans.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 740.00119 E. W./9–1844: Telegram

[Document 695]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, September 18, 1944—8 p.m.

2232. The Department has received from the British Embassy in Washington a memorandum stating the British Government’s view that in connection with the signing of armistice terms by the Axis satellites the responsibility of the latter for the protection, within their jurisdiction, of refugees and displaced persons against violence and against removal by retreating enemy forces should be clearly fixed.

Specifically, the British memorandum suggests separate public declarations on the part of Rumania, Bulgaria and Hungary, which in the case of the two latter states could be signed simultaneously with the armistice and in the case of Rumania “in accordance with the armistice”. According to the text suggested by the British, the signatory government would undertake “to take all measures within its power to ensure that all displaced persons or refugees within its territory, including Jews and stateless persons, are accorded at least the same measure of protection and security as its own nationals.”

The Department is in full agreement with the purpose of the British proposal and has no objection to the suggested text of declaration. You are accordingly instructed to indicate this Government’s agreement if the question of such a public declaration by Rumania is raised by the British in Moscow.

Repeated to London.

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/9–1944: Telegram

[Document 696]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 19, 1944—9 p.m.
[Received September 20—2:15 a.m.]

7774. For Pehle, WRB. ReEmtel 7473, September 11, 11 p.m. Following paragraph is paraphrase of substance of message from Intercross to Foreign Office via British Legation, Bern, in reply to inquiry as to possibility rescue Jews from Hungary.

Unfortunately events have partly overtaken questions raised by British Government. Emigration from Hungary to Rumania impossible and to Sweden and Switzerland most difficult. German Government does not agree to allow Jews to leave Hungary and cross Germany despite statement of Hungarian Government that it will permit Jews to migrate to countries prepared to accept them and particularly to Palestine. Committee is persevering in efforts to assist Hungarian Jews but is meeting greatest obstacles at present.

In communicating this discouraging information to Embassy Foreign Office states that it can probably be taken as advance negative reply to any joint Anglo-American approach regarding release of 2100 Jews whose departure from Hungary is held up due to German reluctance permit them reach Palestine. Foreign Office still awaiting views of United States Government on this specific issue.

Winant

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/9–2044: Telegram

[Document 697]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, September 20, 1944—5 p.m.

3245. The following for McClelland is WRB 178. You are requested to convey to German authorities through official Swiss channels, with reference to persistent reports of renewed or impending deportations of Jews from Hungary and Slovakia by order of such authorities, this Government’s emphatic protest against these deportations and its unflinching determination to see to the apprehension and punishment of all persons participating in any form whatsoever in these deportations or in any other forms of persecution in Hungary or Slovakia.

The attention of German authorities should also be called in this connection, and referring to final paragraph your 5109 of August 8,11 to position of this Government regarding deportations from recognized civilian internment camps of holders of documents issued in the name of American Republics. The German authorities will be held strictly accountable unless all such persons are immediately returned to civilian internment camps supervised by Intercross.12

Also, please use all channels available to you to make strongest possible unofficial representations on both points to appropriate individual German officials.

Hull

11 Not printed; it concerned (1) refusal by the German Ministry of Foreign Affairs at Berlin to furnish Swiss Legation information on group of 163 Jews removed from Vittel to Bergen-Belsen contending they were not nationals of countries under Swiss protection, and (2) supplementary information promised Swiss Legation by two functionaries then absent (840.48 Refugees/8–844).

12 The Minister reported in telegram 7204, October 30, 1944, 3 p.m., from Bern: “Swiss note October 26 states Swiss Legation Berlin orally communicated to German Foreign Office substance first and second paragraphs Department’s 3245, September 20 (WRB 178).” (840.48 Refugees/10–3044)

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson) 840.48 Refugees/9–2044: Telegram

[Document 698]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson)13

Washington, September 20, 1944—6 p.m.

1883. The following for Olsen is WRB 86. Several thousand Lithuanian Jews are reported held in camp Krotingen, in Lithuanian-East Prussian border region. Seventy-five hundred are said to have been deported from Kaunas to East Prussia.14 Great anxiety is felt here for their lives. Please urgently endeavor to extend to the Krotingen inmates and any Jewish deportees from Baltic states in East Prussia the measures indicated by you in your 3565 [3605] of September 1115 as now being applied to Jews remaining in Baltic countries.

It is reported that many Jews, perhaps 60,000 persons, survive in Lodz, Poland. It is feared that they may be massacred as a prelude to German retreat. Please use whatever means are at your command and take such measures as may be feasible to avert any such tragedy.

With reference to persistent reports of renewed or impending deportations of Jews from Hungary and Slovakia by order of German authorities, you are requested unofficially to convey to appropriate individual German officials through all channels that may be available to you the strongest possible representations against these deportations. You should make clear this Government’s unflinching determination to see to it that all persons participating in any form whatsoever in these deportations or in any other form of persecution are apprehended and punished. Wallenberg’s contacts as well as your own may be used in this connection.

The Germans are removing from civilian internment camps Polish and other Jews holding documents issued in the names of American Republics. As a result of Board’s efforts, the United States and other American Republics have informed the German Government through their protecting powers that such documents must be deemed valid and that such persons must be treated in the same manner as unquestioned nationals of these countries. Nevertheless, removals continue, presumably to extermination centers. Please endeavor through any unofficial channels that may be available to you to convey the sense of the following to appropriate German officials: Foreign Office and other officials who bear any responsibility for the consignment of persons to whom documents have been issued in the name of an American Republic to extermination or other forms of persecution must expect personally to bear the consequences. If American Republics, horrified by the bestiality and brutality of Nazi mass-slaughter accord to some persons the protection of their passports or other documents, individual officials of the German and satellite foreign offices and foreign police ought to be anxious to avail themselves of such or any other opportunity to save innocent lives. If, instead, they indulge in fine reasoning and take action which is tantamount to sentencing such persons to persecution or death, they thereby assume the responsibility and invite the consequences therefor. Furthermore, their failure to seize every available opportunity to save lives will be considered as strong evidence of their concurrence with the policy of mass-slaughters of Jews and other civilian populations and their participation in such crimes, the consequences for which formed the subject of President Roosevelt’s statement of March 24.16

Hull

13 The Minister in Sweden replied in telegram 3955, September 29, 1944, that every effort would be made to enter into any practicable arrangement that would mitigate the circumstances described in Department’s telegram No. 1883. (840.48–Refugees/9–2944)

14 In telegram 3235, September 19, 1944, 8 p.m., to Bern the Department requested that inquiry be made concerning this matter and that Intercross, with view of preserving inmates from death, take steps to include them in its program. (840.48 Refugees/9–1944)

15 Not printed; reference was made to approaches by a German group “to freeing Baltic Jews against 2,000,000 Swedish kronor of civilian relief supplies for German bombed-out population”; in the meantime, it was stated that German authorities had issued strict orders to stop further Jewish persecutions in the Baltic countries (840.48 Refugees/9–1144).

16  Post, p. 1230 [Pg. 1230 includes portions of Doc. 770 and Doc. 771].

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 E. W./9–2944: Telegram

[Document 699]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 29, 1944—10 p.m.
[Received September 30—2:05 p.m.]

3725. ReDepts 2232, September 18, 8 p.m. The British Ambassador having approached the Soviet Government on the subject of the proposed declarations by Rumania, Bulgaria and Hungary concerning the protection of refugees, I have informed Molotov by letter that the United States Government is in agreement with the purpose of the British proposal and has no objection to the suggested text of the declaration.

Harriman

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) 840.48 Refugees/9–1444: Telegram

[Document 700]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb)

Washington, October 3, 1944—8 p.m.

2656. The cable below is WRB 101. Please refer to your No. 2875 of September 14 (WRB 189).17

As you were advised in Department’s No. 2118 of July 2818 and 2332 of August 24,19 this Government has guaranteed that it will arrange for the maintenance in Portugal and the removal to the United States or to other areas outside Portugal of all refugees who are admitted to Portugal in accordance with the terms of those cables. It is the firm intention of this Government to comply fully with the terms of this guarantee, should the necessity arise. Until the number of such refugees and other similar facts are known, it is neither possible nor desirable to determine exactly where they will be taken. You may assume that all available havens, including Fedhala, will be used to fulfill this Government’s guarantee.

Hull

17 Not printed; it concerned question of destination of refugees admitted to Portugal (840.48 Refugees/9–1444).

18 Not printed, but see telegram 5948, July 28, midnight, to London, p. 1106 [Pg. 1106 includes portions of Doc. 652 and Doc. 653].

19 Not printed, but see telegram 2918, August 24, 7 p.m., to Bern, p. 1135 [Pg. 1135 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675].

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/9–2244: Telegram

[Document 701]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, October 5, 1944—11 p.m.

3427. The following for Harrison and McClelland is WRB 191. You may request Swiss Foreign Office to inform Hungarian authorities, with reference to your 6292 of September 22,20 that the Swedish Government in charge of Hungarian interests in the United States has always been afforded every opportunity to extend its protection to each individual in the United States who has claimed to be a Hungarian national. At no time has the United States Government limited the Swedish Legation in the discharge of its protective functions in respect of any individual claiming Hungarian citizenship.

There is no reason to believe that any other American Republic would take a position differing in any way from the foregoing position of the United States.

Kindly inform the Hungarian officials through available informal channels that this Government considers the Hungarian inquiry as specious and made in an endeavor to gain time. This Government will hold such officials personally accountable should harm befall any person claiming the nationality of an American Republic as the result of failure of the Hungarian Government to accord him the rights and privileges due to a national thereof. Such officials should be so informed. The sense of paragraph 3 of the Department’s 2490 of July 21 should also be conveyed in this connection to the appropriate Hungarian quarters.

Hull

20 Not printed; it referred to paragraph 7 of Department’s telegram 2407, July 13 (p. 1094 [Pg. 1094 includes portions of Doc. 642, Doc. 643, and Doc. 644]), and reported receipt of a note from the Swiss Foreign Office dated September 16, The Swiss note reported that the Hungarian Government had been informed of the pertinent portions of Department’s telegram 2407 regarding the extension of Swiss protection to all persons in Hungary bearing passports issued by any of the American Republics, and that the Hungarian Foreign Office had inquired whether the Governments requesting this treatment guaranteed to accord reciprocity to Hungary. (840.48 Refugees/9–2244)

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/9–2844: Telegram

[Document 702]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, October 6, 1944—9 p.m.

3435. The following for Harrison and McClelland is WRB 198.

The O.W.I. is informed of situation contained your 6447 of September 28.21

Kindly request Swiss Foreign Office cooperation in conveying to appropriate Hungarian authorities the sense of the message below. Employment of such unofficial channels as may be available to you to the same end is also suggested.

“The plan of the Hungarian authorities to remove to putative work camps in the provinces those Jews still remaining in Budapest has been learned by the United States Government. This Government, in view of fate of Jews removed to similar camps in previous months from other cities, and of the approach of winter, has good reason to regard this plan as a further measure of mass extermination accomplished either by subjecting large numbers of people to undernourishment, hard physical labor and unhygienic living conditions in improvised camps or by the methods employed at camps of final destination in Poland. The Government consequently deems it appropriate to remind Hungarian authorities of its determination, as President Roosevelt expressed on March 24, that ‘those who participate in these acts of savagery shall be punished …22 The punishment shall be shared by all who share the guilt.’ Members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the House of Representatives Foreign Affairs Committee respectively publicly reaffirmed this determination on May 31 and June 28.

The United States Government recognizes the possibility however that the present plan, as has been claimed by various Hungarian authorities, may have been evolved to achieve genuine humanitarian ends. This Government will recognize the validity of such claims, of course, to the extent that the plan, if put in operation, achieves such ends. Should the removal of Jews from Budapest to provincial camps be, on the other hand, only a prelude to ultimate removal to extermination centers or otherwise result in their deaths, the Hungarian authorities are fully informed of the attitude of the Government of the United States and the people thereof.”

The Department and Board would appreciate information as to any action you may take.

Conveyance of a similar message to Hungarian authorities through such channels as are available to them is being requested of the Embassy at Lisbon and Ampolad at Caserta.23

Hull

21 Not printed; it concerned anxiety of Jewish organizations in Switzerland regarding the announced intention of the Hungarian Government to move Jews remaining concentrated in Budapest out of the city (840.48 Refugees/9–2844).

22 Omission indicated in the original message.

23 This message reached the Hungarian Foreign Office through Swiss channels on October 28; the substance of the message was also transmitted to Budapest through the Hungarian Legation at Lisbon.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/10–744: Telegram

[Document 703]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)24

Washington, October 7, 1944.

3461. The Department has received information indicating that orders have been given to exterminate the Jews in three concentration camps, namely Osswiecin, Birkenau and Naeuss. Probably some 65,000 Jews are involved.

You are requested, through any channels available to you, to convey to the German Representative at Bern that the United States has this information and further understands that the death order has been personally authorized by Himmler,25 to be carried out by certain other officials. Direct responsibility for this proposed crime is thus fixed, and if it is carried out appropriate consequences will follow in accordance with the declared policy of the United States Government, and will attach to all participants.

Kindly report any developments in the situation as soon as they become known to you.

Hull

24 Repeated in substance to Ankara as telegram No. 879 and to Lisbon as No. 270 on October 10: to Stockholm as telegram No. 2041 on October 11, and to Caserta as No. 238 on October 12.

25 Heinrich Himmler, German Minister of the Interior, Leader of the SS and of the State Police.

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/10–1844: Telegram

[Document 704]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, October 18, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 10 p.m.]

6913. Swiss note October 13 transmits copy note date September 26 addressed Swiss Legation Budapest or Hungarian Foreign Office which contains in summary translation following reply:

a. To numbered paragraph 3 Department’s 2863, August 19:

Hungarian Legation Berlin established workers Supervisory Office to take care of Hungarian Nationals placed at disposal German Government as workers. Competence this office extends to every male and female worker of Hungarian nationality without regard to race and religion.

Furthermore permanent delegate of Intercross at Berlin Dr. Robert Schirmer was informed pursuant his request during Budapest visit early August that Hungarian Government authorizes Intercross relief and humanitarian activity also for those Jews placed at disposal German Government as workers.

Hungarian Government itself made proposal to German Government that Intercross representative be permitted visit Hungarian Jews working in Germany.

b. To second paragraph point 1 Department’s 2900, August 23.

Already in August 1944 it was ordered that the transfer of Jews of Jewish faith for labor service abroad must definitely be stopped. Since then no Jews placed at disposal German Government.

Hungarian Government prepared give all categories of Jews authorization to emigrate. Dr. Schirmer was so informed during his above mentioned visit.

Hungarian Government has given its consent for Intercross organs to observe living conditions and treatment of Jews. This control was carried out end of July and beginning August 1944 by Dr. Schirmer and since then by Dr. Friedrichborn Intercross delegate at Budapest.

Harrison

Note From the German Legation in Hungary to the Swiss Legation in Hungary 840.48 Refugees/12–1144

[Document 705]

Note From the German Legation in Hungary to the Swiss Legation in Hungary 26

[Translation]

I.

After March 19, 1944, agreements between the Hungarian and German Governments were reached for the settlement of the Jewish question, according to which all Jews residing in Hungary, about whom the Hungarian Ministry of the Interior had issued instructions through the Hungarian police and had received the assistance of the German Security Police, were transferred to Germany with their families for the purpose of working. Under the influence of foreign attacks in the press obviously provoked by the enemy, as well as upon the intervention of several foreign countries and enemies, the former German Administrator in August, 1944, informed the German Government of an agreement, according to which a further transfer of Hungarian Jews to Germany was to cease. At the same time assurance was given that the Jews still remaining in Hungary, especially those in the Budapest area, would be treated according to an internal Hungarian solution in so far as these Jews would likewise be evacuated and concentrated inside Hungary for labor purposes. This assurance has, however, not been carried out because in spite of all efforts to find suitable camps, i.e. camps where a control could be exercised to avoid the recurrence of foreign attacks in the press carried out by international organizations, it was not possible to find appropriate camps. The consequence of this development was that attacks by the foreign press against Hungary effectively stopped, but that on the other hand Hungarian Jewry, especially in the capital Budapest, after some time of intimidation, again developed such a subversive activity directed against the common interests of the allied (Axis) countries, that, already under the Lakatos Government, but particularly after the proclamation of October 15, 1944, of the former Administrator, the Hungarian Jews did not consider themselves bound any longer by the laws concerning Jews issued by the Sztojay Government, left the houses assigned to them and took off the obligatory badges. At the same time the well-known campaign began concerning the protection by several foreign states of individual Hungarian Jews. The fact that measures for the definite solution of the Jewish question were not carried out, and that Hungarian Jewry remained in Hungary, particularly at Budapest, where it could live quite freely, constituted a steadily increasing danger for the fighting allied (Axis) front and hinterland, as was observed by the wholehearted opinion of responsible Hungarian and German circles.

It was only after October 16, 1944, that new negotiations were taken up on the advice of the German authorities with a view to effect a definite solution of the Jewish question in Hungary.

II.

During the carrying out of the measures contemplated after March 19, 1944, and referred to above, particular attention was given by all interested authorities to the question of the treatment of Jews of foreign nationality residing in Hungary, in order to eliminate from the beginning justified complaints on the part of foreign states. Jews who were regularly documented as foreign nationals and in possession of normal foreign passports, were in principle singled out of camps in the country which had been prepared for them with a view to their emigration. These were excluded from the obligation to work in Germany. Insofar as they were nationals of allied, friendly or neutral states, repatriation through their competent foreign representations was made possible for them. Insofar as they were nationals of enemy states or countries which had broken diplomatic relations with Hungary after the outbreak of the war, they were placed in special camps for foreigners under grant of special treatment as accorded ordinary internees of these countries.

III.

However, the possession of foreign nationality by Jews residing in Hungary was only recognized in principle in the way described above, if it could be proved that the Jews concerned legally possessed this nationality prior to March 19, 1944. The acquisition of a foreign nationality by Hungarian Jews after that date could not be considered as valid, because it was obviously contrary to International Law and only resulted in abuse. Since a number of foreign representations in Hungary continued in spite of the foregoing (partly and at times without any valid ground) to issue “provisional” documents to Hungarian Jews and to protect them, these representations soon intervened with the competent Hungarian and German authorities with a view to recognize these naturalizations and obtain their repatriation or emigration. During negotiations between the Sztojay Government and the German Government with regard to these interventions and in consideration of the difficult position of Hungary towards foreign endeavors in this connection, the following was agreed to:

The repatriation or emigration of a limited number of foreign or Hungarian Jews, as well as a further number of so-called “humanitarian” actions in favor of Hungarian Jewry should be permitted or rather made possible under the preliminary condition that Jews still remaining at Budapest would be definitely evacuated. The following points have been agreed upon within the framework of these measures: 1. the possibility of emigration to Sweden by issuance of Hungarian exit visas and German transit visas to approximately four hundred Hungarian Jews who, —according to information of the Swedish Legation at Budapest and on the basis of personal or economic relations with Sweden,—had acquired Swedish nationality after March 19, 1944, by issuance of so-called provisional or protective passports;

2. the possibility of emigration for approximately 7,000 Hungarian Jews who had received immigration certificates to Palestine through the good offices of the Swiss Legation at Budapest;

3. the possibility of emigration to Portugal for nine Hungarian Jews who had received provisional Portuguese passports issued by the Portuguese Legation at Budapest, i.e. the authorization to enter Portugal;

4. the possibility of emigration to Spain to a family of Hungarian Jews consisting of three persons, for whom, in view of personal interest for their persons, the Spanish Government had authorized their entry into Spain;

5. the intended transfer of 1,000 Jewish children to Palestine or to enemy states which, however, has not yet been agreed to, as well as the possibility of sending comfort parcels by foreign organizations to Hungarian Jews working in Germany.

These measures have however not been brought into effect until now, since the preliminary condition forming the basis of their execution—i.e. the evacuation of the Jews at Budapest—has not been carried out until the present.

IV.

Since a definite solution of the Jewish question can be expected without further delay, on the ground of recently instituted negotiations, even inside the city of Budapest, the German Government expressly states that, in view of the measures already instituted by international organizations and to avoid further foreign attacks against Hungary in the press, it has recognized the agreements mentioned above and is willing to carry out the assurances given in due time. The German Legation has therefore been instructed: 1. to render possible the emigration to Sweden by issuance of German transit visas to Hungarian Jews who are the bearers of Swedish protective passports, within the number of 400 persons initially agreed upon. The emigration of other bearers of Swedish protective passports (the Swedish Legation issued over 4,000 such passports despite its original assurance) can not be considered for the time being. However, the German Government is willing, provided the Swedish Government undertake the necessary steps, to institute new negotiations in this connection.

2. to issue German transit visas to 7,000 Hungarian Jews who are in possession of immigration certificates to Palestine and therefore to render their emigration possible. For the time being, only Switzerland can be the temporary destination in view of the present situation. The German Government can not, for questions of principle, agree to a further emigration of Hungarian Jews to Palestine.

3. to render possible the travel to Portugal of the group of Hungarian Jews possessing protective Portuguese passports within the number of nine persons agreed upon by issuing them German transit visas. The German Legation has likewise been instructed to negotiate the issuance of further transit visas to other Hungarian Jews to whom, as is known, the Portuguese Legation at Budapest has issued protective passports and for whose emigration it has asked.

4. to render possible the emigration to Spain of the Jewish family-consisting of three persons by issuance of German transit visas, as requested.

5. to continue the negotiations about further action regarding the emigration of 1,000 Jewish children to Palestine and the sending of comfort parcels.

V.

After carrying out the measures described above, there will only remain in Hungary Jews of foreign nationality, either of enemy countries or such who in spite of possessing protective passports can not be recognized as bona fide nationals of foreign states. As far as their treatment is concerned, the German Government agrees with the frequently expressed standpoint of the Hungarian Government that the remaining Jews, whether they possess foreign nationality or not, are in principle subject to Hungarian Laws and can therefore be included, like all other Jews, in the recently considered measures of concentration issued by the Hungarian Government, for the purpose of working inside Hungary.

Budapest , October 19, 1944.

26 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Chargé in Switzerland in his despatch 10180, December 11, 1944, from Bern; received January 5, 1945.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.48 Refugees/9–2244: Telegram

[Document 706]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 22, 1944—noon.

7998. Please refer to your telegram of September 11, and to Department’s telegram of September 14.27 The following cable dated September 22 (Bern—No. 6276) has been received from McClelland: “McClelland sends the following for the War Refugee Board. Reference is made herein to the Department’s September 14 cable No. 3185.28

A note dated September 8 from Swiss Federal Political Department received by the British Legation at Bern and reporting substance of a conversation between an unnamed German Foreign Office official and Swiss Minister Feldscher at Berlin is the basis for the British Minister’s telegram under reference. An approach had been made to the Germans by Feldscher concerning emigration of same initial group of 2,000 Hungarian Jews from Hungary holding Palestine certificates for whom the Swiss Legation at Budapest issued a collective passport in late July. (Legation’s August 3 cable No. 4972 and August 5 cable No. 504329 mentioned this). The Germans replied, as British Minister’s telegram stated, that since the departure of these people for Palestine would disturb ‘German relations with Arabs’ they could not permit these people to go. However the German Foreign Office intimated to Feldscher ‘that if these Jews were going to American or British territory their departure would be viewed more favorably’. Consequently there is no question whatsoever of a concrete offer on the part of the German Government to permit such a group to depart if Allies agreed to accept them in either American or British territory but a vague statement only that ‘more favorable consideration’ would or might be given to such a proposal. In addition the Swiss note reports very definite request by Germans that for security reasons an exact list of Jews whose departure is contemplated should be furnished the Germans. Note also that this was only a verbal (not written) statement from German Foreign Office which as is well known exerts only very slight influence on decisions and plans of Gestapo and SS who are obviously, so far as the German Government is concerned, in control of the Jewish situation in Hungary.

The British Legation at Bern with whom I discussed this question is of the opinion that the Swiss Legation at Budapest should not under any circumstances be requested to deliver to the Germans lists of Hungarian Jews and that transit of any group or groups of Jews through German-controlled territory at this particular time would be, to say the least, an extremely hazardous undertaking. Unless real control by some such organ as ICEC could be assured permission for such transit if it were granted could scarcely be relied upon. It is the feeling of the British Legation here that the responsibility of recommending such a move could not be assumed by it.

In agreement with the point of view of the British I feel that it would be exceedingly dangerous to try to evacuate Hungarian Jews through territory controlled by the Germans which now that exit by way of Bulgaria and Rumania is barred, is the only existing route. With respect to the eventuality of the Germans attempting to hold the Allies responsible for not accepting an offer which it could hardly be said, after all, has been concretely made would on their part constitute pure casuistry.

As an alternative an offer might be made to the Germans via the Swiss to grant temporary haven in Allied territory to the group of 2,000 or more Hungarian Jews who did not have Palestine certificates and who did not plan to go to Palestine eventually as the Legation’s August 26 cable No. 5579 suggested. Of course from the Jewish point of view this would raise very knotty problem of selection in Hungary of a non-Palestine group. The possibility exists for the British to declare formally that this group would not go to Palestine and the Germans’ alleged objection to Palestine immigration would thus be offset. It could be stated, if the Germans insisted on knowing the ultimate destination, that division of this group among various overseas countries of immigration was being actively arranged. It might be possible, in order to ease the problem of settlement of such a group in the postwar, if this could be done without German suspicion being aroused, to select Hungarian Jews who desired to return to their country when the war is over. The idea of getting Jews out of Europe permanently is an obsession in certain Nazi circles and they will not tolerate the departure of those they feel may come back again.

An additional alternative of a more positive nature would be to make a concrete offer to admit a group of 1,000 or more Hungarian Jewish children into the United States, for instance, those whose parents have been deported in line with August 21 cable No. 2877 from the Department.31 Pending possibility to evacuate such children to the United States they could possibly be convoyed under ICRC control from Hungary for a temporary sojourn in Switzerland.”

The following reply has been sent to McClelland as No. 3378 of Sept. 30, 1944: “Please refer to your No. 6276 of September 22. We concur in your conclusion that it probably would not be useful to pursue further the vague suggestion by the German Foreign Office that a request for the emigration from Hungary of Jews holding Palestine certificates might be more favorably considered if such Jews were going to American or British territory.

With regard to your suggestion that perhaps efforts could be made to facilitate the emigration of children and others who do not have Palestine certificates, your attention is called to the fact that the Legation in Bern already has broad authority to grant visas for entry into the United States.

Particular reference is made to Department’s No. 2877 of August 21, which made available approximately 4,000 American visas for children in Hungary; Department’s No. 2605 of July 28,31 which made special provisions in favor of persons to whom American immigration visas were issued or authorized after July 1, 1941; and Department’s No. 2918 of August 24, making special provisions in favor of close relatives of American citizens and alien residents in the United States. Please refer also to Department’s No. 3120 of September 9 which summarizes the arrangements made by this government for the emigration of refugees from Hungary to the United States and other countries.

You were requested to bring the foregoing arrangements to the attention of the Swiss Government and the International Red Cross, and through them, to the attention of the German and Hungarian authorities in an effort to effect the evacuation from Hungary of as many as possible of the refugees for whom arrangements have thus been made. We assume that you have done everything possible to execute these instructions, and if anything further can be done in this regard, we are sure that you will proceed to do so under the already existing authorizations. You will note that the authorizations above referred to are applicable to substantially more than the 2,000 refugees referred to in your No. 6276 of September 22.”

In view of McClelland’s cable, we do not intend to take any further action in connection with the vague intimation of the German Foreign Office that the emigration of some 2,000 Hungarian Jews holding Palestine certificates might be more favorably considered if their destination were to be American or British territory.

As you will note, however, we have indicated to McClelland that he should continue to do everything possible to effect the emigration of those Jews from Hungary into “non-Arab” territory for whom arrangements have already been made. Since these arrangements presumably have been communicated to the Germans some time ago, it is not known whether any success can be achieved. However, we will continue to make every effort to that end.

For your convenience and for the information of appropriate officials of the British Government and of the Intergovernmental Committee, following is a summary of arrangements already made by this government for the emigration of Jews from Hungary to the United States and other territory: (1) On August 21 the Legation in Bern was authorized to issue visas under liberal conditions to approximately 4,000 children arriving in Switzerland from Hungary. This authorization was issued in such manner as to insure the validity of the visas until transportation to the United States is available. The Legation was instructed at the same time to advise the Swiss authorities of the authorization to issue visas, and to make all appropriate efforts to arrange for the release from Hungary of children eligible for such visas.

(2) On August 1 the Legation in Bern was authorized to issue, under certain conditions, new American immigration visas to any person in enemy-controlled areas who held an American visa or for whom a visa was authorized after July 1, 1941. The Legation was instructed to (a) advise the Swiss authorities of this authorization

(b) request the Swiss Government to advise enemy governments of Switzerland’s willingness to permit the entry, with or without transit visas, of all persons to whom immigration visas were issued on or subsequent to July 1, 1941; and

(c) advise the Swiss authorities that such persons entering Switzerland would be adequately maintained until eligibility for new visas was determined, and that all persons found ineligible would promptly be evacuated from Switzerland.

The same authorization and instructions were sent to Sweden, Turkey, Spain and Portugal.

(3) On August 24 the Legation in Bern was directed to request Swiss authorities to advise enemy governments, particularly Germany and Hungary, that American Consular Officers in neutral countries had been authorized to issue immigration visas to (a) the alien husband, wife, parent and unmarried minor children of an American citizen; and

(b) wife and unmarried minor children of an alien, resident in the United States

who has been in an area controlled by Germany or any of her allies, provided any such person(s) presents himself to an American Consular Officer and is found not to be disqualified for a visa. At the same time, the Legation in Bern was requested to secure the agreement of Switzerland to advise enemy governments of its willingness to permit the entry into Switzerland of persons falling within the categories indicated above, and to assure the Swiss officials that persons so admitted will be adequately maintained pending determination of eligibility for such visas, and those found unqualified will be evacuated promptly. Similar instructions were sent on the same date to Sweden, Turkey, Spain and Portugal.

(4) Assurances have been obtained from the governments of Ireland and various Latin American Republics that they will receive at least 2,000 children. In addition, Mexico has assured this government of its willingness to give emergency shelter to an unspecified number of refugees from enemy territory for the duration of the war. Among the neutrals, the governments of Spain and Sweden have agreed to admit children, numerous adults, and persons to whom American visas were issued or authorized after July 1, 1941. Spain alone has authorized 2,000 visas.

In view of the foregoing, it is apparent that adequate assurances have already been afforded the Germans to test the sincerity of the intimation that refugees might be permitted to leave Hungary if they go to the United States and not to Palestine. Accordingly, it seems more practicable to continue our efforts to effect evacuation under these existing authorizations than to pursue further the somewhat nebulous statement of the German Foreign Office referred to in your telegram of September 11.

It will be appreciated if you will express our views on this matter to the appropriate officials of the British Government and the Intergovernmental Committee.

Hull

27 Nos. 7473 and 7485, pp. 1151 [Pg. 1151 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690] and 1156 [Pg. 1156 includes portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693], respectively.

28 Not printed; it concerned Palestine certificates.

29 Neither printed.

31 Not printed.

31 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/10–1944: Telegram

[Document 707]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, October 26, 1944—2 p.m.

3648. The following for Harrison and McClelland is WRB 236. Appreciate information and suggestion in your 6938 of October 19.32 Accordingly Vatican is being approached. It has been requested to send information directly to you.

You are requested however, without awaiting Vatican’s reply, to approach Swiss Government immediately, requesting it to take immediate steps as protective power for Salvador and certain other American republics to protect the persons concerned in conformity with Department’s 1181 of April 7, 1221 of April 10, 1921 of June 6 [5],34 2490 of July 21, 3180 of September 14 and all others concerning Latin American document holders. It is suggested that, specifically, the Swiss Government may be able to approach the German Government and (1) to ask as to truth of report of removal to Germany or areas under German control of Jews from Slovakia holding documents issued in name of Salvador and other American republics, (2) to request information as to destination of such persons, (3) to state that such persons are under the protection of Switzerland and (4) to request that facilities for exercising such protection be immediately afforded the Swiss authorities.

The Salvadoran declaration in paragraph 6 of your 3871 of June 17 will doubtless facilitate your task in view of large proportion of Salvadoran passport holders among deportees reported in your 6938.

A similar approach concerning holders of Paraguayan passports being made to Embassy Madrid.

For Harrison. Please have this matter so handled as to preclude any recognition, either expressed or implied, of the present Salvadoran Government, such recognition being a question now under consideration by the American Republics.

Stettinius

32 Not printed; it concerned a report from Bratislava that 300 to 400 arrested Jews holding Latin American documents had been transported, it was believed, to Germany (840.48 Refugees/10–1944).

34 Telegram 1921 not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) 840.48 Refugees/10–3044: Telegram

[Document 708]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan)

Washington, October 30, 1944—7 p.m.

2563. From Department and War Refugee Board.

Reliable information has been received recently by this Government that the Germans are preparing a last minute slaughter in forced labor and concentration camps, of thousands of United Nations nationals and stateless Jews held by them. This plan is a final step in the program of mass murder and terror which the Germans have visited upon the peoples of the world. The United Nations are of course determined to see that the perpetrators of all of these crimes receive just punishment but it is also felt that every possible step should be taken to prevent these last minute atrocities.

President Roosevelt, with this in view, has requested the issuance of a statement of warning by General Eisenhower35 and word has just been received that the British Government concurs in the issuance of such a statement. Consequently arrangements are now being made for General Eisenhower to issue a statement in the following sense: “Attention Germans! There are large numbers of persons in labor battalions and in concentration camps in your midst. Germans, these are my orders. You shall disregard any order from whatever source to molest or otherwise harm or prosecute any of these people regardless of their nationality or religious faith. The Allied armies are already firmly on German soil. As they advance we shall expect to find these persons unharmed and alive. Any one who is responsible directly or indirectly in large measure or in small for their mistreatment will be subject to severe penalties. Those now exercising authority, heed this warning!”

This Government considers it extremely important that the Soviet Government make a similar statement either directly or through appropriate military officials. While there is no assurance that words will save the innocent lives which are threatened the voice of the military forces encircling Germany may prove effective.

It is sincerely hoped that the Soviet Government will find it possible to cooperate in this most important effort. In view of the urgency of the situation this Government feels that the Soviet statement should be issued as soon as possible, not necessarily making its release simultaneous with that of the statement by General Eisenhower.36

Stettinius

35 General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower, Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force.

36 Telegram 4206, November 2, 1944, noon, from Moscow, reported that a note in the sense of this telegram had been delivered to the Foreign Office (840.48–Refugees/11–244); no further telegram on the subject was received in the Department. General Eisenhower’s statement was issued on November 7.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 740.00115 EW/8–1444: Telegram

[Document 709]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, November 8, 1944—6 p.m.

3806. American Interests—Germany. Request Swiss Government to inform the German Government that the Government of the United States desires to effect before Christmas an exchange of civilians without awaiting the lists contemplated in the proposals referred to in the Department’s 3169, September 14, noon.37 Specifically the United States Government proposes the exchange on a head-for-head basis of approximately 850 German nationals for approximately 850 United States and Latin-American civilians falling under categories A, B, C, D, and E of the Department’s 3082, September 6. The figure of 850 has been established as a convenient one in view of certain additional proposals which the United States Government expects to make the German Government in the near future. To extent feasible, priority should be accorded in order of categories named. However, with reference to your 7163, October 28, 12 a.m.,38 it is especially desired to have included in this exchange under category “E” all of those persons formerly at Marianka who can be found and identified as Americans. The Swiss should make every effort to ascertain through whatever means possible the names and whereabouts of such persons. If there is no objection the Vatican representative who visited the Marianka camp should be asked to lend assistance.

The Swiss authorities should be urged to provide the German authorities urgently a list of all United States and other American nationals known to them falling in categories A, B, C, D, and E. List of United States nationals to be exchanged can be compiled from lists prepared by Swiss in accordance with Department’s 1509, May 1,39 regrouped into categories established by Department’s 3082. Correspondence regarding prior exchanges should provide ample material for lists of other American nationals.

As German Government has provided no lists of Germans to be considered for repatriation, United States Government will necessarily have to rely in compiling list of German nationals for embarkation upon wishes expressed to it by various interned and uninterned German nationals. Mexican Government is being invited, if state of Mexican-German negotiations warrants such action, to provide up to 100 Germans from Mexico for inclusion in exchange as part of the global quota of 850. If German Government wishes urgently to provide for consideration lists of Germans in whose repatriation it is interested, the United States Government will give those lists every possible consideration and assumes Mexican Government will do likewise.

Later communications will provide further details regarding proposed exchange.

Swiss should urgently obtain German reaction so that preliminary steps may be taken to prepare German repatriates for voyage. In the interest of these persons, it is hoped that report can be received by November 13 at the latest.

Stettinius

37 Not printed.

38 Not printed.

39 Not printed; a survey was requested of all American citizens believed to be residing in enemy-occupied countries (340.1115A/3374b).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 840.48 Refugees/9–2744: Telegram

[Document 710]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, November 11, 1944—midnight.

3852. Department informed that German authorities in Slovakia have begun evacuation from a camp at Marianka of Jews who claim nationality of United States and of other American Republics. Persons being removed are reported to be destined to Auschwitz.

Please request Swiss to inform German Government that United States Government expects urgently to obtain assurances that the German authorities in Slovakia have not taken any action against claimants to citizenship of the United States which deprived them of any of the rights to which they are entitled. If any claimants to citizenship of the United States have been deprived of such rights or have been removed from Slovakia to some other area under German control, German Government should provide the names of the persons concerned and information regarding their whereabouts and welfare.

Telegraph pertinent developments.

Stettinius

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 740.00115 E.W. 1939/11–1544: Telegram

[Document 711]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, November 18, 1944—midnight.

3928. American Interests—Germany. Reurtel 7540 November 15.40 Department notes the German Government has agreed in principle to a civilian exchange to occur before Christmas, that the German Government will transmit through the protecting power a list of German nationals in the United States to be repatriated, and that German Government will give consideration to the list of Americans transmitted by the Swiss Government in so far as possible in view of the short time available.

The Mexican Government has been informed of the statement made by the German Government in regard to the Mexican-German exchange.

In regard to the last sentence of paragraph 3 of your reference telegram in which the German Government states that it expects that there would be included in this exchange a larger group of persons from Bergen-Belsen, Swiss are requested to take up matter on following basis: (1) It has already been proposed that 50 to 75 such persons be included in the present exchange.

(2) This Government is prepared to proceed immediately with its proposal for a Paraguayan-German exchange covering a large group of persons falling within the category of those at Bergen-Belsen.

(3) There is under consideration by the Colombian and United States Government, an exchange of Colombian and German nationals similar to the proposed Paraguayan-German exchange. This proposal will involve some 300 persons on both sides.

This Government feels that the above proposals adequately cover the German Government’s expectations in regard to the exchange of the Latin-American groups at Bergen-Belsen. Accordingly, this Government sees no reason to alter its present proposal for a civilian exchange, especially as there is no lack of candidates in categories A, B, C, D and E.

With reference to (1) above, the Department cannot help seeing in the present situation, which may endanger the success of the exchange negotiations, a further unfortunate effect of the earlier inability of the Swiss to find a means of presenting to the German Government the proposals for a Paraguayan-German exchange. Madrid’s 3708, November 9, 6 p.m.42 which was repeated to you (reurtel 7302, November 3, 8 a.m.42 ), would seem to clear the way for prompt and urgent action on the part of the Swiss Government in regard to the proposed Paraguayan-German exchange. If you have not already done so, you should communicate contents of Madrid’s 3708 to Swiss Foreign Office and emphasize the desirability of prompt action in bringing this proposal to the attention of the German Government.

In view of transportation and communication difficulties within Germany, please request the Swiss Government to volunteer to have its representatives assist the Germans in assembling candidates for the exchange by notifying those non-interned Americans approved for inclusion of their selection for repatriation and by assisting them in reaching the assembly point or points designated by the Germans.

Stettinius

40 Not printed.

42 Not printed.

42 Not printed.

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/11–2144: Telegram

[Document 712]

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, November 21, 1944—10 a.m.
[Received 6:30 p.m.]

7668. Legation’s 7542, November 15.43 Minister Feldscher44 now visiting Bern stated during interview Foreign Office that German Government’s refusal accept notes mentioned fourth paragraph telegram under reference based principally on second reason stated—menacing tone of notes and German objections to accepting such reproaches from another government. Although he assures Germans his position is only that of channel of communication between belligerents, they show resentment against Swiss for transmission of communications bearing threats from American Government. He emphasized tension already existing between Foreign Office officials and heads of Gestapo and other branches German Government which only aggravated if such threats are passed on by former and adds that notes containing threats are not taken seriously by latter and receive no action except evasive replies.

In view foregoing and undoubtedly serious and adverse effect upon his relations with Foreign Office officials because of his transmission of menacing communications from our Government, Feldscher expressed desire that messages to German Government bearing warnings to German authorities against committing specified offenses or threats to bring individual officials before tribunals to answer for wartime offenses be not transmitted Swiss Legation. De Pury45 and Bisang46 share foregoing views.

Huddle

43 Not printed; it referred to two notes (containing substance of first and second paragraphs of telegram 3245, September 20, to Bern, p. 1159 [Pg. 1159 includes portions of Doc. 696 and Doc. 697]) which the German Government had refused to accept since it did not recognize the right of Swiss representatives as representing American interests to intervene in favor of bearers of Latin American identity documents, and additionally it considered the tone of these notes unacceptable (840.48 Refugees/11–1544).

44 A. Feldscher, Swiss Minister in Germany.

45 Arthur de Pury, Chief of Division of Foreign Interests of Swiss Federal Political Department.

46 Emile Bisang, member of Division of Foreign Interests of Swiss Federal Political Department.

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State 740.00115 E.W./11–2244: Telegram

[Document 713]

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, November 22, 1944—3 p.m.
[Received 3:55 p.m.]

7684. American Interests, Germany, Civilian Exchange. Swiss Foreign Office official indicates orally that Swiss are willing to take up with the German authorities the question of exchange of 850 civilians on the basis of the three numbered points contained Department’s 3928, November 18.

The possible implications of the non-negotiations thus far of a separate German-Paraguayan exchange set forth in penultimate paragraph of Department’s 3928 were discussed at Swiss Foreign Office. The Swiss official consulted nevertheless stated that it is not considered possible to present the proposal for a separate German-Paraguayan exchange to the German authorities until the Legation presents notification that the German Government has officially informed the Spanish authorities that it accepts the Paraguayan mandate to the United States to negotiate the separate exchange through the Swiss. Accordingly the statements contained in Madrid’s 3708, November 947 are not considered adequate.

The Swiss have, nevertheless, agreed orally to present numbered point 2 of Department’s 3928 to the Germans in such a manner as clearly to indicate that the negotiation of a separate German-Paraguayan exchange by the Department is contemplated without actually presenting the proposals therefor at this time.

Repeated to Madrid referring its 3708, November 9 to Department.

Huddle

47 Not printed.

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/11–2444: Telegram

[Document 714]

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, November 24, 1944—9 a.m.
[Received 10:41 a.m.]

7716. For WRB from McClelland. Legation’s 7541, November 14 [15],48 According to latest news from Swiss Legation Budapest brought by Minister Jaeger who is at present in Bern, some 7,000 persons (composed of family groups) holding Palestine certificates are ready to leave for Switzerland. They have all necessary papers including German transit visas but are unable to depart for lack of transportation. Meanwhile they are relatively unmolested and are exempted from forced labor service as are all persons possessing Swiss “protective” documents. In view of military situation it seems unlikely that Germans will choose to allot rolling stock for their transportation. Essential thing is, however, they are not being deported.

Departure of 4,500 or more persons holding Swedish protective papers is even more doubtful as they are reported not to have been granted German transit visas yet.

Will keep you posted on any new developments in this situation. [McClelland.]

Huddle

48 Not printed.

The Turkish Ministry for Foreign Affairs to the American Embassy in Turkey 840.48 Refugees/12–1444

[Document 715]

The Turkish Ministry for Foreign Affairs to the American Embassy in Turkey 49

[Translation]

In reply to the note verbale of the Embassy of the United States of America, No. 1034, dated September 8, 1944,50 the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has the honor to inform the Embassy as follows:

It has become impossible to carry into effect the proposal of the Government of the United States concerning the issuance of Turkish visas to certain categories of persons living in Germany, as a result of the rupture of diplomatic relations between Turkey and the latter country.

Moreover, the liberation of the Balkan countries by the Allied armies is solving the problem of the persecuted persons in these countries.

Nevertheless, in accordance with the spirit of collaboration which the Government of the Republic has always manifested in the matter of refugees, this Ministry will not fail to take into consideration the desire expressed in the Embassy’s note. To this end, the Turkish Consulates in the Balkan countries have received instructions to insert, in appropriate cases, in the questionnaires to be completed by the persons applying for visas, their qualifications for obtaining an American visa.

Ankara , December 6, 1944.

49 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in Turkey in his despatch 946, December 14; received December 30.

50 Not printed; for substance, see telegram 2918, August 24, 7 p.m., to Bern, p. 1135 [Pg. 1135 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675].

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/12–744: Telegram

[Document 716]

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, December 7, 1944—2 p.m.
[Received 7:33 p.m.]

7973. Your 3435, October 6, WRB 198. Foreign Office note November 25 quoted Hungarian response delivered Swiss Legation Budapest November 8. Following is substance note:

Jewish workers needed within framework Hungary’s total war mobilization. Concentration Jews fit for work not discriminatory as on basis law 1939 all physically fit persons without distinction race nationality or religion subject military labor service under military discipline. Concentration Jews work camps can not be considered as punishment camps. Actually Hungarian and German Governments have consented visit Intercross delegate camps where Hungarian Jews performing labor in Germany. Furthermore the protection of these Jews is appropriately provided for according to nature of work performed.

Solution of Jewish question Hungary decided solely in light interests Hungary. Foreign threats of whatever kind cannot change this principle. Jewish workers represent part all Hungarian workers and are used within framework Hungarian war effort in a form which appears appropriate Hungarian Government.

Government intends treat Jews in just and humane manner. Such measures depend, however, upon attitude Jews themselves and upon whether further enemy terroristic attacks on Hungarian civilian population occur since these provoke increased opposition Hungarian population. General standard life Jews will not be lower than working classes.

Regarding issuance passports and other documentation by Foreign Mission Budapest to Hungarian Jews for their emigration neutral countries or Palestine, Hungarian Government reiterates it is still prepared to recognize these papers and accord emigration Jews concerned within frame-work number visas agreed upon by German Government for transit through German territory in case normal diplomatic relations with interested country so permit.

Despatch follows.51

Huddle

51 Despatch 10132, December 6, not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) 840.48 Refugees/11–2144: Telegram

[Document 717]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle)

Washington, December 8, 1944—9 p.m.

4154. The substance of your 7542 of November 1552 and 7668 of November 21 has been carefully studied by the Board and the Department. As indicated in Department’s 3255 of September 21, item 3,53 the Board is of the view that the transmission by the protecting power of messages regarding the mistreatment of victims of enemy persecution serves a useful purpose regardless of whether the enemy government “accepts” the message in any formal sense. However, if certain terminology in the Department’s telegrams requesting that such messages be transmitted is known to the Swiss to be definitely unacceptable to the Germans and likely to defeat the objective of the Department and the Board, which is to save the lives of unfortunate individuals, it is requested that the Swiss use their best discretion in the matter. Other channels are available for communication of the omitted passages or phrases.

In view of this Government’s stand regarding holders of documents issued in the names of American Republics, which is shared by the Inter-American Advisory Committee for Political Defense, the Department and the Board do not accept any German refusal to receive communications in matters pertaining to bearers of Latin American documents. Further, in addition to existing efforts, since each of the Latin American nations has a protecting power for the German Government, Switzerland, Sweden, Spain or Portugal, it is possible for these protecting powers in view of the general responsibility devolving upon them in that capacity to concert measures at Berlin to save lives of persons whose existence is threatened. If the Swiss feel they can not speak up in behalf of human beings whose governments they do not represent, there is no reason why they should not exercise a humanitarian initiative to obtain concerted protective action along the lines suggested by the United States Government by all the protecting powers. The United States Government appreciates and will be eager to support any such Swiss move.

There is a definite reason why the United States Government appears so frequently as spokesman for the other American Republics in these matters. It has the best sources of information and with this responsibility can not await multiple transmissions of communications to various governments before initiating remedial measures. It is furthermore clearly established on the basis of Resolution XXIV of the Committee for Political Defense and through communications exchanged with the various American Republics that none of the other American Republics is willing to accept German infringement of its sovereignty which is constituted by German decisions regarding the validity of its documents of nationality. The protecting powers are all aware of this position and should not need added instructions from the represented powers in order effectively to maintain the protection of bearers of these documents.

This Government of course has a special interest in citizens and claimants to citizenship of the United States and you are authorized to urge or request the Swiss authorities accordingly, unless that has already been done, in line with the fifth paragraph of your 7542 describing action which the Swiss were to take with respect to those whom they consider to be bona fide United States and Latin American nationals represented by Switzerland. It is hoped that that action has been taken. However, the Department and the Board wish to point out that since the Swiss have been arbitrarily deprived by the Germans of contact with many of the individuals whose lives are in the greatest danger they are not able to perceive how the Swiss can determine which of these individuals are bona fide nationals. If without such contact the Swiss should undertake to accept the German determination they would be accepting a grave responsibility.

The German Government is willing enough to accept representations of the United States Government in behalf of the other American Republics whether or not represented by Switzerland, when by doing so it obtains an advantage in the return of its nationals to Germany in exchange. Germany’s failure at this late date to recognize the interest of this Government in claimants of nationality of the American Republics and its justification in making representations concerning matters affecting their availability for exchange is entirely inconsistent. The United States Government can not accept; this German point of view. Moreover, Germany’s attitude in the light of your 7616 of November 1855 is not likely to prove inflexible in practice even if it remains so in negotiations.

There appears to be some misinterpretation attached to the Swiss attitude in the matter of the Americans and Latin Americans removed from Slovakia discussed in your 7163 of October 28, penultimate paragraph of your 7542, and the Department’s 3769 of November 456 and 3852 of November 11, 1944. The Department and the Board understood that Grassli’s57 proposal called for an approach to the German Government as the power responsible for the transfer of the Americans and Latin Americans held in Slovakia and that he intended the Swiss Government, on its own initiative, as a good office in behalf of both belligerents and in the effort to solve the impasse which might otherwise arise, to suggest to the Germans as a possible solution to the difficulty the return of these individuals to Slovakia. In its 3769, the Department therefore concurred in his proposal. In its 3852 requesting the Swiss to take definite action, it made the request extend only so far as this Government could speak in the matter without extending recognition to Slovakia. Your 7802 of November 2858 covers only eight of at least 150 Americans understood to have been held at Marianka. If this figure represents the total number of American citizens of Jewish race remaining alive in Slovakia, numbers of American citizens have disappeared.

To make the matter clear, the Department would be glad if the Swiss could continue with the implementation of Grassli’s proposal to the extent that is compatible with pending exchange proposals. The extent to which the Swiss can speak for the United States Government in making this proposal was defined in Department’s 3852 and the Department notes with gratitude that they have done so and further that they have induced the Germans to consider the exchange of at least eight of the Americans concerned. The remaining elements of the proposal can only be implemented by the Swiss on their own initiative through good offices as a friendly neutral intermediary.

If there were at Marianka or at Sered nationals of the American Republics not represented by Switzerland, the Department and the Board would appreciate if in addition to the action suggested in the foregoing paragraph the Swiss would inform the Department urgently so that the appropriate protecting powers may be asked to take parallel measures in their behalf.59

Stettinius

52 See footnote 43, p. 1178 [Pg. 1178 includes portions of Doc. 711 and Doc. 712].

53 Not printed.

55 Not printed; it reported the opinion of the Italian Minister in Switzerland (Magistrati) that Allied occupation of German territory was apparently causing German authorities to change their minds with regard to arrests and deportations on racial and political grounds, since they themselves might have to appeal to international organizations or neutral countries for protection of their own civil populace (840.48 Refugees/11–1844).

56 None printed.

57 Andre M. Graessli, Swiss Consul General at Bratislava, Czechoslovakia.

58 Not printed.

59 According to telegram 8407, December 29, 1944, 11 a.m., from Bern, the Swiss representative at Bratislava reported that transmission of Salvadoran identity documents to Jews in Slovakia accomplished nothing; German authorities had simply torn up Salvadoran documents which they considered doubtful (840.48 Refugees/12–2944).

The Secretary of State to the Executive Director of the War Refugee Board (Pehle) 840.48 Refugees/12–1344

[Document 718]

The Secretary of State to the Executive Director of the War Refugee Board (Pehle)

Washington, December 13, 1944.

Dear John: The Department is giving continuing consideration to the questions raised in your memorandum of November 2, 194460 concerning the treatment of refugee problems in the post hostilities period after the termination of the activities of the War Refugee Board. The Department is in complete agreement with the Board that the representation of this Government on the Intergovernmental Committee should be strengthened by the early appointment of a successor to Honorable Myron C. Taylor to represent this Government on the Committee and by reconsideration of the position of the American Vice Director of the Committee and action in strengthening this position.

In anticipation of the termination of the activities of the War Refugee Board it is the intention of the Department to expand the present office of the Adviser on Refugees and Displaced Persons to perform the following functions: 1. Planning and development of this Government’s participation in the program and financing of the Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees.

2. Cooperation in the planning of the activities of the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration with respect to displaced persons, through the representatives of this Government on the Council and the standing technical Committee on Displaced Persons.

3. Development of policies and recommendations to the War and Navy Departments on refugees and displaced persons.

4. Consultation and cooperation with the private refugee agencies with the objective of facilitating their programs abroad within the framework of the foreign policies of this Government and as a continuing expression of this Government’s interest in the refugee problem.

As you will readily understand, the reorganization of the Department of State is not yet complete. Consequently I am unable at this time to advise you under which Assistant Secretary the general supervision of the office of Adviser on Refugees and Displaced Persons will be placed. I am, however, giving most careful consideration to the suggestions you have made and I should be able to give you definite word very soon now.

I am hopeful that Mr. George L. Warren will continue as Adviser on Refugees and Displaced Persons.

With best wishes,

Sincerely yours,

E. R. Stettinius, Jr.

60 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson) 840.48 Refugees/12–2144: Telegram

[Document 719]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Johnson)

Washington, December 21, 1944—8 p.m.

2566. The cable below is WRB 273. Amembassy Madrid reports that Spanish Chargé d’Affaires left Budapest, and that there being now no Spanish diplomatic representative in Hungary, protection of Spanish interests there has been turned over informally to Swedish Legation.

In this connection, please endeavor to convey to Swedish representatives in Budapest the following information:

Spanish letters of protection have been issued to 2,300 Budapest Jews and 570 Jews, including 500 children, are in possession of visas to Spain and Spanish Morocco. Furthermore, Spanish Legation in Budapest was authorized to grant visas to 700 more Budapest Jews. Authentic information from Budapest dated October 23 indicates that several categories of Jews in Budapest, in possession of protective documents and visas from foreign governments, have been exempted from general treatment reserved for Hungarian Jews, excluded from deportation to labor camps, and held in Budapest under agreement with German authorities who are ready to grant them transit visas enabling them to leave Axis territory. But none of the Jews with Spanish papers or visas are mentioned as being accorded this special treatment except one family consisting of three persons.

Any action of Swedish Legation in Budapest to extend protection and special treatment to all Jews with Spanish papers and visas will be greatly appreciated.61

Stettinius

61 In reply, Minister Johnson indicated in telegram 5293, December 29, 7 p.m., that the Swedish Foreign Office informed him that for the time being there was no means of communicating with the Swedish Legation in Budapest (840.48 Refugees/12–2944).

Memorandum by the Adviser on Refugees and Displaced Persons (Warren) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/12–2244

[Document 720]

Memorandum by the Adviser on Refugees and Displaced Persons (Warren) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] December 22, 1944.

The War Refugee Board is prepared to liquidate its activities immediately provided it can be assured that its policies in rescuing and bringing relief to refugees and persecuted minorities will be continued by the Department of State and that proper organization therefor under the general supervision of an Assistant Secretary acceptable to the Board is announced by the Secretary. An interim report on the intention of the Department to assume the responsibilities of the Board and to organize effectively to carry them out was sent to the Board on December 13, 1944.

Involved in the fulfillment of this undertaking is the appointment of a suitable successor to Myron C. Taylor as a member of the Intergovernmental Committee, the reorganization of the existing relations between the Department and the American Vice Director of the Intergovernmental Committee, Patrick M. Malin, and immediate determination of the American financial contribution to the 1945 budget of the Intergovernmental Committee which will involve securing substantial funds from Congress. The American representative to be appointed to the Intergovernmental Committee should go to London as soon as possible to work out the 1945 program of the Intergovernmental Committee and return by February at the latest to support the request for funds in Congress.

Otherwise the change over to the Department involves the carrying on of the mutually satisfactory relations which have existed between the War Refugee Board and the private refugee agencies during the period in which their activities are circumscribed by censorship and other war controls. This will involve the reception of all appeals for official actions of various kinds from Jewish and other agencies which are deeply concerned about the situation of refugees in Europe and politically adept in pressing their claims for action. To accomplish the foregoing an expansion of the staff of the office of Adviser on Refugees and Displaced Persons and its organization as a division under an Assistant Secretary acceptable to the Board is called for.

The War Refugee Board is now awaiting word on the Assistant Secretary under which supervision of the foregoing program will fall. The Board also expects word on the willingness of the Department to assume its overall responsibilities on the operation of the camp of a thousand refugees brought from Italy, at Oswego, New York, which is operated by the War Relocation Authority, and on the intentions of the Department to continue the Board’s efforts to give food package relief to the refugees still held within occupied Europe. 300,000 such packages are already en route to Europe for immediate distribution. Dispatch of another 300,000 packages at a cost of $1,000,000 has already been approved by the blockade authorities but is awaiting the allocation of funds by Presidential action.

The Board will [does?] not feel that the assurance requested above has been given by the organization of the office of Adviser on Refugees and Displaced Persons outlined in Departmental Order 1301 of December 20, 1944.62

62 Department of State Bulletin, December 17, 1944, Supplement, p. 778.

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State 740.00115 E.W./12–2344: Telegram

[Document 721]

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, December 23, 1944.
[Received December 24—10:41 a.m.]

8285. Am Interests Germany. Civilian repatriation. Swiss note December 22 transmits copy German Foreign Office note November 27 of which following is substance material portion: 1. German Government accepts proposal of United States Government concerning carrying out of exchange of persons bearing Latin American passports against Germans in United States.

2. For Germany’s part persons mentioned in enclosed list A, all detained at Bergen-Belsen, are foreseen for repatriation. Apart from persons mentioned said list German Government also prepared arrange for exchange of persons who have relatives in United States mentioned in list B which will be delivered later. Swiss Legation Berlin requested in note dated November 9 further particulars regarding relationship of these persons to kin in United States.

3. German Government expects as counterpart the inclusion of a corresponding number of Germans in North Central and South America willing to be repatriated giving preferable consideration to those persons detained in internment camps insofar as their departure is not accomplished within the framework of the German-American repatriation movement expected to occur before Christmas and Germans receiving financial assistance.

4. According to investigations made at Bergen-Belsen there are no Colombians detained there. On the other hand, as the German Government for humanitarian reasons stresses the importance that first of all there be arranged the repatriation of those Germans who were transferred from Central and South America to the United States and interned there or who in part are interned under especially bad and unhealthy conditions in Central and South America, it is proposed that German nationals interned in Central and South America be joined for repatriation purposes to the group of internees in the United States and be repatriated at this opportunity.

Huddle

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) 840.48 Refugees/12–2344: Airgram

[Document 722]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle)

Washington, December 23, 1944—9:30 a.m.

A–631. The following for McClelland is WRB 337. With reference to situation in Slovakia, the following information was received from Vatican City: “Vatican under date of December 16 transmits report on subject dated December 5 from Slovak Government of which following is substance:

The German military authorities began deporting from Slovakia in October, 1944 the Jews who had been assembled by the Slovakian authorities in labor camps in Slovakia. In addition they deported Jews with American passports who had been residing in the Marianka Castle near Bratislava. When the Slavic Government protested against these measures, the Germans replied that the Jews in Slovakia, after having obtained arms from the partisans, attacked German soldiers with these arms and since Slovakia is becoming the battlefield (according to the Germans) a group of persons who would take up arms again to fight against the Germans when a favorable occasion arises cannot be allowed to remain on this territory. As for the Jews with American passports, the German authorities have indicated that all these Jews will be exchanged against Germans. Until the arrival of the Germans from the United States, the Jews are being detained on German territory where naturally they will be treated in a proper (convenable) manner. The report from the Slovak Government ends with the statement that at the time of writing, the representative of the International Red Cross committee is in Bratislava and can see for himself what the situation is.”

With reference to assistance to Jews in Belsen-Bergen holding Latin American passports, Board is informed by Apostolic Delegate in Washington that Apostolic Nuncio in Berlin took up this matter with the German Government authorities and received a reply to the effect that these Jews, as American citizens, were represented by their own proper protecting powers.

Stettinius

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State 711.62114 Sick/12–2344: Telegram

[Document 723]

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, December 23, 1944—3 p.m.
[Received December 24—3:42 a.m.]

8293. American Interests, Germany, Civilian Exchange. Following is substance Swiss note dated December 22:

Foreign Office transmitted to Swiss Legation Berlin communications based on Madrid’s 3708, November 9 to Department63 and Department’s 3928, November 18.

Swiss Legation states with regard Switzerland’s right to take steps include Paraguayans in forthcoming exchange that Germany never contested American Government’s right to make exchange proposals in name of all western hemisphere countries. German Foreign Office never objected to Swiss Government conducting exchange negotiations on behalf of countries not represented by Switzerland. However Swiss Legation thus far only proposed to Germans for exchange nationals of Swiss protected countries, this likewise applicable to from 50 to 57 [75] bearers of Latin American documentation to be exchanged in Category F. Swiss Legation nevertheless informed Germans that American Government envisages special German-Paraguayan and German-Colombian exchanges (Department’s 3928, November 18 and Legation’s 7684, November 22).

Concerning Paraguay, Swiss Legation has Spanish Embassy’s consent to designate for exchange certain of bearers Paraguayan documents at Bergen-Belsen. It accordingly appears that Switzerland’s right to act for Paraguayans in organizing general American-German exchange is settled with Spanish representative and German Foreign Office.

[Here follow data on lists of exchange candidates.]

Huddle

63 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/12–2544: Telegram

[Document 724]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 25, 1944—noon.
[Received December 25—10:30 a.m.]

11434. For Department and WRB. An informal meeting was recently held by Emerson, Director of IGC, Mason, Head of Refugee Section of Foreign Office, and representatives of the Embassy and WRB to discuss the position of Jews in Rumania. Emerson noted that the aiding of Rumanian Jews in Rumania, now liberated territory, was strictly speaking not within IGC mandate but that IGC had a very real interest in making it possible for Rumanian Jews to make a living in Rumania thus obviating their leaving and becoming a serious and perhaps the major problem of IGC.

According to Emerson’s information there are about 450,000 Jews in Rumania of whom 200,000 are now without means of livelihood. These destitute persons are principally the Jews who formerly were engaged in commerce and who lost their property, and hence have no means of existence. The other 250,000 are mainly professional men. artisans, et cetera who through their services can now make a livelihood. There are estimated to be 30,000 ardent Zionists who will wish to leave the country in any event, but unless means can be found of rehabilitating such of the 200,000 destitute Jews who are not Zionists, they too will endeavor to emigrate.

Provided Department finds it advisable to take similar action with respect to American member of Allied Control Commission in Rumania, Foreign Office is ready to instruct the British member of Commission to take up with Commission the question of rehabilitating Rumanian Jews. Foreign Office believes that Commission should approach the new Rumanian Government with a view to expediting and expanding action in the rehabilitation of Jews. (This action should be taken not by way of complaint since new government apparently has initiated steps to relieve plight of Jews but as means of helping such relief measures). Foreign Office also believes that the rehabilitation of Jews and the restitution (so far as it is feasible) of their property can be connected with armistice terms. Foreign Office deems it inadvisable to mention to Commission at present time IGC interest in this matter. IGC hopes to send at a later date when practicable a representative to Rumania to examine position of Jews.

Emerson requested that State and Foreign Office ask their members of Allied Control Commission and their political representatives in Rumania to report regularly on the position of Jews there.65 He hoped that as much of this information as possible would be given to IGC.

Department’s instructions requested by telegraph.

Winant

65 The question of rehabilitating Rumanian Jews was subsequently referred to the Allied Control Commission through its British and American members.

Emergency measure for the welfare and repatriation of American citizens in enemy, former enemy, and enemy-occupied countriesEmergency measure for the welfare and repatriation of American citizens in enemy, former enemy, and enemy-occupied countries1

1 For previous correspondence on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 119 ff.

[725] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, January 8, 1944—10 p.m.

340.1115A/3344c: Telegram

[726] The Secretary of State to the Acting American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, January 28, 1944—midnight.

340.1115A/3346a: Telegram

[727] The Secretary of State to the Acting American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, January 31, 1944.

340.1115a/3343: Telegram

[728] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Dublin (Styles)

Washington, May 9, 1944—11:50 a.m.

341D.1115/29: Airgram

[729] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, July 14, 1944—8 p.m.

340.1115A/7–1444: Telegram

[730] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Palermo (Nester)

Washington, July 29, 1944.

340.1115A/7–2944: Telegram

[731] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, August 2, 1944. [Received August 11—3 p.m.]

864.4016/8–244: Airgram

[732] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, August 9, 1944—9 a.m. [Received 7:05 p.m.]

340.1115/62860: Telegram

[733] The Consul General at Naples (Brandt) to the Secretary of State

Naples, August 26, 1944—8 p.m. [Received August 26—2:47 p.m.]

340.1115A/8–2644: Telegram

[734] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, September 1, 1944—8 p.m.

121.67/8–2544: Telegram

[735] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, September 7, 1944.

706.5571/9–744: Telegram

[736] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Kirk)

Washington, September 11, 1944—8 p.m.

702.5451/9–1144: Telegram

[737] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, September 14, 1944—10 p.m.

703.5455/9–1444: Telegram

[738] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 14, 1944—11 p.m. [Received September 15—2:17 a.m.]

340.1115A/9–1444: Telegram

[739] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, September 16, 1944—midnight.

711.71114A/9–944: Telegram

[740] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 20, 1944—10 p.m. [Received September 20—8:30 p.m.]

703.5464/9–2044: Telegram

[741] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, September 22, 1944. [Received September 22—11:55 p.m.]

340.1115A/9–2244: Telegram

[742] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, September 23, 1944—8 p.m. [Received September 23—7 p.m.]

702.5451/9–2344: Telegram

[743] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, September 23, 1944—8 p.m. [Received September 23—6:53 p.m.]

703.5455/9–2344: Telegram

[744] The Acting American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Paris (Chapin) to the Secretary of State

Paris, September 30, 1944—9 a.m. [Received October 1—8:37 p.m.]

703.5451/9–3044: Telegram

[745] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, September 30, 1944—4 p.m.

711.71114A/9–2544: Telegram

[746] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, October 3, 1944—10 p.m. [Received October 3—9:45 p.m.]

340.1115A/10–344: Telegram

[747] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, October 5, 1944. [Received October 5—11:35 p.m.]

740.00113 E.W./10–544: Telegram

[748] The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk)

Washington, October 16, 1944—8 p.m.

340.1115A/10–1644: Telegram

[749] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, October 25, 1944—9 p.m.

740.00115 E.W./10–2544: Telegram

[750] The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Rome, October 30, 1944—6 p.m. [Received October 31—9:19 a.m.]

740.00113 European War 1939/10–3044: Telegram

[751] The Acting Secretary of State to Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy

Washington, November 7, 1944.

740.00115 European War 1939/11–744

[752] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, November 8, 1944—11 a.m. [Received November 8—9:50 a.m.]

340.1115A/11–844: Telegram

[753] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Naples (Brandt)

Washington, November 14, 1944—8 p.m.

740.00115 European War 1939/11–1444: Telegram

[754] The Chargé to the Czechoslovak Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State

London, November 14, 1944. [Received November 20.]

740.00115 European War/11–1444

[755] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, November 18, 1944—6 p.m.

740.00115 European War/11–444: Telegram

[756] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, November 20, 1944—4 p.m. [Received November 20—12:48 p.m.]

703.5464/11–2044: Telegram

[757] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, November 23, 1944—7 p.m. [Received November 23—3:45 p.m.]

740.00115 European War/11–2344: Telegram

[758] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, November 26, 1944—6 p.m.

706.0054/11–944: Telegram

[759] The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, December 1, 1944. [Received December 1—6:55 p.m.]

703.5451/12–144: Telegram

[760] The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, December 8, 1944—11 a.m. [Received December 20—5 p.m.]

864.4016/12–844: Airgram

[761] The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk)

Washington, December 13, 1944.

740.00113 European War 1939/10–3044

[762] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Caffery)

Washington, December 19, 1944—9 p.m.

740.00115 European War/11–3044: Telegram

[763] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, December 21, 1944—8 p.m.

340.1115A/12–2144: Telegram

[764] The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, December 26, 1944—10 a.m. [Received January 13, 1945—5 p.m.]

356.115/12–2644: Airgram

[765] The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Kirk)

Washington, December 26, 1944—8 p.m.

340.1115A/12–2644: Telegram

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 340.1115A/3344c: Telegram

[Document 725]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, January 8, 1944—10 p.m.

75. Legation’s despatch no. 6491, November 5.2 Department has decided, as an exceptional measure, to authorize loans pending repatriation to American nationals in Switzerland under the procedure set forth in the Department’s instruction no. 1202, February 14, 1942, as amended.3 This is intended primarily to assist needy American nationals who have escaped from enemy territory and who were receiving or were eligible to receive financial assistance while they were in enemy territory. This authorization may, however, be extended to apply to other needy American nationals in Switzerland who established their eligibility under the above-mentioned instruction. It is contemplated that American nationals of either category who are in a position to obtain funds from the United States will not be extended financial assistance under this authorization. This procedure is to remain in effect only so long as American nationals in Switzerland are without means of egress therefrom and the opportunity to return to the United States.

Consulates in Switzerland should be notified of this authorization, fully informed as to the procedure established under instruction 1202, and directed to transmit applications for financial assistance to the Legation as provided in applicable portions of paragraph 11 of that instruction.

A revision of instruction 1202 embodying amendments as of December 23, 1943 is now in preparation and will be transmitted in the near future. Copies thereof should be forwarded to the consulates as soon as received.

You are authorized to make loans, from funds available for representation purposes, on the same basis, except as noted above, as those authorized to be made through Swiss representatives in enemy and enemy-occupied territory. Switzerland is hereby classified as Class VIII ($110 a month maximum).

Please furnish Department by telegraph an estimate of the amount needed for this purpose during remainder of fiscal year ending June 30, 1944, and with respect to those qualifying for loans but who have not previously received loans, report by cable name, amount, and names and addresses of persons to whom Department might look for reimbursement.

Hull

2 Not printed.

3 For instruction 1202, February 14, 1942, see Foreign Relations, 1942, vol. i, p. 262. This instruction as amended through December 23, 1943, was transmitted to American Diplomatic and Consular Officers as enclosure to Foreign Service Serial No. 109, January 22, 1944, not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Acting American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Chapin) 340.1115A/3346a: Telegram

[Document 726]

The Secretary of State to the Acting American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, January 28, 1944—midnight.

308. The Department does not wish to place American diplomatic and consular officers or other American officials in the embarrassing position of not being able to assist qualified American nationals in liberated areas if they are excluded from any general relief measures which may be available to aliens in those areas from public funds derived in part at least from the United States. Such recommendations as you may make in accordance with paragraph 5 of Department’s 2188, November 18, 1943,4 with respect to reduction or termination of financial assistance when commercial banking facilities for transactions in foreign exchange become available (as contemplated by War Department’s Tarn 100, December 7,5 to Eisenhower6 for FHMGS7 ) should accordingly be formulated with due consideration for such factors. Even after reestablishment of commercial banking facilities, it would seem reasonable to continue on a provisional basis financial assistance to qualified American nationals unable to obtain funds from the United States or to benefit from United Nations or other general relief measures applicable in liberated areas, provided that such American nationals intend to return to the United States at the earliest opportunity. Such assistance would of course cease definitively if at any time the recipient should refuse an opportunity to be repatriated, except in those cases where the officer in charge is satisfied that the recipient is physically unable to undertake the voyage of repatriation. All such cases should be promptly reported to the Department for review.

You should appropriately inform those charged with extension of financial assistance to qualified American nationals in liberated areas.

Hull

4  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 130.

5 Not found in Department files.

6 Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower, at that time Commander in Chief, Allied Forces, North Africa; he became Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force, December 31, 1943.

7 Military Government Section of Army headquarters at Algiers.

The Secretary of State to the Acting American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Chapin) 340.1115a/3343: Telegram

[Document 727]

The Secretary of State to the Acting American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, January 31, 1944.

331. Your despatch 16, December 4, and telegram 122, January 12.8

1. A basic principle of Department’s instruction 1202 February 14, 1942, to Legation Bern9 is to expedite extension of financial assistance by the designation of a central office in the field: (a) to review applications granted on the spot (those covered by paragraph 10 of 1202); and

(b) to render decisions on all other applications (paragraph 11 of 1202).

Such centralization also assures a uniform and consistent application of 1202 within a given area.

2. Department wishes to designate one such Central Office in each liberated country. Central Office will accept and decide upon all applications submitted by American nationals within its immediate jurisdiction. It will also review or render decision upon applications submitted to other offices in the same country, all of which are to be forwarded to the Central Office. Central Office will endorse all applications to show, in case of review, its concurrence in or reversal of decision taken by initiating office and, in other cases, its decision. Central Office will then forward endorsed applications to Department as provided by paragraph 2 of Department’s 2188, November 18.10

3. Qualified American nationals on lists received from Swiss representatives pursuant to paragraph 4 (b) of memorandum of December 15 transmitted with Department’s instruction to Murphy11 of December 2712 may be considered in same category as applicants covered by paragraph 10 of 1202.

4. If you believe that Palermo,13 for the time being, is best situated to serve as Central Office for liberated Italy, you are hereby authorized so to designate it and to instruct Palermo in foregoing sense.

5. At the appropriate time, there should be similarly designated a Central Office for liberated France, financial assistance having already been authorized in Tunisia (Department’s 11, September 4, to Tunis14 ) and Corsica (Department’s 83, December 7, to you15 ). Your recommendations in that respect are requested. If you consider it desirable, you may authorize Tunis to continue to function independently.

Hull

8 Neither printed.

9  Foreign Relations, 1942, vol. i, p. 262.

10  Ibid., 1943, vol. i, p. 130.

11 Robert D. Murphy, American representative on the Advisory Council for Italy.

12  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 131.

13 The Consulate at Palermo was opened to the public on February 11, 1944.

14  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 125.

15 Not printed; authorization was granted to direct a Foreign Service Officer for a brief period to Corsica to perform limited consular duties in connection with welfare and whereabouts of American citizens there (125.1336/129).

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Dublin (Styles) 341D.1115/29: Airgram

[Document 728]

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Dublin (Styles)

Washington, May 9, 1944—11:50 a.m.

A–30. Your despatch no. 1737, March 25, 1944.16 Department has decided as an exceptional measure to authorize loans in emergency cases and to a limited extent only to destitute American nationals in Eire (Ireland) under the procedure set forth in the Department’s instruction no. 1202, February 14, 1942, as amended,17 to the American Legation, Bern, a copy of which was enclosed with circular instruction of January 22, 1944 (Foreign Service Serial no. 109).

Eire is temporarily classified as Class I, the basic maximum for which is $60 monthly.

An allotment of $500 is hereby authorized for the remainder of the current fiscal year for financial assistance to destitute American nationals in Eire, and for their repatriation as provided by Department’s circular instruction of August 12, 1941 (Diplomatic Serial No. 3382).18 No funds may be expended under this authorization for the financial assistance or repatriation of any alien relatives of American nationals. Payments shall not be made to or for the benefit of any American national who fails to return to the United States aboard the first vessel on which passage is available. Transportation for the repatriation of destitute American nationals under this authorization shall be limited to third-class or other cheapest available minimum passage to the United States.

Whenever there are disbursements, draw separate drafts and render separate accounts charging Authorization no. 13, 1943–1944 in accordance with Section V–8, Note 2, Foreign Service Regulations.

You are authorized to make suballotments, if necessary, from this allotment to the other American consular offices in Eire. Vouchers covering all their disbursements for this purpose will be furnished to the Consulate General for inclusion in its special accounts to the Department.

A basic principle of Department’s instruction 1202 to Legation, Bern, is to expedite extension of financial assistance by the designation of a central office in the field: (a) to review all applications granted on the spot (those covered by paragraph 10 of 1202); and

(b) to render decisions on all other applications (those covered by paragraph 11 of 1202).

The Consulate General is hereby designated as the central office in Eire and will accept and decide upon all applications submitted by American nationals within its immediate jurisdiction. It will also review and render decision upon applications submitted to the other consular offices in Eire, all of which are to be forwarded to it. The Consulate General will endorse all applications to show, in case of review, its concurrence in or reversal of the decision made by the initiating office, and, in other cases, its decision. It will then forward all applications to the Department. Upon receipt of the application the Department will approve or disapprove but will communicate its decision to the Consulate General only in case of disapproval. Payment in case of disapproval by the Department shall cease as of the date of the receipt by the Consulate General of an instruction containing the disapproval but the validity of payments previously made shall not be affected, provided that total disbursements for financial assistance and repatriation shall not exceed allotments made for that purpose.

For the purposes of financial assistance in Eire, the provisions of Department’s instruction 1202 are to be considered as modified by omitting all reference to the Swiss Government or Swiss representatives and to the American Legation, Bern. So far as the situation or the context of that instruction permits, the Consulate General will perform the functions performed by the American Legation, Bern, under Department’s 1202, and the consular officers extending financial assistance will perform the functions carried out by the Swiss in enemy and enemy-occupied territory. The Consulate General will point out to the consular officers under its jurisdiction the necessity for very careful study of the provisions of Department’s 1202 as amended.

Estimates of the amounts which will be required under this instruction for the period ending June 30, 1944 and for the period July 1 to December 31, 1944 by the consular offices in Eire should be submitted promptly by the Consulate General.

The Department has ascertained informally that the supplies shipped by the American Red Cross to the Irish Red Cross are not intended for general civilian relief but for special emergency purposes only.

Attention is especially invited to the provisions of paragraph 4 of Department’s 1202 which direct that the receipts for loans should indicate the evidence of American nationality borne by recipients of payments and the names and addresses of persons, firms or organizations to whom the United States Government may look for reimbursement of the sums advanced.

Hull

16 Not printed.

17 See footnote 3, p. 1192 [Pg. 1192 is part of Doc. 725].

18  Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. i, p. 413.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 340.1115A/7–1444: Telegram

[Document 729]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, July 14, 1944—8 p.m.

1700. Department’s 1643, July 7.20 You are authorized to extend financial assistance in areas occupied or which may be occupied by the forces of the Soviet Union, to qualified American nationals in accordance with Department’s instruction 1202, February 14, 1942 as amended (copy of which was enclosed with Foreign Service Serial 109, January 22, 1944) but as modified by the provisions of this telegram and by omission of references to Swiss authorities or American Legation, Bern. So far as the situation or the context of instruction 1202 permits with respect to financial assistance you will perform functions such as are performed by Swiss in enemy and enemy-occupied territory and the duties performed by American Legation, Bern, in connection therewith. Your decisions on financial assistance should be reported promptly by air mail to Department which will inform you only in case of reversal.

Such areas are provisionally classified as Class I, maximum $60, under Department’s 1202. As indicated in paragraph eight of that instruction, it is expected that whenever possible the actual sums advanced will be less than permitted maximum, and such advances should never be more than enough to provide for minimum essential needs. Please investigate adequacy of this maximum for such occupied areas and submit recommendation if you believe it should be increased.

Submit estimate of amount required for financial assistance under this instruction for first 6 months fiscal year 1944–1945 with expected number of recipients and estimated amount required monthly for each. Upon receipt of your estimate Department will make allotment funds to you with instructions regarding accounting therefor.

Keep Department informed of developments respecting financial assistance and continued necessity of such assistance.

Hull

20  Not printed; it listed Americans reported by the Legation at Helsinki who were understood to have been in territory recently occupied by Soviet forces (340.1115/62424a).

Lists of American citizens and their dependents reported to be residing in Rumania, Hungary and the southern section of Czechoslovakia and of American prisoners of war in Rumania were delivered to the Soviet Foreign Office under cover of note of June 13, according to telegram 2120, June 13, 1944, midnight, from Moscow (340.1115A/3386).

In telegram 1749, July 21, 4 p.m., the Ambassador in the Soviet Union was informed that the Department did not have any lists of American citizens known to have been residing in Poland or the Baltic States (340.1115A/7–2144).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Palermo (Nester) 340.1115A/7–2944: Telegram

[Document 730]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Palermo (Nester)

Washington, July 29, 1944.

47. You are authorized to extend financial assistance to destitute American nationals in the Island of Sicily without reference to Algiers or any other office. American Consul Naples has been similarly authorized24 to extend financial assistance in liberated areas on the mainland of Italy without reference to Algiers. You will be governed by the provisions of Department’s instruction 1202, February 14, 1942, as amended (copy of which was enclosed with Foreign Service Serial 109 January 22, 1944) but as modified by the provisions of this telegram and the omission of all references to Swiss authorities or American Legation, Bern. So far as the situation or the context of instruction 1202 permits with respect to financial assistance you will perform functions such as are performed by Swiss in enemy and enemy-occupied territory and the duties performed by American Legation, Bern, in connection therewith. Your decisions on financial assistance should be reported promptly by airmail to Department which will inform you only in case of reversal.

To such extent as relief by the United Nations or other general relief measures applicable in Sicily provide for the needs of American nationals there, financial assistance shall be reduced or discontinued.

Liberated Italian areas are provisionally classified as Class VI, maximum $90, under Department’s 1202. As indicated in paragraph eight that instruction, it is expected that whenever possible actual sums advanced will be less than permitted maximum, and such advances should never be more than enough to provide for minimum essential needs. Please investigate whether present maximum for Sicily is excessive or inadequate and submit recommendation if you believe it should be increased or decreased. Submit estimate of amount required for financial assistance in your Consular District for first 6 months fiscal year 1945 with expected number recipients and estimated amount required monthly for each. Upon receipt your estimate Department will make allotment funds to you with instructions regarding accounting therefor. No expenditures should be made by you for financial assistance during fiscal year 1945 except after the receipt of an allotment of funds for the purpose from the Department.

Telegraph whether records regarding financial assistance to American nationals in Sicily have been turned over to you in connection with the relinquishment by Swiss of American interests (see Department’s memorandum December 15, 1943 transmitted under cover of Department’s instruction number 3, February 26, to Algiers25 for distribution to Italy).

United States Government funds are not to be used in cases where there is any other available source of funds for financial assistance. Each applicant should be required to show that he has endeavored to obtain funds from friends, relatives, attorneys, banks, or other organizations in the United States and should give the names and addresses of such persons or organizations so that they may be requested to furnish funds for his financial assistance.

Keep Department informed of developments respecting financial assistance and continued necessity such assistance.

Stettinius

24 Telegram 304, July 4, 1944, to Naples, not printed.

25 Not printed.

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 864.4016/8–244: Airgram

[Document 731]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, August 2, 1944.
[Received August 11—3 p.m.]

A–455. American Interests—Hungary. Department’s airgram 252 May 26.26

Swiss Foreign Office note July 31 states decree mentioned Legation’s 2505 April 20th27 appeared Hungarian Official Gazette April 16th and paragraph 14 reads in translation as follows.

“The provisions of the present decree are not applicable to those foreign citizens residing in Hungary who upon request of the competent foreign representative authorities prove their foreign citizenship by a certificate issued for that purpose by the Foreign Control Bureau providing however that reciprocity exists in that respect with the state of which the Jew is a citizen.”

Swiss Legation Budapest reported that since publication decree it has taken steps that Americans under its protection benefit paragraph 14 and is of the opinion that property Americans in Hungary not affected by government measures.

Harrison

26 Not printed; it inquired concerning a decree affecting Jews in Hungary (864.4016/187).

27 Telegram not printed.

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 340.1115/62860: Telegram

[Document 732]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, August 9, 1944—9 a.m.
[Received 7:05 p.m.]

5150. American Interests—Allied Liberated Italy. Department’s 2388, July 12.28 Swiss report that Swiss Legation Rome transmitted through Swiss Consulate Algiers message indicating it continues protect American interests Allied liberated areas of Italy on basis of instructions given by Swiss Foreign Office at request Allied authorities. Swiss Legation Home continues pay relief qualified Americans.

Swiss Foreign Office official states orally courier Bern-Algiers again functioning and anticipates that documentation and relief applications submitted by Americans in subject areas will be forwarded Bern via that mail channel. Accordingly Swiss willing employ same channel in forwarding Legation’s relief and documentation decisions.

In view foregoing please instruct whether ultimate sentence Department’s telegram under reference may be considered canceled.29

Harrison

28 Not printed.

29 The ultimate sentence was: “Further documentation decisions involving persons in liberated areas of Italy should be referred to Department.”

The Consul General at Naples (Brandt) to the Secretary of State 340.1115A/8–2644: Telegram

[Document 733]

The Consul General at Naples (Brandt) to the Secretary of State

Naples, August 26, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received August 26—2:47 p.m.]

444. Swiss Legation Rome where representation American interests Italy centralized having lost contact with invaded areas Nester,30 Palermo, and I here upon opening offices31 took on full representation in our respective districts. Replying Department’s 478, August 21, 9 p.m.32 Upon liberation Rome33 and Kirk’s removal there34 I went to Rome latter part July and had understanding with Swiss Legation that Legation would continue representing American interests northward from Naples district until Consulate Rome established when representation our interests would be formally relinquished by Legation. I have thus delayed formal assumption representation as permitted by Foreign Service Serial 10835 and because I do not have the necessary officer assistance to do all that assumption entails particularly in checking inventory, taking possession of property and archives and extending consular activities of this office to Rome and northward. Please see my 187, June 14, 10 a.m.,35 in this connection.

Regarding extension financial assistance to American nationals Allied financial authorities36 have been and are extending such assistance as to other Allied nationals in liberated areas under promissory note procedure. I shall describe in despatch.37 Nester and I cooperating with those authorities in examining applicants for assistance in our districts. Swiss Legation still extending assistance in Rome district after checking against duplicate payments. Kirk informs me that Allied Control Commission pressing for American and British Consuls to take over payments.38 I have replied that I have been gathering necessary data from Swiss, and Allied authorities have asked Nester to Naples for consultation and propose to take on payments when Consulate Rome established to share in work.39

[Here follow requests for additional consular officers.]

Please advise.

Brandt

30 Alfred T. Nester, Consul General at Palermo.

31 The Consulate General at Naples was reestablished and opened to the public on July 1, 1944.

32 Not printed.

33 June 4, 1944.

34 Office of the American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy, formerly at Naples, transferred to Rome.

35 Not printed.

35 Not printed.

36 Allied Financial Agency.

37 Despatch 99, September 9, not printed.

38 According to telegram 78, September 1, 2 p.m., from Palermo, Allied Control Commission had been and was extending financial assistance to American nationals in southern areas of Italy including Sicily (340.1115A/9–144).

39 Telegram 5, July 19, to Rome, indicated that pending such time as the Embassy in Rome could be reopened as a combined office, a Consulate was to be established there, and the Consulate General at Naples would be the supervisory office (125.771/7–1944).

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 121.67/8–2544: Telegram

[Document 734]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)40

Washington, September 1, 1944—8 p.m.

3021. American Interests—France. Reurtel 5550, August 25, 8 a.m., and thirteenth paragraph your 5367, August 18.41 In view of fact that Swiss Government is apparently out of touch with its representatives in liberated areas of France, U. S. Government is willing to offer all possible assistance in Swiss effort to resume communications and would be pleased to consider specific suggestions by Swiss Foreign Office on this subject.

It is hoped to reopen American diplomatic and consular offices in France at the earliest opportunity but in the present circumstances it is unlikely that the diplomatic and consular staffs at the various posts will be adequate at first to carry on all the functions of the representation of American interests. It would therefore be appreciated if Swiss Government would implement in France the arrangement outlined in the Department’s instruction 1999, December 27, 194342 and its telegram 2179 September 443 whereby Swiss officers in Italy continued to render consular services for the United States Government upon a provisional basis.

The American staff returning to Paris44 will be unable immediately to undertake consular duties but will wish immediately to take over the physical properties of the United States Government. It would be appreciated if specific instructions to that effect could be urgently issued to the Swiss Consul at Paris. The exact nature of initial activities at other posts in France is not yet determined.

In the Department’s opinion the needs of the circumstances at each place can best be met by close and effective liaison between the Swiss and American representatives who should take each step in the transfer of the representation of American interests to American hands only after appropriate consultation. It would therefore be appreciated if Swiss representatives in France could be instructed to turn over to American Foreign Service Officers the representation of American interests when and to the extent requested by such officers.

Please inform Department of Swiss reaction and of instructions on this subject being sent to Swiss representatives in France. As stated above Department will be glad to facilitate transmission of such instructions.

Hull

40 Repeated (in paraphrase) on the same date to London and Algiers, and on September 12 to Caserta, as telegrams 7086, 2545, and 130, respectively.

41 Neither printed.

42 Not printed.

43  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 124.

44 Paris was liberated August 23, 1944.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 706.5571/9–744: Telegram

[Document 735]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)45

Washington, September 7, 1944.

2148. In response to an inquiry dated August 29 Department has addressed following self-explanatory communication to Belgian Embassy Washington: “The Secretary of State acknowledges the receipt of the memorandum no. 4089 (D. 8248) of August 29, 1944 from the Belgian Embassy46 requesting the advice of the United States Government in respect of the situation presented, now that Soviet forces have liberated Bucharest,47 by the fact that the Swiss Legation in charge of Belgian interests in Rumania is the representative of a Power which has not established diplomatic relations with the Soviet Government.

It is the assumption of the Department of State that as the Soviet Government is an ally of the Belgian Government it will be willing to permit the Swiss Legation at Bucharest, which is accredited to the Rumanian Government, to remain at least as custodian of Belgian interests in Rumania until such time as the Belgian Government may be able to arrange for its own representation at Bucharest. It is assumed that a similar situation will prevail in respect of the protection of United States interests in Rumania.”

Hull

45 Repeated on the same date to London as telegram 7236 with the following introductory sentence: “For the Embassy’s information the following has been sent AmEmbassy, Moscow.”

46 Not printed.

47 August 31.

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Kirk) 702.5451/9–1144: Telegram

[Document 736]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Kirk)48

Washington, September 11, 1944—8 p.m.

124. ReDeptel 96, September 1, 8 p.m.49 German occupying authorities forced Swiss Consulates at Marseille and Nice to evacuate to Montelimar and Grenoble respectively. Department believes that they should return as facilities and opportunities for protection of United States and British nationals are not so favorable inland as at Marseille and Nice. Please discuss matter with military authorities and inform Department of result in order that this may be taken up with Swiss Government.50 Department views this step as of considerable importance in view of its probable inability to open offices in southern France for some time to come.

Hull

48 Mr. Kirk served concurrently (as Political Adviser to the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater, whose Allied Force Headquarters (AFHQ) was at Caserta, and as American member of the Advisory Council for Italy, with a staff at Caserta and a staff at Rome.

49 Not printed.

50 The Minister in Switzerland was advised in telegram 3252, September 21, noon, to inform the Swiss Foreign Office that military authorities in southern France were under instructions to facilitate; return of Swiss Consuls to Marseille and Nice (702.5451/9–2144).

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 703.5455/9–1444: Telegram

[Document 737]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)51

Washington, September 14, 1944—10 p.m.

3182. American Interests—Belgium. In view of liberation of Brussels and Antwerp52 and impending arrival there of representatives of Department, please make to Swiss Government in respect of communications with Swiss Consul Brussels an offer corresponding to that contained in first paragraph of Department’s 3021, September 1, 8 p.m., with regard to Paris.

It would be helpful if Swiss Consul Brussels could proceed with arrangements for separate transfer to Department’s representatives Brussels and Antwerp of archives relating to matters in their respective districts.

Please request that Swiss Consul Brussels be instructed regarding transfer of American interests along lines discussed in Department’s 3021. As it is anticipated that it will be infeasible fully to staff at the outset American offices at Brussels and Antwerp a gradual transfer of interests there as at Paris is anticipated.

Please report along lines prescribed in final paragraph of Department’s 3021.

Hull

51 Paraphrase transmitted in telegram 7487 on the same date to London for (1) the Counselor of Embassy in Belgium (Harrington) or the Second Secretary (Mayer), and (2) the Consul at Dublin (Anderson), who was to be assigned to Antwerp.

52 September 4–5.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 340.1115A/9–1444: Telegram

[Document 738]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 14, 1944—11 p.m.
[Received September 15—2:17 a.m.]

3494. Department’s 2153, September 7, 8 p.m.53 Foreign Office states it has taken up with the Soviet military authorities our request that claimants to American citizenship in liberated areas be assisted in presenting their cases to the Embassy and has promised to inform us more fully concerning the steps that have been taken in the near future.

Postal communications appear to have been fairly generally established between Moscow and those areas which the Russians regard as Soviet territory, and we are already receiving letters from Bukowina, Eastern Galicia, White Russia and Lithuania, usually within 10 days to 2 weeks of the date of mailing. Most of these letters are from aliens seeking to communicate with American relatives. Only about a dozen so far have been from claimants to United States citizenship.

Postal authorities in Moscow say that there is service between here and Lublin, but the five letters we have received from Lublin have all been delivered by hand.

A further report will be submitted as soon as possible.

Harriman

53 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 711.71114A/9–944: Telegram

[Document 739]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, September 16, 1944—midnight.

2228. ReDeptel 2148, September 7. Department is informed by Legation Bern54 that Swiss Legation Bucharest has reported that American colony in Rumania desires learn when representatives of this Government will arrive to protect United States interests vis-à-vis the Soviet authorities.

From another source55 Department learns of feeling by approximately 500 Americans in Rumania that they require further protection. Department is requesting Bern56 to ascertain from Swiss Legation Bucharest exactly what if any obstacles prevent normal extension of protection to Americans.

Hull

54 Telegram 5960, September 9, not printed.

55 Telegram 338, September 9, 6 p.m., from Caserta, not printed.

56 Telegram 3217, September 16, midnight, not printed.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 703.5464/9–2044: Telegram

[Document 740]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 20, 1944—10 p.m.
[Received September 20—8:30 p.m.]

3602. ReDepts 2205, September 14, 7 p.m.57 We have given the Foreign Office a memo regarding the representation of American interests in enemy and enemy-occupied territory by the Swiss Government stating that the United States Government assumes the Soviet Government will not object to the continuance of this representation in areas occupied by Soviet forces until the arrival of United States representatives.58

Harriman

57 Not printed; it concerned an inquiry from the Swiss Legation at Budapest whether the United States Government had informed the Soviet Government that Switzerland was the Power protecting American interests in Hungary (703.5464/9–544).

58 The Minister in Switzerland was informed of the September 20 reply from the Ambassador in the Soviet Union, in telegram 3343, September 28, 8 p.m. (703.5400/9–2844).

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 340.1115A/9–2244: Telegram

[Document 741]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, September 22, 1944.
[Received September 22—11:55 p.m.]

6296. American Interests—Baltic Countries. Legation’s 4991, August 3, Department’s 2852, August 19.59

Swiss Legation Berlin reports September 15 no recipients financial assistance Baltic countries.

Harrison

59 Neither printed.

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 702.5451/9–2344: Telegram

[Document 742]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, September 23, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received September 23—7 p.m.]

6321. Your 3252 September 21.60 Swiss Foreign Office reports chief Foreign Interests Section of Swiss Consulate Nice (removed to Grenoble) arrived Nice September 8 and agreed with American Officer in charge civil affairs that Swiss Consulate now at Nice would continue protection Americans in district61 until functions taken over by representative State Department. Postal service having been reestablished September 12 Swiss Consulate forwarded relief receipts to qualified recipients for September payments.

Harrison

60 See footnote 50, p. 1203 [Pg. 1203 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736].

61 A memorandum of September 26 by a divisional assistant of the Division of Special War Problems (Correll) stated that the Department’s records indicated that at that time approximately 75 American nationals were receiving monthly financial assistance from the Swiss Consulate at Nice (temporarily at Grenoble); in addition to this number it was anticipated that a considerable number of Americans formerly resident at Nice who had left because of German pressure or who had been forcibly evacuated to other parts of France would return to Nice as soon as feasible (702.5451/9–2344).

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 703.5455/9–2344: Telegram

[Document 743]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 62

Bern, September 23, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received September 23—6:53 p.m.]

6322. Belgium—American Interests. Your 3182, September 14, communicated Foreign Office September 15. Latter replies note September 21 advising Swiss Consul Brussels given necessary instructions gradual relinquishment American interests.63 Note adds matters relating Belgium having been centralized Swiss Legation, Berlin, appears possible part archives taken over by Swiss Consulate, Brussels, have been transferred Berlin.64 In such case Foreign Office will have records sent from Berlin to Bern for reforwarding by earliest means.

No response yet received to concluding paragraph Department’s 3021, September 1.

Harrison

62 Telegram 8066, October 3, 1 p.m., transmitted the substance of this telegram to London, for Ernest de W. Mayer, Second Secretary of Embassy in Belgium.

63  The Embassy in Belgium (reestablished on September 14) and the Consulate General at Antwerp (established on October 17) were opened to the public on September 18 and November 17, respectively.

The Ambassador in Belgium (Sawyer) was accredited also to Luxembourg where the Legation (reestablished September 23) was opened to the public on October 2, 1944.

64 According to telegram 6380, September 26, from Bern, the archives were not transferred to Berlin but remained in Belgium and the Netherlands (703.5455/9–2644).

The Acting American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Paris (Chapin) to the Secretary of State 703.5451/9–3044: Telegram

[Document 744]

The Acting American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Paris (Chapin) to the Secretary of State 65

Paris, September 30, 1944—9 a.m.
[Received October 1—8:37 p.m.]

121. The questions raised in Department’s 37, September 25, 9 p.m. are answered to a large extent by my 96, September 27, 4 p.m.,66 which crossed the Department’s telegram.

As the Department is aware we are already acting on all whereabouts, welfare and property inquiries referred to the Mission by the Department in addition to a limited number of inquiries originating here. We are not prepared, however, to handle any financial matters for American citizens or others until our disbursing section is fully installed.

The Swiss continue to handle all financial matters and ordinary welfare and protection cases as in the past and it will not be feasible to take over any of these functions until as pointed out in my telegram referred to we are adequately staffed. For the time being our activities must be limited to the Paris area due to existing difficulties of transportation and telegraphic and postal communication. As Consulates are opened in other parts of the country they can presumably assume such functions although in cases of extreme urgency it might be possible even before that time for this Mission to send a representative beyond the Paris area or to elicit the cooperation of the military authorities although neither course is recommended.

The Department may wish to announce publicly at this time67 that the Mission is prepared to receive welfare and whereabouts inquiries emphasizing in the announcement that a delay may be anticipated due to shortage of personnel presently available to the Mission.

Chapin

65 A Mission at Paris was reestablished on September 8, and Jefferson Caffery was assigned as U. S. representative to the de facto French Authority on September 21, 1944.

66 Neither printed; in telegram 37 to London, for Selden Chapin (who was assigned as Counselor of Mission at Paris on September 1), request was made for information regarding the Mission’s assumption of functions with respect to United States nationals and their property (whereabouts, welfare, financial assistance, messages and funds) (703.5451/9–2544). In telegram 96, September 27, from Paris, Mr. Chapin reported that, because of his hopelessly inadequate staff, it was impossible to consider taking over from the Swiss the representation of American interests for the time being (124.51/9–2744).

67 See Department of State Bulletin, October 8, 1944, p. 391.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 711.71114A/9–2544: Telegram

[Document 745]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, September 30, 1944—4 p.m.

2327. Department has been informed by American Legation Bern68 that according to information received informally and orally the only communication with Rumania is by telegraph in plain language. Legation states that Swiss Foreign Office telegraphed to ascertain whether its representative could continue protecting American interests until American representatives could arrive and Minister’s reply was an inquiry as to when they would reach there and that it is believed by Foreign Office that Swiss representative will be unable to represent our interests and it strongly advises that an American representative arrive at Bucharest very soon. The matter of American representation in Rumania is being covered in a separate telegram.69

Hull

68 Telegram 6359, September 25, 6 p.m., not printed.

69 Telegram 2365, October 5, 8 p.m., vol. iv, p. 246.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 340.1115A/10–344: Telegram

[Document 746]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, October 3, 1944—10 p.m.
[Received October 3—9:45 p.m.]

3783. Reference Embassy’s telegram 3494, September 14, 11 p.m.

We are now receiving letters by mail from Lublin, and Moscow postal authorities state that postal communications have been established with all parts of liberated Poland, but that telegraph service is not yet available.

We have reiterated to the Foreign Office our hope that all possible assistance will be given claimants of American citizenship in communicating with the Embassy. The Foreign Office states it has asked the Soviet military authorities to advise and assist all such persons to communicate with us. Names of claimants will be reported periodically in accordance with Department’s 2285, September 25, 7 p.m.70

Soviet postal authorities say that parcels of food and clothing coming from abroad via Iran are deliverable in Baltic States and Polish and Rumanian territory occupied by Soviet armies. Weight limit five kilograms. It would be helpful to us in dealing with requests for assistance to know whether post offices in the United States accept such parcels for mailing.71

Harriman

70 Not printed.

71 The Ambassador in the Soviet Union was informed in telegram 2401, October 10, 1944, and telegram 2459, October 18, 1944, that no mail was being accepted addressed to Baltic States or Soviet-occupied Polish and Rumanian territory and that no parcel post was being accepted for the Soviet Union because adequate facilities for its transportation to the Soviet Union were not available (340.1115A/10–344; /10–1344). Telegram 2610, November 4, 1944, to Moscow, concerned the readiness of the American Post Office Department to resume normal parcel post service immediately with all of the U.S.S.R. if the Soviet postal authorities were agreeable to resumption of such service. (340.1115A/10–2844)

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 740.00113 E.W./10–544: Telegram

[Document 747]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, October 5, 1944.
[Received October 5—11:35 p.m.]

6637. American Interests—Bulgaria—Private Property. Swiss Legation, Sofia, telegraphs Bulgarian decree September 15 abrogates all valid laws concerning enemy property, terminates sequestrations and orders restitution property to owners.

Harrison

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) 340.1115A/10–1644: Telegram

[Document 748]

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk)

Washington, October 16, 1944—8 p.m.

289. For Huddleston.72 Department is extremely anxious to have the work of affording financial assistance to destitute American nationals in liberated areas taken over by its diplomatic and consular officers. You will be authorized to extend such assistance to eligible destitute American nationals in the Rome consular district73 and temporarily, pending the reopening of other offices, in all other liberated areas on the Italian mainland lying outside the Naples consular district.

After consultation with Swiss representatives telegraph estimate of the amount which will be required for financial assistance by your office for the period ending December 31, 1944, stating expected number of recipients divided into adults and minors and estimated amount required monthly for each. Upon receipt your estimate Department will give you instructions on how financial assistance will be extended and will allot funds to you with instructions regarding accounting.74

Financial assistance will be extended under the general principles of Department’s instruction 1202, February 14, 1942, to American Legation, Bern (copy of which was enclosed with Foreign Service Serial 109, January 22, 194475 ) but as modified by instruction which will be issued to you and by omission of references to Swiss authorities or American Legation, Bern.

If your office is not in a position to begin making financial assistance loans upon the receipt of an instruction from the Department so directing, report by telegraph what is needed.

Bring substance of this instruction to attention of all officers who are temporarily assigned Rome but who are destined to Milan, Genoa, Florence, Turin or Trieste.

Naples and Palermo have been instructed to submit estimates of allotments required for financial assistance in their consular districts and to begin extending such assistance upon receipt of allotments.76

Hull

72 John F. Huddleston, Consul at Rome.

73  The Consulate at Rome (reestablished on September 26) was opened to the public on October 16, 1944.

The protection of American interests in certain liberated Italian territory was transferred from the Swiss to the American authorities by a memorandum of October 16, 1944.

74 Telegram 348, October 28, 1944, 11 p.m., granted allotment to the Rome office for financial assistance and repatriation during November and December 1944 (340.1115A/10–2344).

75 See footnote 3, p. 1192 [Pg. 1192 is part of Doc. 725].

76 Allotment was granted to the offices at Naples and Palermo, in telegrams 648 and 58, October 28, 1944, 7 p.m. and 10 p.m., respectively, for financial assistance and repatriation for destitute American nationals in those consular districts during the months of November and December 1944; the consular officers were instructed to take over on November 1st, if possible, from the Allied Control Commission the work of extending financial assistance to American nationals (340.1115A/10–1244;/9–144).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 740.00115 E.W./10–2544: Telegram

[Document 749]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, October 25, 1944—9 p.m.

3639. Reurtel 6902, October 18.77 Last May, Department sent to Moscow for transmission to appropriate Soviet authorities list of 374 United States citizens and accompanying alien relatives who were reported by Swiss representatives in 1942 to have been residing in Hungary. Similar lists for Bulgaria, Rumania, and southern portion of Czechoslovakia were sent at the same time. Mission at Moscow was requested to inform Soviet Government that the information in the lists should be of assistance to its authorities in liberated areas in identifying American citizens and their dependents, many of whom would presumably request the local authorities for advice in getting in touch with the nearest United States Government representative for the purpose of obtaining such assistance as the United States Government might be prepared to extend to them.

Even if foregoing action had not been taken, Department is confident that the Soviet Government as an ally would take every possible action to see that United States citizens who conduct themselves peaceably were protected by the Soviet armed forces and also that our citizens would be given such facilities as they might need to obtain appropriate assistance from the nearest United States Government representatives or from the Swiss authorities representing American interests in the area concerned.

If civil disorders threatening the lives of United States citizens should develop in Hungary, Swiss authorities should take every possible measure to protect United States citizens and their accompanying alien relatives, including implementation of the arrangements suggested or alternative ones. The head of family, if an American, or the oldest American member of family should be required to sign a promissory note in an amount equivalent to his family pro rata share of the costs involved in implementing the special arrangements. The Department should be informed when such action is taken.

Please inform appropriate Swiss authorities in confidence of this Government’s action and attitude in this matter.

A paraphrase of your telegram under acknowledgement and the text of this telegram are being repeated to Caserta, London, and Moscow78 with a request that the appropriate Allied authorities be confidentially informed in the premises.

Stettinius

77 Not printed; it reported that a Swiss note of October 3 had requested the Legation to ascertain whether the Department would be disposed to take favorable action upon requests made by uninterned members of American, British, and Belgian colonies in Budapest protected by the Swiss Government who desired to take refuge at Venta Sanatorium at the expense of their respective Governments. These persons, according to a Swiss note of October 15, foresaw possible disorders created by communist groups and expressed fear that the Soviet armed forces would not give proper recognition to Swiss protective documentation if the bearers kept separate domiciles. (740.00115 EW/10–1844)

78 As telegrams 296, 8905, and 2518, respectively, dated October 25, 10 p.m.

The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.00113 European War 1939/10–3044: Telegram

[Document 750]

The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Rome, October 30, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received October 31—9:19 a.m.]

624. A note dated October 28 just received from Italian Prime Minister79 states that the competent Italian authorities have taken steps for promoting the desequestration of property of British and American subjects in Italy to point out to my Government that the Government of Italy expects similar measures to be taken in the United States with regard to Italian property still under sequestration. He requests any assurance which I can give him in the matter.

In this general connection the Italian Government was apprised by me some months ago of the basis of treatment accorded to Italian property in the United States insofar as was set forth in Department’s instruction No. 3 of May 25, 1944.80

I should appreciate being informed as to what I should now say to President Bonomi in reply to his note.

Kirk

79 Ivanoe Bonomi.

80 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy 740.00115 European War 1939/11–744

[Document 751]

The Acting Secretary of State to Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy

Washington, November 7, 1944.

My Dear Admiral Leahy: I attach for your information a copy of a letter which I am addressing to the Attorney General81 with respect to the suggested use of State Department facilities for the proposed repatriation from Europe of American civilians soon after the termination of formal armed resistance by the German Government.

The facilities of the State Department were made available to effect the evacuation from the Far East of American citizens held by the enemy in that area.82 As you are aware, numerous proposals for such evacuation are pending with the Japanese and there is of course always a possibility that the Japanese will accept one or the other of those proposals. In particular I refer to a recent statement by a spokesman of the Japanese Foreign Office to the Swiss Minister at Tokyo indicating that in his opinion of three proposals envisaging the exchange of Japanese in North America for Americans in Japanese-held territory, one (use of steamships via Soviet port) was considered infeasible and two (small exchanges using rail facilities across Manchuria and Siberia and exchange such as that effected last year at Mormugão) were considered as feasible, the last mentioned being preferred. The Japanese spokesmen, however, stated that the Japanese Government would wish to defer any further American exchanges until after the accomplishment of the next British exchange which he alleged to be impeded by serious technical difficulties. A fourth exchange proposal of which you are aware is before the Japanese involving the Japanese civilian population of the Island of Saipan. The Japanese Government has expressed unwillingness to consider this proposal until it has a list of the Japanese civilians in question. The Navy Department has undertaken the preparation of such a list.

The proposed use of State Department facilities to and from Europe pending the outcome of further negotiations with the Japanese, and even between voyages to the Far East would not only provide useful employment for such facilities but would enable this Government to discharge important obligations to the American taxpayers. I attach a memorandum regarding the post-war problem of repatriation of American civilians from Europe.

This problem is one of gravity to the Department in terms of its responsibility to the taxpayer and to the individual Americans concerned. The Department fully appreciates that the War and Navy Departments and the War Shipping Administration are fully occupied with the more important problem of winning the war which, so far as can now be foreseen, will continue in the Far East even after extensive military operations in Europe are terminated. It is therefore the Department’s hope that as soon as formal hostilities in Europe are terminated the military authorities will agree to the use of State Department facilities for the repatriation from Europe of deserving American citizens who may be identified by the representatives of this Department and screened by the appropriate military authorities. I shall appreciate your views upon this proposal.

To the extent deemed necessary in the public interest the Department of State, when using the Swedish ship Gripsholm 83 for the purpose described above, would wish to reserve a relatively small portion of the passenger space eastbound for its own personnel traveling to Europe and for other civilian employees of the Government. On the return voyages there might be carried materials for civilian agencies of this Government as well as civilian Government personnel. Throughout the entire course of such operations this Department would, of course, be guided by the principle that nothing should be done with the vessel which might in any way impair its present established character as an exchange vessel since it may at any time be required for use in connection with exchanges of nationals with Japan.84

Sincerely yours,

Edward R. Stettinius, Jr.

[Enclosure]

Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Special War Problems Division (Clattenburg)

[Washington,] October 19, 1944.

The Department of State has during the course of the present conflict in Europe done everything possible to facilitate the repatriation of American civilians caught in enemy or enemy-controlled territory but has been hampered very considerably by the difficulty inherent in obtaining a satisfactory agreement with the German Government covering that problem.

There are in Europe today in territory still held by the enemy or territory more or less recently liberated from his control large numbers of American citizens who have during the time since Pearl Harbor been participating in the terror and deprivation visited by the Nazis upon all within their power who are not declared partisans of the Nazi regime. We are receiving in the Department increasing numbers of reports of American citizens who have been deprived of personal possessions, of food and of many of their inherent rights as human beings such as the Americans of Jewish extraction who were caught in Germany, Hungary or Slovakia. There are unknown numbers of Americans who concealed their American nationality in the hope of escaping enemy oppression only to share the fate of the local populace in terms of loss of health, liberty and belongings. At least two cases are known of Americans in France who lost their reason under Gestapo85 questioning. Other Americans, perhaps a minority, have been more fortunate and either have remained relatively unmolested or have been interned in the regular internment camps which, although conducted in accordance with the principles of the Geneva Prisoners of War Convention,86 subjected them to physical discomfort, inadequate provisions to maintain their health, and sub-normal provision of food and clothing.

An important number of American civilians have during the period since December 7, 1941 existed by virtue of financial assistance loans from the funds of this Government. The Department feels it essential that such assistance be continued until the Americans in question can receive funds from next of kin or others in the United States, or until they have been afforded an opportunity for repatriation, whichever may be the proper solution of each case. With the removal of the fear of enemy oppression many more deserving cases will come to the attention of our officers entering the areas formerly held by the enemy and the burden of financial assistance may be expected to increase. In the public interest suitable provision for terminating this burden should be made by providing means for the repatriation of these individuals.

81 Letter of November 7 to Attorney General Francis Biddle, not printed.

82 For correspondence on this subject, see vol. v, pp. 1081 ff.

83 For correspondence on the use of the Gripsholm for the exchange of American and German prisoners of war and others, see vol. iii, pp. 785 ff.

84  In response, Admiral Leahy stated in his letter of December 5, 1944, to the Secretary of State:

“The Joint Chiefs of Staff, from a military point of view, have no objection in principle to the foregoing proposals. However, it may be that proposed movements of the M. V. Gripsholm and other vessels and overland transportation facilities may interfere with military operations in progress following the cessation of hostilities in Europe. They therefore request that the matter be presented for consideration at that time.” (740.00115 EW/12–544)

85 The German Secret State Police (Geheime Staatspolizei).

86 Signed at Geneva, July 27, 1929; for text, see Foreign Relations, 1929, vol. i, p. 336.

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 340.1115A/11–844: Telegram

[Document 752]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, November 8, 1944—11 a.m.
[Received November 8—9:50 a.m.]

7406. American Interests—Liberated Italy. Legation’s 5150, August 9, 9 p.m. Foreign Office note November 2 states American representatives, according telegram from Swiss Legation Rome, in southern Italy have taken over completely from October 31, all matters concerning American interests in Rome area. From that date Swiss Legation discontinued payment relief.

Protection American interests in Florence consular district not yet turned over to American representatives. Accordingly Swiss Consulate that city will continue these functions.87

Harrison

87 Telegram 8210, December 18, from Bern, indicated that according to Swiss Foreign Office note of December 16, “Swiss Consulate Florence continues protection of American interests in provinces Florence, Arezzo, Livorno, Pisa, Ravenna, Apuania, Forli, Lucas [Lucca?], Pistoia, and Siena” (125.7711/12–1844).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Naples (Brandt) 740.00115 European War 1939/11–1444: Telegram

[Document 753]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Naples (Brandt)

Washington, November 14, 1944—8 p.m.

684. Department is informed by War Department that SACMED88 has agreed to repatriation of properly documented United Nations nationals in Italy in so far as military circumstances permit. (See Tam 348 November 3 to General Wilson from CCS.89 ) In considering applications for repatriation of American nationals residing in your district you should give preference to following categories: 1. Persons who are ill or disabled.

2. Persons who are aged and infirm.

3. Persons whose repatriation would result in the reunion of families.

4. Children under 15 years of age.

5. Individual cases, the merits of each to be considered separately: a. Persons left alone through the death of a near relative especially when death caused by hostilities.

b. Persons whose residences have been destroyed through military action.

c. Men of military age or others whose repatriation would aid the Allied war effort.

d. Women who are married to Italian nationals but have retained their American nationality.

Department notes that repatriation of American civilians escaped from enemy territory is covered by final paragraph of October 5 letter from Headquarters NATOUSA.90

Issuance of passports and other documents will be covered in a separate communication.

American nationals who are presently receiving financial assistance from official funds should be reminded that they are under obligation to accept earliest opportunity for repatriation and that refusal will result in complete curtailment of further assistance.

Inform Ampolad Rome and Palermo.

Stettinius

88 Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (Wilson).

89 Combined Chiefs of Staff; copy of telegram not found in Department files.

90 Letter from North African Theater of Operations, United States Army, October 5, not found in Department files.

The Chargé to the Czechoslovak Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State 740.00115 European War/11–1444

[Document 754]

The Chargé to the Czechoslovak Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State

No. 209 London, November 14, 1944.
[Received November 20.]

Sir: Referring to the Department’s telegram No. 8905 of October 25, 10 p.m.91 regarding certain precautionary measures which the Department in conjunction with the Swiss Government has taken to protect the lives of American citizens in certain disturbed areas, I have the honor to report that in a note of November 10th the Czechoslovak Minister of Foreign Affairs suggests, for the benefit of American citizens who may be on the territory of the Czechoslovak Republic, that lists of names of such citizens be forwarded additionally by the Department to the Czechoslovak Embassy in Moscow in order that they may be given to the Czechoslovak Government Delegate in the liberated area for his assistance in tracing American citizens and in granting them social assistance where necessary. The Minister adds that in this respect the Czechoslovak Government is willing to afford the same measure of help to them as that rendered to Czechoslovak citizens and will instruct its Delegate that his Mission should prepare and transmit a list of any American citizens who may be residing on territory administered by it.

As has already been reported, there is at present, under the terms of the Soviet-Czechoslovak Treaty of 1943,92 a Czechoslovak Government Delegate (Mr. František Němec) and his Mission on the territory of the Republic which has been liberated by the Soviet army. This delegation progressively takes over from the Soviet military authorities the civil administration of the liberated territory in the name of the Czechoslovak Government, a procedure which has thus far been applied in the Province of Subcarpathian Ruthenia.

Respectfully yours,

Rudolf E. Schoenfeld

91 See footnote 78, p. 1212 [Pg. 1212 includes portions of Doc. 749 and Doc. 750].

92 For text of treaty of friendship, mutual assistance and post-war collaboration between Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union, with protocol, signed at Moscow on December 12, 1943, see British and Foreign State Papers, vol. cxlv, p. 238, or Department of State, Documents and State Papers, vol. i, No. 4, pp. 228–229. For correspondence on this treaty, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. iii, pp. 726–735, passim.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 740.00115 European War/11–444: Telegram

[Document 755]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, November 18, 1944—6 p.m.

3921. American Interests—Hungary. Following is second paragraph of telegram 4235 from Embassy Moscow93 regarding protection of American citizens at Budapest: “I added that for purposes of protection during the period of military activity in and about Budapest, the Americans in the city might decide to concentrate in one place, and that the Venta Sanitarium had been under consideration for this purpose. If this occurred we would try to see that the Soviet authorities were notified, both here and in Budapest. In the meantime, I asked that the competent Soviet military authorities be informed of the presence of Americans in the Budapest area, of the possibility of their concentration, and of the interest of my Government in their safety.”

Department is replying94 as follows: “Communications between Bern and Budapest are understood to be very unreliable and it is doubtful whether a last minute decision to concentrate Americans at Venta Sanitarium could be communicated to you in time to serve any useful purpose.

London reports that British Embassy at Moscow has received instructions regarding protection of British subjects at Budapest. Naturally, the approaches which you and your British colleague make to the Soviet Government should be suitably correlated if that has not already been done. You should proceed on the assumption that the Americans will be concentrated at the Sanitarium and attempt to have the Soviet authorities take steps to insure its safety.”

With reference to inquiry of Swiss Legation Budapest described in your 7528, November 14, 3 p.m.,95 Department would appreciate having Swiss Government informed that communication of Hungarian Government dated November 4 may represent attempt by German Government to obtain custody of American and British hostages and hence that United States Government distrusts statements of Hungarian Government. Department requests that Swiss Legation at Budapest find some pretext to delay delivery of list of Americans at large unless it is convinced that the Hungarian Government actually contemplates the repatriation of the Americans and that it would not expose them to unnecessary danger to endeavor to evacuate them for inclusion in the proposed exchange with Germany.

Department would have no objection if Swiss Legation in responding to Hungarian communication should state that United States Government is concerned to learn that it is proposed to move the Americans through an area which is the scene of active military operations and would like to know what arrangements Hungarians are in a position to make for the safety of the Americans if the scheme is activated.

If Swiss Foreign Office should raise the question please inform it that Embassy Moscow has fully familiarized the Soviet Foreign Office with the situation at Budapest so far as the Department is aware of it.

Stettinius

93 Dated November 4, 7 p.m., not printed.

94 Telegram 2695, November 18, 6 p.m., to Moscow, not printed.

95 Not printed; it concerned a report (summarized in telegram 2695, November 18, to Moscow) that on November 4 the Hungarian Government (1) was considering evacuation of British and American citizens in connection with a proposed exchange of civilians between British and German and United States and German Governments, (2) intended to ship all American and British nationals in Hungary to Germany to the extent that they could be found, and (3) requested the Swiss Legation at Budapest to provide them with a list of American nationals who were at liberty and had not up to that time been interned (340.1115A/11–1444).

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) to the Secretary of State 703.5464/11–2044: Telegram

[Document 756]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, November 20, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received November 20—12:48 p.m.]

4420. Embassy’s 3602 September 20, 10 p.m., and 4188, November 1, 11 a.m.,96 and of our note of September 28 transmitting the substance of the Department’s 2275 September 23, 9 p.m.97

A note dated November 16 has been received from the Foreign Office acknowledging receipt of the Embassy’s memorandum of September 19 regarding Swiss representation of American Interests in enemy territory.

The Foreign Office’s note states that since there are no diplomatic relations between the Soviet Union and Switzerland, the Soviet Government cannot instruct Soviet military authorities in liberated territories to enter into contact with Swiss representatives.

The Foreign Office adds that the information contained in the Embassy’s note of September 28 with respect to the buildings of the British and Belgian Legations in Budapest has been transmitted to the competent Soviet military authorities in order that they may take measures for the protection of these buildings.

The Department will note that the information provided in our note of September 28 concerning the location of the special division of the Swiss Legation in Budapest has been pointedly ignored.

Kennan

96 See vol. iii, p. 625, for telegram 4188, in which the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) gives several reasons why in general he feared that the United States would “get little satisfaction out of the Russians with respect to the recognition of the role of the Swiss in protecting our interests in territory occupied by Russian forces”.

97 Not printed; it listed, for information of Soviet authorities, addresses at Budapest for maximum protection (701.5464/9–1944).

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) to the Secretary of State 740.00115 European War/11–2344: Telegram

[Document 757]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, November 23, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received November 23—3:45 p.m.]

4456. The first section of the Department’s 2695, November 18, 6 p.m.,98 which was sent through commercial channels and consequently was received a day later than section 2, transmitted through Army facilities, contains no reference to my 4235 of November 4.99

At one time or another, we have supplied the Soviet Government with a list of American citizens in Hungary, have informed it that the Americans in Budapest might decide to concentrate in the Venta Sanitarium, and have requested that this information be transmitted to the competent Soviet military authorities and that the latter make every effort to assure the safety of the persons in question. A further communication on the subject to the Foreign Office therefore does not appear to be necessary at this time.

The action which the British Embassy has been instructed to take regarding the protection of British subjects in Budapest is substantially similar to that which we have already taken with respect to our own citizens.

Kennan

98 See telegram 3921, November 18, 6 p.m., to Bern, and footnote 94, p. 1218 [Pg. 1218 is part of Doc. 755].

99 See ibid [Pg. 1218 is part of Doc. 755]., and footnote 93, p. 1218 [Pg. 1218 is part of Doc. 755].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 706.0054/11–944: Telegram

[Document 758]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, November 26, 1944—6 p.m.

4006. Following is text of Caserta’s telegram 1237, November 9 communicating report from Melbourne1 at Bucharest: “Melbourne reports that in long conversation with Ritter Counselor of Swiss Legation latter described Swiss situation regarding protection of foreign interests as follows: “1. Swiss in awkward position because diplomatic relations not maintained with Russia. With one exception when Legation truck was taken by Russians and later returned relations have been proper. Ritter explained that he has attempted to avoid trouble by not bothering Russians with problems.

“2. Since arrival of Russians there has been no courier or telegraphic contact with Bern other than clear language. Accordingly, Ritter has felt restricted in attempting to present or comment upon protection problems.

“3. Polish interests have presented increasingly difficult problem since arrival of Russians. Policy [Polish?] colony recently swollen with questionable elements from Bessarabia and German army (?) is becoming panicky demanding protection and Bitter feels unpleasant incidents may result. He foresees that when contraction of Swiss protection activity reaches point where virtually only Polish interests remain Swiss will be powerless to exert protection influence. Work until now materially assisted due to concentration all interests in former American Legation.

“4. Bitter asked that Bern be apprised of foregoing situation and since problem will become acute once American authorities reassume protection American interests he hopes he will receive urgent appropriate instructions.”

Stettinius

1 Roy M. Melbourne, Foreign Service Officer, member of staff, Office of the U.S. Representative in Rumania (Berry).

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 703.5451/12–144: Telegram

[Document 759]

The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, December 1, 1944.
[Received December 1—6:55 p.m.]

747. American interests taken back today from Swiss in all of France except Lyon district. Embassy and Consulates in Marseille, Nice and Cherbourg officially open to the public.

Caffery

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State 864.4016/12–844: Airgram

[Document 760]

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, December 8, 1944—11 a.m.
[Received December 20—5 p.m.]

A–774. American Interests—Hungary—Protection American Property. Legation’s airgram 455 August 2 and previous.

Swiss Foreign Office note December 5 states Swiss Legation Budapest reports November 21 various agencies of Hungarian Government have on several occasions taken action against private property belonging enemy nationals.

A representative of the Swiss Legation at Budapest discussed this matter with Minister Bagossy who made following statement:

The Hungarian Government intends to accord to private property belonging enemy nationals residing Hungary same treatment which is accorded private property of Hungarian citizens residing in enemy countries.

With regard to special case of an American citizen of Jewish origin Mr. Bagossy added that Hungarian Government cannot permit that such a person has for example the sum of 100,000 Pengoes in cash for he might use it to the detriment of the Hungarian nation.

In such cases the funds are deposited with the Commissioner of Jewish Property pending its transfer to a blocked account in the Hungarian National Bank.

Huddle

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) 740.00113 European War 1939/10–3044

[Document 761]

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk)

No. 96 Washington, December 13, 1944.

The Secretary of State refers to secret telegrams nos. 624, October 30, 1944, and 685, November 8, 1944,4 from the Representative, in both of which the question of desequestration by Italy of American properties located in Italy is discussed. Telegram no. 624 under reference also states that the Italian Prime Minister has requested the advice of the American authorities as to whether steps will be taken by the United States Government to effect the desequestration of Italian property in the United States. The Department also refers to a despatch no. 535, November 15, 1944,5 from the United States Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy, with which there was transmitted a copy of a proposed Italian decree of desequestration and a copy of a letter referring to the draft decree.

This Government is strongly of the view that property of United States nationals sequestered by Italy should be released from control as speedily as adequate care for the property can be provided, and that, therefore, the proposed draft decree enclosed with despatch no. 535 under reference should be issued as soon as possible. The Department does not wish to comment specifically upon the provisions of the draft decree at this time, but believes that the general effect of the decree is along lines which are satisfactory to this Government. In this connection the question arises as to whether release by the manager appointed by the Ministry of Treasury will be effected as soon as a satisfactory agent can be appointed by the interested United States national or as soon as other satisfactory arrangements can be made by that national. The advice of the Representative on this point is requested.

With respect to the desequestration of Italian assets located in the United States, however, it is believed that such desequestration is not related to the action proposed under the draft decree or similar measures. The attitude of the United States Government with respect to Italian property established or placed in the United States after the signing of the Italian armistice with the Allied Nations is exemplified by this Government’s willingness to release troop pay dollars for the purposes of the Italian Government and by the policies adopted with respect to dollar proceeds of Italian exports and post-liberation remittances. However, policy in the United States has not as yet been definitely formulated on the question of pre-armistice Italian property, and such property must continue to be immobilized until the decision of this Government upon the question of its disposition. It may be pointed out, for your information, that a number of legal as well as policy problems arise in connection with the disposition of property of nationals of a state which has been at war with the United States and with whom a treaty of peace has not as yet been concluded. These problems are under consideration in the Department and elsewhere in the Government of the United States, but they involve difficulties which must be resolved before a final decision is reached and which are likely to permit of no early answer to the question of ultimate disposition of pre-armistice Italian property.

It should, however, be further pointed out that the policies set forth in the Department’s instruction no. 3 of May 25, 1944,6 will continue to be followed.

The Representative is further authorized, in his discretion, to deliver a note covering the substance of the statements made above in response to the note of October 28, 1944 from the Italian Prime Minister. In any case, unless the proposed draft decree transmitted with despatch no. 535 under reference is already enacted, the Representative should emphasize, either orally or in some more formal manner, in his discretion, the importance which the United States attaches to the prompt release of Italian sequestration controls over the property of United States nationals. The Department is gratified that the Italian Government is apparently already taking the necessary steps for the release of its sequestration controls, in which connection reference is made to the voluntary report of the United States Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy of June 2, 1944,7 but this gratification is somewhat tempered because of the lapse of time since the request in the spring of 1944 that such measures be taken. It may be emphasized in any communications addressed to the Italian Government with respect to this subject that the liberalized policy regarding communications with Italy and the resulting increased opportunity for United States owners to control and provide for their property will underline the necessity for the prompt release of Italian sequestration controls.

4 Latter not printed.

5 Not printed.

6 Not printed; it concerned (1) a circular of March 29, addressed by the Attorney General to all United States attorneys and marshals, providing for the return of articles, such as radios and cameras, that had been deposited by Italian nationals in compliance with regulations no longer applicable to them; (2) the continuance of the Treasury Department to block Italian funds under Executive Order 8389, subject to the possibility of release under special license; and (3) discontinuance by the Alien Property Custodian of further vesting of the property of nationals of Italy in instances where vesting is proposed simply because of the nationality of the property owner, resulting in diminution of vestings in the fields of business enterprises, real estate and property under judicial supervision, such as estates and trusts (740.00113 EW 1939/1408).

7 Not found in Department files.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Caffery) 740.00115 European War/11–3044: Telegram

[Document 762]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Caffery)

Washington, December 19, 1944—9 p.m.

778. Your 738 November 30.8 You are authorized to extend financial assistance loans temporarily to all loyal and destitute American nationals in your district who are entitled to the protection of the United States and who would be eligible under the same criteria as applied by the Swiss under the Department’s instructions. You are further authorized to continue temporarily financial assistance loans to all American nationals who have been receiving such assistance from the Swiss provided that you believe the recipients are loyal and destitute and entitled to the protection of the United States. In considering who are entitled to the protection of the United States you should be guided by the provisions of the Foreign Service Regulations and by the Department’s airmail instruction of September 14, 19449 on citizenship.

Because Americans living in France never had an actual as distinguished from a constructive opportunity of repatriation and because denial of financial assistance would result in probable extreme hardship, you are authorized to extend financial assistance loans to American nationals who refused an offer of repatriation or who were denied loans by the Swiss on the ground of having refused such an offer, if such American nationals are otherwise qualified and you are convinced that they intend to return to the United States at the earliest opportunity. Each of them should be informed that the United States will not grant loans to any American national who hereafter refuses an actual offer of repatriation.

The Department approves and will do all in its power to facilitate the Embassy’s efforts to have financial assistance cases converted to special deposit cases. All applicants should endeavor to obtain funds from other sources or to become self-supporting.

In view of your statements regarding the great increase in the cost of living, the maximum monthly loan to an adult in France is increased to one hundred eighty dollars ($180). If cost of living in other districts of France is lower than in Paris, the maximum should be reduced proportionately. It is expected that whenever possible the actual sums advanced will be less than the permitted maxima and such advances should in no event be more than enough to provide for minimum essential needs.

American Aid Society’s representative has been in touch with War Relief Control Board regarding funds for continued operations of Society. Definite arrangements have not as yet been completed but it seems probable that the Society will obtain sufficient funds here to finance its current operations.

American Red Cross at present carrying on no special operations in French areas returned to civilian administration. However, headquarters here consulting with Giblin in regard to possible assistance to French Red Cross in special projects which might include supplementary aid to Americans. Such projects would not preclude continued assistance by American Aid Society to indigent American nationals.

An allotment of funds for financial assistance will be made to you upon the receipt of the estimate requested by Department’s 594 December first.10 Similar estimates should be submitted by all American consular offices in France.

Swiss may continue to extend financial assistance in Lyon district temporarily. Elsewhere in France such assistance should be extended by you or by the American consular officer in whose district the American applicant resides.

Repeat to all American consular offices in France.

Stettinius

8 Not printed; it concerned relief of persons who were either not interned or if interned did not remain in internment camps (840.48 Registration/11–3044).

9 Not printed.

10 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 340.1115A/12–2144: Telegram

[Document 763]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, December 21, 1944—8 p.m.

4303. Reurtel 7876 December 1, noon,11 American Interests—Balkans. Because of rapidly changing situation Swiss may communicate to their representatives in Balkans by clear telegram or any other practicable manner your decisions extension financial assistance cases. It is hoped that United States representatives in Rumania and Bulgaria may assume work extension financial assistance in those countries in near future. Decisions on cases in Yugoslavia may be sent to Foreign Office with copies to Department. American Embassy Athens and Consulate Salonika have taken over from Swiss extension financial assistance in Greece.12

Stettinius

11 Not printed: the Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) reported that the Swiss Foreign Office had no means of communicating with Swiss representatives in Yugoslavia and Greece, and could communicate with representatives in Rumania only by clear telegram and with Bulgaria only by clear and cipher telegram (706.0054/12–144).

12 The Embassy at Athens was opened to the public on November 15, 1944, and representation of American interests was transferred by the Swiss to that Embassy in a memorandum dated November 15, according to telegram 45, November 15, 1944, from Athens (124.68/11–1544). Allotment for financial assistance to American nationals was granted in telegram 23, November 15, 1944, 9 p.m. (340.1115A/11–1144). Allotment for financial assistance to destitute American nationals in Salonika district was granted in telegram 159, December 30, 1944, 5 p.m., to Athens (340.1115A/12–3044).

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State 356.115/12–2644: Airgram

[Document 764]

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, December 26, 1944—10 a.m.
[Received January 13, 1945—5 p.m.]

A–876. American Interests—Netherlands—Germany. Legation’s airmail 9052 August 18.13 Foreign Office note December 20 states Swiss Legation Berlin received early in December note dated October 19 from German Foreign Office reading in part in translation as follows: “The Foreign Office has ordered that personal property of British and American nationals, as well as of nationals of other countries whose interests are protected by Switzerland, will not be claimed for the use of German people who have suffered damage through bombardment.”

Huddle

13 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Kirk) 340.1115A/12–2644: Telegram

[Document 765]

The Secretary of State to the United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Kirk)

Washington, December 26, 1944—8 p.m.

38. For Berry. American Interests—Rumania. Reurtel 34 November 27.14 To extent your facilities permit you are hereby authorized to accept messages from American nationals to be forwarded to Department in paraphrase by airgram.

With regard to possible repatriation of American nationals in Rumania, please discuss question with AmPolad, and ascertain the views of the Allied Control Commission and appropriate Rumanian authorities, keeping Department informed of all developments, particularly difficulties to be overcome, in order that it may at any given moment be able to assess current situation and handle inquiries adequately. Department has drawn up list of priorities for use in connection with eventual repatriation of American nationals from Italy which you should obtain from AmPolad for use in registering applicants appearing before you.

Remainder your 34 has been subject of telegram to Legation Bern.

Stettinius

14 Not printed; Mr. Berry reported the desire of a score of Americans for information concerning their early repatriation (340.1115A/11–2744).

Allied declarations and warnings regarding Nazi atrocitiesAllied declarations and warnings regarding Nazi atrocities1

1 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 402–438. For correspondence regarding the trial and sentencing of German war criminals by the Soviet Union, see ibid., 1944, vol. iv, pp. 1198 ff.

[766] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, January 3, 1944—2 p.m. [Received January 3—1:23 p.m.]

740.00116 European War 1939/1225: Telegram

[767] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, January 5, 1944—6 p.m. [Received January 5—4:32 p.m.]

740.00116 European War 1939/1234: Telegram

[768] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, January 10, 1944—7 p.m. [Received 8:05 p.m.]

740.00116 European War/1241: Telegram

[769] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, January 13, 1944—8 p.m.

740.00116 European War 1939/1241: Telegram

[770] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , 15 January, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1939/1257

[771] Statement by President Roosevelt, March 24, 1944

March 24, 1944

740.00116 European War 1939/1368

[772] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, March 30, 1944. [Received March 30—1:05 p.m.]

740.00116 European War 1939/1380: Telegram

[773] The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, June 16, 1944—11 a.m. [Received June 23—1 p.m.]

840.48 Refugees/6377: Airgram

[774] The Chargé to the Polish Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State

London, July 4, 1944. [Received July 11.]

740.00116 EW/7–444

[775] The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

Washington, 6 July, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1939/7–644

[776] The Secretary in Charge of the Mission at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, July 6, 1944—8 p.m. [Received 9:50 p.m.]

751R.62114/7–644: Telegram

[777] The Secretary of State to the Secretary in Charge of the Mission at Algiers (Lawton)

Washington, July 10, 1944—8 p.m.

751R.62114/7–644: Telegram

[778] The British Chargé (Campbell) to the Secretary of State

Washington , 10 July 1944.

751R.62114/7–1044

[779] The Secretary in Charge of the Mission at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, July 11, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 11:22 p.m.]

751R.62114/7–1144: Telegram

[780] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 12, 1944—4 p.m. [Received July 12—1 p.m.]

740.0011 E.W./7–1244: Telegram

[781] The Secretary in Charge of the Mission at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, July 12, 1944—5 p.m. [Received July 13—10:59 p.m.]

751R.62114/7–1244: Telegram

[782] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 12, 1944—6 p.m.

740.0011 E.W./7–1244: Telegram

[783] The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, August 16, 1944—12 p.m. [Received August 18—1:38 a.m.]

740.00116 EW/8–1644: Telegram

[784] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Washington , 19 August, 1944.

751R.62114/8–1944

[785] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 19, 1944—midnight.

740.00116 E. W./8–1944: Telegram

[786] The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

Washington, August 21, 1944.

740.00116 EW/8–2144

[787] Statement Issued to the Press by the Department of State, August 29, 1944

August 29, 1944

740.00116 EW/8–2944

[788] Statement Issued to the Press by the Secretary of State, August 30, 1944

August 30, 1944

740.00116 EW/8–3044

[789] The Legal Adviser (Hackworth) to the First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth)

Washington, September 2, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./7–644

[790] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

Washington , September 2, 1944.

751R.62114/8–1944

[791] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, September 2, 1944—8 p.m.

740.00116 E.W./8–1944: Telegram

[792] The Consul at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, September 16, 1944—6 p.m. [Received 11:58 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./9–1644: Telegram

[793] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

Washington , September 20, 1944.

740.00116 EW/9–2044

[794] The Polish Chargé (Kwapiszewski) to the Secretary of State

Washington , September 23, 1944.

740.00116 European War/9–2044

[795] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Washington , September 30, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./9–3044

[796] The Chief of the Special War Problems Division (Plitt) to the First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth)

Washington, October 2, 1944.

740.00116 European War/8–2144

[797] The Polish Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , October 2, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./10–244

[798] The Chargé to the Czechoslovak Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State

London, October 6, 1944. [Received October 14.]

740.00116 European War/10–644

[799] The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Caserta, October 10, 1944—7 p.m. [Received October 10—7 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./10–1044: Telegram

[800] Memorandum by Mr. E. Tomlin Bailey of the Special War Problems Division

[Washington,] October 10, 1944.

740.00116 European War/10–1044

[801] The Department of State to the Polish Embassy

Washington , October 11, 1944.

740.00116 European War/10–244

[802] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 11, 1944. [Received October 11—2:37 p.m.]

740.00116 European War/10–1144: Telegram

[803] The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Rome, October 17, 1944—9 a.m. [Received 10:10 a.m.]

740.00116 European War/10–1744: Telegram

[804] The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk)

Washington, October 18, 1944—6 p.m.

740.00116 E.W./10–1744: Telegram

[805] The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Rome, October 18, 1944—midnight. [Received October 19—10:10 a.m.]

740.00116 E.W./10–1844: Telegram

[806] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Washington , October 19, 1944.

740.00116 EW/10–1944

[807] The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Rome, October 20, 1944—3 p.m. [Received 4:42 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./10–2044: Telegram

[808] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, October 23, 1944.

740.00116 EW/9–3044: Telegram

[809] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

Washington , October 24, 1944.

740.00116 European War/10–1044

[810] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, October 24, 1944—4 p.m.

740.00116 E.W./10–2444: Circular telegram

[811] The Chargé to the Czechoslovak Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State

London, November 7, 1944—7 p.m. [Received 7:30 p.m.]

740.00116 European War/11–744: Telegram

[812] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé to the Czechoslovak Government in Exile (Schoenfeld), at London

Washington, November 14, 1944—8 p.m.

740.00116 European War/11–744: Telegram

[813] The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, November 23, 1944—4 p.m. [Received 8:53 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./11–2344: Telegram

[814] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle)

Washington, December 6, 1944.

740.00116 EW/9–3044: Telegram

[815] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Washington , December 19, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./12–1944

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War 1939/1225: Telegram

[Document 766]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, January 3, 1944—2 p.m.
[Received January 3—1:23 p.m.]

4. Corcoran2 states that pro-German Swede in contact with German civilian and military officials who passed through Göteborg states that high military officers have protested against German Government proposal to hold mock trials of captured British and American airmen in reprisal for Russian trials and execution of war guilty at Kharkov. German Propaganda Ministry has been dissuaded from its original plan because there is definite apprehension as to results of increasing public feeling against Allied airmen, many of whom have been murdered by infuriated civilians when falling in German territory after raids on German cities. Goebbels3 still urges that trials be held but military and naval offices advocate cessation of all propaganda against Allied airmen. Repeated as my 5 to London.

Johnson

2 William W. Corcoran, Consul General at Goteborg.

3 Joseph Goebbels, German Minister of Propaganda.

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War 1939/1234: Telegram

[Document 767]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, January 5, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received January 5—4:32 p.m.]

92. American interests, Germany. Department’s 3222, December 24.4 Swiss note January 4 states Swiss Legation, Berlin, reports Minister Albrecht of German Foreign Office stated December 31 not yet able comment reports concerned. Legal Section, Foreign Office, has likewise been unable to so far give consideration this matter. Appears for present to involve only threats in field political propaganda but not yet possible verify degree to which these press radio statements correspond to attitude German authorities.

Swiss promise revert subject receipt Berlin’s detailed report. Repeated to London.

Harrison

4  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 434.

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/1241: Telegram

[Document 768]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, January 10, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received 8:05 p.m.]

216. American interests, Germany. Legation’s 92 (34 to London) January 5. Swiss report Mr. Hencke, Under Secretary of State of German Foreign Office, states Government following with interest decisions Tehran Conference5 and is examining them with view determining whether they will provoke introduction new laws of war.

Communiqué given press conference December 22 in substance as follows: German military tribunals are consequently soon to consider cases of those American and British POWs accused of having committed war crimes without having been until now arraigned in court.

Swiss Legation Berlin states in latest telegram that Under Secretary of State and Chief of Legal Section of German Foreign Office6 unaware whether decision already taken to introduce procedure against “criminals of war” as announced.

Repeated to London.

Swiss representative duly informed Mr. Hencke that American Government plans strict observance, as heretofore, provisions Geneva Convention7 with respect treatment German POWs under its control.

Harrison

5 For documentation on the Tehran Conference, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehran, 1943, pp. 459 ff.

6 Erich Albrecht.

7 Prisoners of War Convention, signed at Geneva, July 27, 1929, Foreign Relations, 1929, vol. i, p. 336.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 740.00116 European War 1939/1241: Telegram

[Document 769]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, January 13, 1944—8 p.m.

126. Department would be grateful if Swiss representatives protecting our interests in Germany would follow the matter discussed in your 216, January 10, 7 p.m. attentively and desires you to keep Department promptly informed of developments.

Hull

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00116 European War 1939/1257

[Document 770]

The British Embassy to the Department of State 8

Paraphrase of a Telegram from the Foreign Office, Dated January 11th, 1944

We agree that we should not allow ourselves to be drawn by German provocation into friction with the Russians. We also agree that, while publicity for the present should be played down, the position will have to be reconsidered if the Germans proceed to trials.9

2. We have been considering whether any public statement could usefully be issued, but have reached the conclusion that, short of expressly abandoning our right to try German war criminals, there is nothing we could say that would not involve the danger of driving the Germans who appear to be still hesitating into a position from which they might find it difficult to withdraw. In reaching this conclusion, we have been influenced by the fact that under the Geneva Convention we cannot object to trials in Germany provided they are properly conducted.

3. In this latter connexion position is that the Geneva Convention, to which His Majesty’s Government, United States Government and the German Government but not the Soviet Government are parties, does not prohibit the trial of prisoners of war for any war crimes they may have committed. What it does is to lay down certain procedures and provisions which must be applied, specific obligation to give due notification through the Protecting Power of trial and of the nature of the offence charged and not to carry out any death sentence until three months after the sentence has been communicated to the Protecting Power.

4. The United States Embassy in London have brought to our notice instructions telegraphed by the State Department to the United States Minister at Berne at [on] December 24th10 in which he was authorized to assure the Swiss Government that the United States Government are not proceeding against German prisoners of war along lines similar to reports of German intentions but are observing strictly the provisions of the Geneva Convention. While the State Department no doubt merely have in mind the point that bombardment of enemy towns should not be treated as a war crime, there seems to be some danger that these instructions might be interpreted as implying that the United States Government regard any trial of prisoners of war as incompatible with strict observance of Convention and might therefore give rise to misunderstanding.

Washington , 15 January, 1944.

8 Transmitted in a letter of January 15, 1944, from Mr. Paul Gore-Booth, Second Secretary of the British Embassy, to Mr. Bernard Gufler, Assistant Chief, Special War Problems Division.

9 i.e., trials of British and American airmen.

10 Telegram 3222, December 24, 1943, to Bern, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 434.

Statement by President Roosevelt, March 24, 1944 740.00116 European War 1939/1368

[Document 771]

Statement by President Roosevelt, March 24, 1944 11

March 24, 1944

The United Nations are fighting to make a world in which tyranny and aggression can not exist; a world based upon freedom, equality and justice; a world in which all persons regardless of race, color or creed may live in peace, honor and dignity.

In the meantime in most of Europe and in parts of Asia the systematic torture and murder of civilians—men, women and children—by the Nazis and the Japanese continue unabated. In areas subjugated by the aggressors innocent Poles, Czechs, Norwegians, Dutch, Danes, French, Greeks, Russians, Chinese, Filipinos—and many others—are being starved or frozen to death or murdered in cold blood in a campaign of savagery.

The slaughters of Warsaw, Lidice, Kharkov and Nanking—the brutal torture and murder by the Japanese, not only of civilians but of our own gallant American soldiers and fliers—these are startling examples of what goes on day by day, year in and year out, wherever the Nazis and the Japs are in military control—free to follow their barbaric purpose.

In one of the blackest crimes of all history—begun by the Nazis in the day of peace and multiplied by them a hundred times in time of war—the wholesale systematic murder of the Jews of Europe goes on unabated every hour. As a result of the events of the last few days hundreds of thousands of Jews, who while living under persecution have at least found a haven from death in Hungary and the Balkans, are now threatened with annihilation as Hitler’s forces descend more heavily upon these lands. That these innocent people, who have already survived a decade of Hitler’s fury, should perish on the very eve of triumph over the barbarism which their persecution symbolizes, would be a major tragedy.

It is therefore fitting that we should again proclaim our determination that none who participate in these acts of savagery shall go unpunished. The United Nations have made it clear that they will pursue the guilty and deliver them up in order that justice be done. That warning applies not only to the leaders but also to their functionaries and subordinates in Germany and in the satellite countries. All who knowingly take part in the deportation of Jews to their death in Poland or Norwegians and French to their death in Germany are equally guilty with the executioner. All who share the guilt shall share the punishment.

Hitler is committing these crimes against humanity in the name of the German people. I ask every German and every man everywhere under Nazi domination to show the world by his action that in his heart he does not share these insane criminal desires. Let him hide these pursued victims, help them to get over their borders, and do what he can to save them from the Nazi hangman. I ask him also to keep watch, and to record the evidence that will one day be used to convict the guilty.

In the meantime, and until the victory that is now assured is won, the United States will persevere in its efforts to rescue the victims of brutality of the Nazis and the Japs. In so far as the necessity of military operations permit this Government will use all means at its command to aid the escape of all intended victims of the Nazi and Jap executioner—regardless of race or religion or color. We call upon the free peoples of Europe and Asia temporarily to open their frontiers to all victims of oppression. We shall find havens of refuge for them, and we shall find the means for their maintenance and support until the tyrant is driven from their homelands and they may return.

In the name of justice and humanity let all freedom loving people rally to this righteous undertaking.

11 In connection with the issuance of the declaration regarding Nazi persecution of Jews, see pp. 1015 [Pg. 1015 includes portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575] ff.

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War 1939/1380: Telegram

[Document 772]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, March 30, 1944.
[Received March 30—1:05 p.m.]

1935. Sequence Legation’s 631 January 31.12 Berlin despatches 29th state Wilhelmstrasse spokesman in reply to inspired question declared “preparations for trial of captured Allied soldiers charged with war crimes are now well advanced”. Despatches add spokesman referred to American and British as well as Russian prisoners but intimated such trials would not actually take place unless new trials took place against German prisoners in hands United Nations.

Harrison

12 Not printed; it cited a German news report that “Proceedings against English and American war prisoners envisaged in connection with Charkov trials are in preparation state.” (740.00116 European War/1289)

The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State 840.48 Refugees/6377: Airgram

[Document 773]

The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, June 16, 1944—11 a.m.
[Received June 23—1 p.m.]

A–178. My telegram 868, March 17, 3 p.m.13 I have received a note dated June 6 from Massigli14 stating that the FCNL, as stated in Massigli’s communication of March 13, expressed itself as fully in accord with the views of President Roosevelt regarding measures to be taken immediately to afford the greatest possible protection to victims of persecution in German occupied territory; that in the same general connection the Committee noted with satisfaction the President’s statements of March 24 expressing the intention of the American Government to punish the authors of crimes committed during the occupation as well as their accomplices and instruments; that because of concern over information received from France which gives reason to fear the extension of such acts, the FCNL likewise feels that the United Nations should, by all the means at their disposal, endeavor to forestall the criminal actions of Nazi leaders and of police elements under their authority; that it must be recognized that the statements previously made have not yielded the results which might have been expected; that, after studying different aspects of the problem, the Committee has reached the conclusion that collective and unusually energetic action is essential; and that there is therefore enclosed a memorandum which is submitted for the consideration of the U. S. Government.

The following is a summary of the enclosed memorandum:

The extent of mass executions by the Germans in several occupied countries causes apprehension that there exists a systematic plan to decimate the population of such countries and that the plan is already being carried out. Information, which while not subject to absolute proof must yet be taken into consideration, gives reason to believe that the Nazis envisage under certain circumstances the massacre of hostages. When they realize that defeat is imminent the Nazi leaders might well endeavor to provoke such massacres, either to prevent popular uprisings or to endeavor by frightful threats to place themselves in safety from eventual punishment. It is not even excluded that some of them consider the future interest that Germany would have in assuring by these barbarous acts its demographic superiority in Europe. In that regard indirect means such as the systematic undernourishment of prisoners and deportees would yield the same result.

The statement of March 24 by the President of the U.S. and that which followed by the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs,14a coming after the resolution adopted November 1, 1943 at Moscow,15 prove that the seriousness of these threats has not escaped the attention of the American, Soviet and British Governments. The intention thereby affirmed to punish severely those guilty of such crimes, those who ordered them as well as their accomplices and instruments, will be received with satisfaction by the populations being menaced. For its part the Soviet Government has demonstrated by its actions its intention of prosecuting Germans who committed atrocities. The usefulness of a solemn and carefully drafted warning to Germany remains no less evident. Present experience in fact shows that to intimidate men who entered the German police force and deliberately agreed to fulfill the criminal tasks assigned to them, there is need for something stronger than general statements such as those which on frequent occasions have up to now been made. In the opinion of the FCNL the warning to be given Germany should, in order to be effective: 1) Affirm in the name of the United Nations the determination to apply punishments proportional to the extent of the crimes committed and to strike, as has been indicated by President Roosevelt, the instruments as well as the authors, and in a general way the political, administrative, police and military authorities within whose jurisdiction the crimes have been committed.

2) To make equal provision for the crime, which is no less serious although more subtle, represented by the systematic determination to undernourish prisoners, laborers and deportees.

3) To avoid including in the same threats the mass of the German people and its leaders. At the point which the war has reached it is to the interest of the Allies to disrupt the moral unity of the German people. In that connection, it might be opportune to induce the latter to separate from its leaders by refusing all participation in the crimes which we intend to prevent and by placing it on guard against the responsibility which would be assumed by all persons associated in any manner whatsoever with these crimes.

4) To give the communication destined to the German Government a particularly solemn character it would be appropriate to transmit it by a neutral diplomatic channel and to give it the most extensive publicity. It is, in fact, necessary that by all means at the disposal of the United Nations the repercussions of the warning which is to be given Germany be prolonged and severe in order that the German people itself shall not be in ignorance of it.

Such are the proposals which the FCNL submits for the approval of the United Nations governments. If the principle is accepted the drafting of the text might be confided to the Interallied Committee for Suppression of Crimes of War on which, for the occasion, there might be represented those governments which up to now have not seen fit to participate in its work.

Copy to London.

Chapin

13 Not printed.

14 René Massigli, Commissioner for Foreign Affairs, French Committee of National Liberation; note not printed.

14a Statement made by Anthony Eden in the House of Commons on March 30, Parliamentary Debates, House of Commons. 5th series, vol. 398, col. 1562.

15 Declaration of German Atrocities; for text, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 768.

The Chargé to the Polish Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/7–444

[Document 774]

The Chargé to the Polish Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State

No. 621 London, July 4, 1944.
[Received July 11.]

Sir: Referring to my despatch Polish Series No. 261 of January 23, 194316 enclosing copies of a note from the Polish Foreign Minister which reported intensification of German methods of extermination of Jews in Poland and which gave the text of a Resolution on that subject passed by the National Council of Poland, I have the honor to transmit a copy of a note of July 3 from the Polish Foreign Minister, Mr. Romer,17 reporting the recent deportation of a considerable number of Jews from Hungary to Poland and indicating the possibility that Polish territory has been chosen by the Germans as the theatre for new mass crimes.

The Polish Foreign Minister refers to previous declarations on this subject, especially to the one of December 17, 1942,18 published simultaneously in Washington, London and Moscow in which the United Nations announced that the German criminals would receive exemplary punishment, and now expresses the conviction that it is a matter of the utmost urgency that the United Nations reconsider means of saving the Jewish population and that the responsibility for such crimes should be determined with greater precision.

Respectfully yours,

Rudolf E. Schoenfeld

16 Not printed.

17 Tadeusz Romer; note of July 3 not printed.

18 For previous correspondence, see Foreign Relations, 1942, vol. i, pp. 45 ff.; for text of Declaration, see Department of State Bulletin, December 19, 1942, p. 1009.

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth) 740.00116 European War 1939/7–644

[Document 775]

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

Ref: 152/66/44 Washington, 6 July, 1944.

Dear Mr. Hackworth: I enclose herewith a paraphrase of a telegram we have just received from London about a further possible declaration on the subject of the punishment of war criminals, which is being advocated by the French Committee of National Liberation.

As you will see, His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom are not in favour of making a further statement on this matter at the present time, and in any case do not think the United Nations War Crimes Commission would be the proper channel for such a declaration.

I should be grateful if you would let me know whether you agree with the Foreign Office views, and if so whether I may tell them that you will be replying on similar lines to the French Committee.

Yours sincerely,

P. H. Gore-Booth

[Enclosure]

Paraphrase of Telegram from Foreign Office, London, Dated July 1st

H. M. Ambassador Algiers has received from the French Committee of National Liberation a note, dated June 6th, proposing the issue by the Allied Governments of a joint declaration reaffirming their intention to enforce suitable punishment against Germans perpetrating atrocities, in particular mass massacre, the execution of hostages and systematic under-feeding of the population in the occupied countries. The note refers to statements made by President Roosevelt on March 24th, and by myself on March 30th, on the subject of outrages against Jews and other victims of persecution at the hands of Germany and her Satellites. It also mentions declaration on German atrocities issued by the Moscow Conference. It states however that declarations hitherto made do not appear to have any deterrent effect, and suggests that only energetic collective action is likely to achieve results. The Committee propose that if the issue of a further joint declaration is agreed in principle, the drafting of a suitable text should be entrusted to the United Nations War Crimes Commission, and that the Governments which have hitherto not participated in the Commission’s work should be especially represented upon Commission for this purpose.

2. My view is that there is nothing that could usefully be added at the present time to the earlier declarations on this subject, and in particular to Moscow Declaration, and that an intensification of German atrocities, as their forces of occupation withdraw, is likely to be prevented as effectively by continued reiteration in our propaganda of that Declaration, and principles enshrined in it, as by the issue of any new declaration. I am, moreover, opposed in principle to encouraging the United Nations War Crimes Commission to draft statements of this nature on behalf of the Allied Governments.

3. I accordingly propose to instruct Mr. Duff Cooper19 to reply to the French Committee on the lines of the first sentence of paragraph 2 above. I understand the Committee have addressed a similar note to the U.S. representative at Algiers and probably also to all other United Nations representatives. Before replying therefore we should like to concert our answer with the U.S. Government. Please ask State Department whether their view coincides with ours and if so whether they would be willing to reply on similar lines to French Committee.

19 Alfred Duff Cooper, British representative with the French Committee of National Liberation.

The Secretary in Charge of the Mission at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State 751R.62114/7–644: Telegram

[Document 776]

The Secretary in Charge of the Mission at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, July 6, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received 9:50 p.m.]

2287. On instructions from Foreign Office Duff Cooper left note with Massigli this afternoon strongly protesting action of French Command in sanctioning execution of six German war prisoners as reprisal measure by French interior forces in southern French department which was subject of communiqué issued by Chief of Staff for National Defense. Note cites failure of French Command to consult SHAEF as breach of agreement whereby FFI were placed under command of SHAEF; points out reprisals might well provoke counter reprisals against American and British prisoners; says SHAEF asking Koenig20 to give immediate instructions for all executions of German prisoners to cease; and insists that French Committee insure that these instructions be obeyed and refrain from any further reprisal threats. Note states failure to comply with request will oblige British to reserve right to disassociate themselves publicly from action of French Command.

Duff Cooper tells me Foreign Office is suggesting to American and Canadian Governments that similar protests be lodged with French Committee through their Missions in Algiers. In the absence of instructions, I am taking no action.

Lawton

20 Gen. Joseph Pierre Koenig, appointed Commander of the French Forces of the Interior, June 9, 1944.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary in Charge of the Mission at Algiers (Lawton) 751R.62114/7–644: Telegram

[Document 777]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary in Charge of the Mission at Algiers (Lawton)

Washington, July 10, 1944—8 p.m.

2161. Your 2287, July 6. Please point out to Massigli that this Government takes an extremely serious view of the reports of the execution of the six German prisoners of war and of the sanctioning of the incident by the French authorities in North Africa. The American Government is greatly concerned lest these reprisals lead to counter reprisals by the German authorities against American and Allied prisoners of war. Please report the reply which Massigli makes to your representations.

Hull

The British Chargé (Campbell) to the Secretary of State 751R.62114/7–1044

[Document 778]

The British Chargé (Campbell) to the Secretary of State

Ref: 2609/7/44
No. 414

His Majesty’s Chargé d’Affaires presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and has the honour to refer to his note No. 410 of July 8th, 1944,21 on the subject of the shooting of German prisoners by the French Forces of the Interior, as retaliation for the execution of patriot French prisoners by the Germans.

2. Sir Ronald Campbell has now been informed by His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs that the French Committee has communicated to His Majesty’s Government, through Monsieur Vienot, the message sent by the French Committee to the International Red Cross for transmission to the German Government, claiming that the Forces of the Interior are entitled under the Hague Convention22 to be treated as regular soldiers, threatening counter measures against German prisoners if this claim is ignored, and announcing that Germans who execute members of the Forces of the Interior will be treated as war criminals. The Committee has asked His Majesty’s Government to associate themselves with this action.

3. His Majesty’s Government are anxious to do what they can to safeguard the French Forces of the Interior, especially as they now form an integral part of the forces under General Eisenhower’s command. They see, however, two difficulties in the way of acting as the Committee requests. (i) His Majesty’s Government are not prepared countenance reprisals and will try to dissuade the Committee from doing so. The Germans are already complaining about the treatment of their prisoners in French hands. The mere threat of reprisals might well produce retaliation against not only French but also American and British prisoners.

(ii) The French claim that the Forces of the Interior are entitled, under International Law, to be treated as regular soldiers is difficult to substantiate, at any rate when they are not in uniform.

4. His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom have assumed that a similar communication has been received by the Department of State from the French Committee,23 and have the honour to suggest that in the circumstances the following might be the most effective procedure for dealing with this matter. The French Committee would be asked to concert with the United States Government and His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom a formal statement, to be made by the Committee alone, and to be given the maximum publicity, to the effect that the French authorities will take steps to bring to punishment any Germans responsible for treating members of the Forces of the Interior in a manner inconsistent with the accepted rules and customs of War. The United States Government and His Majesty’s Government would then, it is proposed, issue a parallel statement to the effect that they considered the Forces of the Interior entitled to treatment as regular soldiers, as they formed an integral part of General Eisenhower’s forces and bear arms openly against the enemy; that the American and British commanders in the field would give the French every help in bringing to justice German soldiers who failed so to treat them; and that any offenders falling into British or American hands would eventually be delivered to the French for trial and punishment. It is felt that both statements would have to be carefully worded so as to avoid claiming actual rights for the Forces of the Interior under International Law.

5. As stated in Sir Ronald Campbell’s note under reference, His Majesty’s Government feel this to be a matter of great urgency, and he would be grateful if he might be informed as soon as possible whether the United States Government agree to the line of action proposed. If this course is decided upon, the first step would seem to be for instructions to be sent to the Representatives at Algiers of the United States Government and His Majesty’s Government to explain the proposal to M. Massigli and to invite him to let them have the French statement in draft. The proposed statement by the United States Government and His Majesty’s Government could then be agreed.

Washington , 10 July 1944.

21 Not printed.

22 Annex to convention on the laws and customs of war on land adopted at the Second Hague Peace Conference, 1907, Foreign Relations, 1907, pt. ii, pp. 1204, 1207.

23 See telegram 2355, infra.

The Secretary in Charge of the Mission at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State 751R.62114/7–1144: Telegram

[Document 779]

The Secretary in Charge of the Mission at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, July 11, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 11:22 p.m.]

2355. Your telegram No. 2161, July 10, 8 p.m. Owing to engagements Massigli, I saw his principal assistant Chauvel this afternoon and made representations as instructed leaving aide-mémoire with him. Chauvel referred to Duff Cooper’s note described in my telegram No. 2287, July 6, 8 p.m., and said answer which Massigli had made thereto set forth position of FCNL and could therefore be considered reply to our representations. That reply was received last night by Duff Cooper who has furnished me copy. Following is summary thereof:

Nothing could be further from intention of French military or civil authorities than violation of agreement placing FFI under SHAEF strategic command which is considered most useful safeguard against arbitrary action of German Command; French Command gave no orders in case in question; then follows recital extremely brutal measures taken by German Command against activity of FFI in executing hostages of both sexes and all ages as well as burning villages; following these executions initiative was taken by local FFI commander to shoot 6 German prisoners which resulted in French authorities finding themselves in anomalous position of either getting [giving] their approval to these acts or of repudiating Frenchmen engaged in merciless struggle against the enemy. Note continues that contrary to fears expressed reprisals taken and publicity given to it has not provoked an extension of German atrocities; then there is quoted three instances where Germans have subsequently moderated their threatened harsh treatment of French hostages. In conclusion note states French Committee fully aware of dangers which might result from such action on part of FFI and expresses earnest desire to find general formula which could furnish appropriate guarantee. In this spirit, French Committee attaches great importance to Anglo-American conversations which have in view publication of common declaration sustaining French position and contributing to protection of the lives of FFI. Annex attached to note contains list of brutalities committed against French civilian population by Germans between May 21 and July 9.

In discussing above communication, Chauvel emphasized great importance of an agreement between Washington, London and Algiers for united policy and issuance of public statement thereon. He expressed hope that State Department would take immediate steps to further that end.

Duff Cooper tells me that Massigli assured him in conversation that Committee were unanimously opposed to policy of reprisals; that everything possible would be done to discourage any repetition of the incident in question; that he felt confident it was not likely to happen again.

Local Canadian representative under instructions from Ottawa has also made representations to French authorities supporting British note.

Lawton

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 E.W./7–1244: Telegram

[Document 780]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 12, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received July 12—1 p.m.]

5477. From Phillips.24 At the direction of the Supreme Allied Commander,25 the Psychological Warfare Division is preparing an official statement for broadcast in the name of the Supreme Commander, that the French Forces of the Interior constitute a combatant force forming a part of the Allied Expeditionary Force, and is commanded and directed by General Koenig. It is proposed that it is to be stressed that the French Forces in the Maquis are bearing arms openly in accordance with the rules of war. Although they may not be provided with a distinctive uniform, they are regarded by the Supreme Allied Commander as an army under his command.

Attention is to be drawn also [to?] the enemy’s threats against the Allied parachutists and to their barbarous reprisals against civilian population, thus violating the rules of war to which Germany is reputed to subscribe. Announcement follows that the Supreme Allied Commander will spare no effort to trace the authors of any atrocities committed against the Armed Forces under his command and to exact retribution.

I learned that the Foreign Office, on July 9, has instructed the British Embassy in Washington to discuss with the State Department a similar statement by the two governments. The Foreign Office believes that an Eisenhower statement would make a useful preliminary to an Anglo-American governmental statement but consider that action on a governmental level is still desirable in order to satisfy both the British and French and to impress the Germans.

The present intention of SHAEF is to broadcast the Supreme Commander’s statement immediately unless you believe that it is desirable for the governments concerned to make their statements first in which case General Eisenhower’s broadcast would follow.

May I have an immediate reply. [Phillips.]

Winant

24 William Phillips, Political Adviser at the Headquarters of the Supreme Allied Commander, London.

25 Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower.

The Secretary in Charge of the Mission at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State 751R.62114/7–1244: Telegram

[Document 781]

The Secretary in Charge of the Mission at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, July 12, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received July 13—10:59 p.m.]

2393. British representative has replied to Massigli’s note summarized in my telegram 2355, July 11, 5 p.m., stating British Government is consulting with United States Government most effective means safeguarding French interior forces against improper treatment when taken prisoners by Germans. Note expresses hope French authorities will agree to refrain from taking or threatening reprisals only defeat their own end by provoking counter reprisals against Allied prisoners.

Duff Cooper informs me Embassy in Washington has been instructed to approach State Department suggesting most effective procedure would be for American and British Governments to ask French Committee alone to issue formal statement which would be given maximum publicity to the effect that French authorities will take steps to punish any Germans responsible for treating members of French interior forces in manner inconsistent with accepted rules and considerations of war. The American and British Governments would then issue a parallel statement to the effect that French interior forces are considered entitled to treatment as regular soldiers since they form integral part of General Eisenhower’s forces and bear arms openly against enemy; that British and American commanders would give French every assistance in bringing to justice German soldiers who fail so to treat them; that any offenders falling into American or British hands would be delivered to French for trial and punishment. Both of these statements would be carefully worded to avoid claiming actual rights for French interior forces under international law.

Lawton

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.0011 E.W./7–1244: Telegram

[Document 782]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 12, 1944—6 p.m.

5472. For Phillips. If proposal outlined in your 5477 July 12 is agreeable to the British, we have no objection to statement being issued by the Supreme Allied Commander.26 We would regard such a statement as being without prejudice to the proposal for a further statement on a governmental basis should that be considered desirable.

Hull

[For texts of statements by the Secretary of State issued on July 14, 1944, on Nazi atrocities in Hungary and Greece, see Department of State Bulletin, July 16, 1944, page 59.]

26 For text of the warning, see the London Times, July 17, 1944, p. 3, col. 3.

The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/8–1644: Telegram

[Document 783]

The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, August 16, 1944—12 p.m.
[Received August 18—1:38 a.m.]

2693. I have received communication dated August 14 from Massigli of which following is summary.

Reference is made to Massigli’s note of June 6 regarding crimes committed by Germans in occupied territory (my despatch 351, June 16)27 and to suggestion contained therein that United Nations issue warning to Germany.

Since then situation has worsened as indicated by massacres in France.

Being sure of reflecting expectation of endangered populations “I venture to insist that the position already taken on this subject by the Allied governments be confirmed as quickly as possible in the form of a common declaration and reinforced by an appropriate propaganda activity.”

Request is made for information as to action United States Government considers it possible to take and to facilitate carrying out French suggestion there is enclosed proposed text of statement to be issued.

Following is summary of draft statement enclosed with note.

Governments of Allied Nations are determined to manifest their intentions of giving most rigorous effect to statement published at Moscow November 1, 1943. In face of particularly revolting crimes which have again been perpetrated on innocent populations and defenceless prisoners Allied Nations recalling statements made by President of United States of America March 24, British Foreign Secretary March 30, confirm their determination to seek, apprehend and punish all enemy nationals who on occasion or under pretext of war ordered, planned, authorized, committed, assisted or tolerated commission of such crimes.

Besides crimes openly committed more under-handed crimes such as systematic under-nourishment of civilian populations, prisoners or deportees would meet with pitiless punishment. Governments of Allied Nations give German authorities solemn warning. They are determined in every case to impose punishment which will be exemplary and proportional to acts committed. (Sent to Ampolad 41 London 281.)

Finally they invite Germans who do not wish to be associated in responsibilities implied in such crimes to do everything in their power to disassociate themselves from real criminals and to ensure their punishment.

Full texts by airmail.28

Duff Cooper has received similar communication contents of which he has cabled to Foreign Office.

Chapin

27 Not printed; for a summary of the note of June 6, see airgram A–178, June 16, 11 a.m., from Algiers, p. 1232 [Pg. 1232 is part of Doc. 773].

28 Despatch No. 483, August 19, not printed.

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State 751R.62114/8–1944

[Document 784]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Ref: 2609/24/44
No. 526

His Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and has the honour to refer to Sir Ronald Campbell’s note No. 414 of July 10, 1944 about a proposal for a governmental statement in connection with the shooting of German prisoners by the French Forces of the Interior in retaliation for the execution of patriot French prisoners by the Germans.

2. As Mr. Hull will be aware, this matter was considered at a meeting on July 20th, attended by representatives of the United States State, War and Navy Departments, of His Majesty’s Canadian Embassy and of this Embassy, as a result of which it was agreed to propose to the Foreign Office in London that the purpose of the governmental statement advocated by them would be achieved by reiterating the statement on this subject already made by General Eisenhower, and that this procedure would not incur the dangers which might be run in making a governmental statement.

3. His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs has now replied to this suggestion stating that, after the latest evidence of the Germans’ atrocious torture of the French in the Maquis area, there is little doubt that the French Forces of the Interior will continue to take reprisals against German prisoners, whatever instructions they may or may not receive from General Koenig or from Algiers. It is understood that the Supreme Headquarters of the Allied Expeditionary Force have recognised this and are now concentrating on ensuring (a) that the French Forces of the Interior receive no instructions from any quarter condoning reprisals; and (b) that when reprisals occur they should be given no publicity.

4. In these circumstances His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom consider that the proposed governmental statement might well do more harm than good, and they agree that it would be better to drop the idea of such a statement. The Foreign Office have explained the point of view now taken by His Majesty’s Government and the United States Government to the French Delegation in London, pointing out that further the statement would be useless unless it made the point that the French Forces of the Interior conformed with rules of war. If this statement were made and the Germans knew that it was untrue this would merely be an invitation for a counter-statement on their part, reviewing details of occasions when the French Forces of the Interior had executed prisoners. The result would be to give prominence to the very misdeeds of the French Forces of the Interior which it is desired to conceal, and the danger of reprisals against Allied prisoners, which must always be at any time our chief concern, will thereby be increased. In all these circumstances the French Delegation have been told that His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom prefer to rest on General Eisenhower’s statement.

Washington , 19 August, 1944.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00116 E. W./8–1944: Telegram

[Document 785]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 19, 1944—midnight.

6628. The Department has received a note dated August 11, 1944 from Hoppenot, head of the French Delegation at Washington,29 alleging that the Germans are using French political prisoners (presumably of anti-Vichy stripe) to remove the fuses from delayed action bombs dropped in France by Allied aviators. The note contends that such action constitutes a flagrant violation of Hague Convention IV of “1900” (presumably 190730 as there is no Hague Convention of 1900) and adds that General Koenig has already explored with SHAEF the means whereby an end might be put to this “illegal and odious” practice. The note states that the Allied High Command feels that it could have recourse only to publicity as a means to achieve the desired end, although it considers such action insufficient, and has recommended to the French authorities that they bring the matter to the attention of the American and British Governments. The note concludes with a request that the Department consider the manner whereby diplomatic action might be taken which would lead the German Government to discontinue the aforesaid practice.

The Department understands that a similar approach is being made to the British Government.

The Department feels that the German practice, if actually a fact, is reprehensible and that every proper effort should be made to induce the Germans to desist. Article 46 of Hague Convention IV appears to provide the only legal ground upon which a protest might be lodged. If facts are confirmed the Department would be disposed, in parallel with the British Government, to make a strong protest through the protecting Power, and, if the Germans then fail to desist, in making a joint public statement castigating the Germans for this renewed demonstration of their capacity for devising inhuman methods of oppressing and exterminating any unfortunate individuals who do not see eye to eye with them.

Please discuss this matter with the Foreign Office and, if considered desirable and necessary, with the Allied military authorities who are informed of the facts, and telegraph the Department your own and British views on the subject.

Hull

29 Not printed.

30 For text of Convention IV, see Foreign Relations, 1907, pt. ii, p. 1204.

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth) 740.00116 EW/8–2144

[Document 786]

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

Washington, August 21, 1944.

Dear Mr. Hackworth: I enclose herewith a paraphrase of a telegram received from the Foreign Office about the action of the Germans in using French political detainees in contravention of the accepted rules of warfare.

You will see that the Foreign Office are not in favour of any formal communication being made to the German Government through the Swiss Government, but they do think that His Majesty’s Government and the United States Government should put themselves publicly on record as protesting the German action.

We would be grateful for your comments on London’s proposals.

Yours sincerely,

Paul Gore-Booth

[Enclosure]

Telegram to the British Embassy, Washington, From the Foreign Office, Dated August 14, 1944

The French Delegation have informed me that General Koenig recently drew the attention of the Chief of Staff at Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force, to the use by the Germans of French political detainees to un-fuse delayed action bombs dropped in France by Allied aircraft. SHAEF replied on July 22nd that although they considered such action to be contrary to the laws of war, the High Command could do no more than give publicity to the facts, and it considered this action insufficient. SHAEF therefore recommended that the question should be submitted to the British and U.S. Governments whom for their part they would inform directly. The delegation added that a communication on this question has been made to the U. S. Government by the French Delegation in Washington.

2. This German action is clearly a breach of faith. It is contrary to Article 23 of Land Warfare Regulations attached to the Hague Convention 4, and I am advised it could also be held to be a breach of Article 52 of the same Regulations. Apart from these particular provisions it is clearly a breach of the rules and customs of war to compel persons detained for political or indeed any other reasons to undertake work, which is likely to lead to their death.

3. In these circumstances His Majesty’s Government would be prepared to join or support the French Committee in making a strong protest to the Germans, accompanied by a warning that those responsible would be tracked down and suitably punished. Such a protest could be issued either by His Majesty’s Government, the United States Government and French Committee jointly, or His Majesty’s Government and the United States Government might jointly support a statement issued by the French Committee. Every publicity would be given this statement. I am not in favour of a formal communication to the German Government through the Swiss Government, since the Germans might well reject it on the ground that they would not recognize any standing of His Majesty’s Government or the United States Government in this matter.

Statement Issued to the Press by the Department of State, August 29, 1944 740.00116 EW/8–2944

[Document 787]

Statement Issued to the Press by the Department of State, August 29, 1944

August 29, 1944

The Government of the United States has consistently adhered to the view that all members of the armed forces of the countries at war with Germany which are engaged in active combat should be treated by the German military authorities in accordance with the laws and customs of war. It has come to the attention of this Government, however, that the soldiers of the Polish Home Army which is now engaged in active military operations against the common enemy are not being so treated by the German military authorities. The Government of the United States, therefore, declares: 1. The soldiers of the Polish Home Army, which is now mobilized, constitute a combat force operating against the Germans.

2. The soldiers of the Polish Home Army are instructed to conduct their military operations in accordance with rules of war and in so doing they bear their arms openly against the enemy and are provided with a distinctive emblem or with Polish uniforms.

3. In these circumstances reprisals by the German military authorities against the soldiers of the Polish Home Army violate the rules of war by which Germany is bound. The United States Government, therefore, solemnly warns all Germans who take part in or are in any way responsible for such violations that they do so at their peril and will be held answerable for their crimes.

Statement Issued to the Press by the Secretary of State, August 30, 1944 740.00116 EW/8–3044

[Document 788]

Statement Issued to the Press by the Secretary of State, August 30, 1944

August 30, 1944

The Polish Government has communicated to this Government details of the unprecedented brutality with which the Germans are acting against the unarmed and helpless civilian population of Warsaw. This communication states that without regard for age or sex, tens of thousands of innocent men, women, and children are being herded into concentration camps where, under appalling conditions of want, they are being tortured and left to die.

We have repeatedly warned the Germans of the certain consequences of inhuman acts of this character. Those guilty of the present outrages against the civilian population of Warsaw will not escape the justice they deserve.

The Legal Adviser (Hackworth) to the First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) 740.00116 E.W./7–644

[Document 789]

The Legal Adviser (Hackworth) to the First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth)

Washington, September 2, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Gore-Booth: After consultation with the War and Navy Departments, in regard to your letter of July 6 transmitting a paraphrase of a telegram from the Foreign Office in London concerning a proposal of the French Committee of National Liberation made on June 6 that a further declaration on the punishment of war criminals be made, this Department agrees with the position of the Foreign Office set forth in that telegram, namely that nothing could usefully be added at the present time to the earlier governmental declarations on the subject.

I understand that Mr. Russell of the Embassy was informed by telephone by a member of this office of the Department’s position.

The Department has recently received from the American Mission in Algiers a communication dated August 14 from M. Massigli,31 in which the latter refers to his note of June 6 and reiterates his suggestion of a further declaration by the Allied Governments regarding the punishment of war crimes.

We are instructing the American Mission at Algiers to reply to the French Committee’s two communications along lines similar to those set forth in paragraph 2 of the Foreign Office telegram enclosed in your letter of July 6.

Sincerely yours,

[File copy not signed]

31 Not printed; for summary, see telegram 2693, August 16, 12 p.m., from Algiers, p. 1242 [Pg. 1242 includes portions of Doc. 782 and Doc. 783].

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax) 751R.62114/8–1944

[Document 790]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the British Ambassador and has the honor to refer to the Embassy’s note No. 526, Reference: 2609/24/44, dated August 19, 1944, concerning the proposal for a governmental statement in connection with the shooting of German prisoners by the French Forces of the Interior in retaliation for the execution of patriot French prisoners by the Germans.

The Government of the United States concurs in the position taken by the British Government and prefers to make no further public statement with regard to this matter.

Washington , September 2, 1944.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) 740.00116 E.W./8–1944: Telegram

[Document 791]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, September 2, 1944—8 p.m.

2555. You may inform Massigli in reply to his notes of June 6 and August 16 [14], 1944, reference your airgram A–178 of June 16, your despatch 351 of June 16, your telegram 2693 of August 16 and your despatch 483 of August 19,33 that this Government is of opinion that the issuance of a new governmental declaration regarding German war crimes would not be profitable at this time and might well be inadvisable. You may add that the position of the Allied Governments, including the Moscow Declaration, has been explicitly stated and widely and repeatedly published and that position will continue to be referred to in propaganda and otherwise as opportunity offers. It is believed that the French Committee will understand that our reluctance to follow the procedure suggested results not from any waning interest but solely from considerations of policy.

Hull

33 Despatches 351 and 483 not printed.

The Consul at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–1644: Telegram

[Document 792]

The Consul at Algiers (Lawton)34 to the Secretary of State

Algiers, September 16, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received 11:58 p.m.]

67. Note dated September 5 sent to Massigli incorporated Department’s 2554 [2555] September 2, 8 p.m. Acknowledgment received today from Foreign Affairs Commissariat concludes with final paragraph summarized as follows: “Provisional Government” being established in Paris, Commissariat can only reserve comment on whether issuance of new declaration would not be useful in present circumstance. Idea of following and intensifying propaganda already made of subject responds exactly to suggestion expressed by French authorities. Commissariat would be grateful to have competent services requested to renew and develop as frequently as possible in its German language broadcasts warnings already given regarding atrocities committed against civilians, prisoners and internees.

Lawton

34 Edward P. Lawton had been relieved of his duties as secretary to the Mission at Algiers on September 13, the Mission having moved on to Paris.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax) 740.00116 EW/9–2044

[Document 793]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the British Ambassador and has the honor to refer to the apparent policy of the German Government of treating parachutists falling into its hand as francs tireurs.

Reports which the American Government has received from the Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force, indicate that atrocities have been committed against Special Air Services Troops. It is understood that these airborne troops are made up of American and British personnel and that the British personnel are in the majority.

The Government of the United States is considering addressing a strong protest to the German Government with respect to the mistreatment of these soldiers. Before doing so it would be interested in knowing whether the British Government would join in like action with regard to this matter.

Washington , September 20, 1944.

The Polish Chargé (Kwapiszewski) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/9–2044

[Document 794]

The Polish Chargé (Kwapiszewski) to the Secretary of State

The Polish Chargé d’Affaires a.i. has received the following cable communication from the Polish Minister of Foreign Affairs:

The Polish Government in London received information from the German occupied part of Poland to the effect that the German authorities are preparing for mass murder of prisoners in the concentration camp of Oświęcim, in which about 45,000 persons are imprisoned. Of these 95 per cent are political prisoners. Besides Polish nationals there are in Oświęcim citizens of France, Belgium, Holland, Norway, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and Greece, as well as a large number of Jews of various nationalities.

The Polish Minister for Foreign Affairs addressed a note to the British Government with the request that the British Government, together with the Government of the United States, issue a public declaration warning the Germans against this continuation of new mass murder of prisoners and threatening that most severe consequences will follow should such a crime be perpetrated.

A similar note was delivered to the American Chargé d’Affaires in London. In addition, all interested Allied Governments have been informed by the Polish Minister for Foreign Affairs.

The Polish Chargé d’Affaires a.i. has the honor to request and to urge that proper action be taken by the Secretary of State as requested in the above mentioned note of the Polish Government handed to the American Chargé d’Affaires in London.35

Washington , September 23, 1944.

35 The Chargé near the Polish Government in Exile reported the receipt of the note in his telegram 103, September 21, 8 p.m.

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–3044

[Document 795]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

No. 601
Ref. 3136/5/44

His Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and with reference to Mr. Hull’s note of September 20th, 1944 in regard to the mistreatment of allied parachutists who fall into German hands, has the honour to state that he is informed by His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs that His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom have also received reports of such action by the German authorities and are ready to join the United States Government in addressing a strong protest to the German Government.

2. The Earl of Halifax has the honour to add that Mr. Eden suggests that the proposed protest should set out all details so far available and should refer to the communications exchanged between the United Kingdom and German Governments on this subject in 1940. The communications in question were (a) Notes of May 13th and August 19th, 1940 addressed to the Foreign Office by the Swiss Legation in London, containing communications from the German Government and threatening reprisals if German airmen and parachutists were not treated as prisoners-of-war; and

(b) Note of June 6th, 1940, addressed to the Swiss Legation by the Foreign Office, in which it is stated clearly that Germans landing in parachutes who are captured by British forces will be treated in conformity with International Law; i.e., that those wearing their national uniform will be treated as prisoners-of-war and will be dealt with in accordance with the laws governing war prisoners.

3. Lord Halifax has further the honour to state that he has been asked by Mr. Eden to telegraph to the Foreign Office the text of the United States Government’s proposed protest, and would therefore be grateful if Mr. Hull would be so good as to communicate a copy of the text to him as soon as it is available.

Washington , September 30, 1944.

The Chief of the Special War Problems Division (Plitt) to the First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) 740.00116 European War/8–2144

[Document 796]

The Chief of the Special War Problems Division (Plitt) to the First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth)

Washington, October 2, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Gore-Booth: Mr. Hackworth has referred to me your letter of August 21, 1944 enclosing a paraphrase of a telegram received from the British Foreign Office in regard to the action of the Germans in using French political prisoners to remove fuses from delayed action bombs dropped in France by Allied aviators, and outlining the action advocated by the Foreign Office in relation thereto. You request our comments on London’s proposal.

The Department received a memorandum dated August 11, 1944 from the French Delegation36 here paralleling the approach made to the Foreign Office in London in regard to this matter. Subsequently, on August 19, the Department telegraphed the substance of the French memorandum to our Embassy in London and requested the Ambassador to discuss the matter with the Foreign Office and to ascertain the views of your Government on the subject.

In view of the present situation in France which is very different from that which existed at the time the approach on this matter was directed to the British and United States Governments by the French, the Department believes it desirable that information be obtained confirming the continuation of the practice described before pursuing the matter further. This attitude is premised upon the belief that military developments in France have presumably brought about a cessation of those practices about which the French have complained. Consequently the grounds for a protest would appear to have been removed.

In implementation of this reasoning, an officer of the Department of State discussed the matter on September 15 with Mr. Briere of the French Delegation at Washington.37 Mr. Briere was informed regarding the Department’s attitude toward the matter and was told that in the absence of confirmation that the practice of which the French have complained is continuing, the Department would be disposed to drop the matter on the grounds that the basis for a protest would appear to have been eliminated. Mr. Briere stated that the Delegation is not in possession of any information regarding the current status of the matter and that it would endeavor to ascertain whether or not the practice could be described as continuing. He said further that should the Delegation obtain confirmation of the continued use by German occupation authorities in France of political prisoners for the purpose of defusing delayed action bombs, the Department would be informed accordingly.

In view of the foregoing the Department deems it preferable that no further action be taken in the matter until the French Delegation has had an opportunity to confirm the need for positive action on the part of United States and British Governments. I shall inform you in the event that the Delegation approaches the Department of State again oil this matter.

Sincerely yours,

Edwin A. Plitt

36 Not printed.

37 Memorandum of conversation not printed.

The Polish Embassy to the Department of State 740.00116 E.W./10–244

[Document 797]

The Polish Embassy to the Department of State

Memorandum

Reference is made to the memorandum of the Polish Embassy dated September 23, 1944, relating to German plans of extermination of all prisoners in the concentration camp of Oświęcim.

The Polish Government in London has received further information from Poland, from which it appears that similar plans of extermination are being prepared also with reference to the prisoners in the concentration camp of Brzezinki, situated in the vicinity of Oświęcim. The number of prisoners in the concentration camp of Brzezinki is estimated at 16,725 men and 39,125 women.

According to information received, the German Commanders of these concentration camps have prepared detailed plans for the extermination of all the prisoners. It is reported that the Commander of Brzezinki has asked for definite orders in writing from Berlin in this matter.

This information has been communicated by the Polish Government to the British Government as well as to the Chargé d’Affaires of the United States in London38 with the renewed urgent request that a joint Anglo-American declaration be issued as soon as possible.

The German plans of extermination are undoubtedly in line with the previous German threats that the most valuable elements of the Polish Nation would be liquidated, should the Germans be compelled to withdraw from Poland.

A joint Anglo-American declaration, as mentioned above, is therefore a matter of the greatest urgency and may be the only way to save the lives of these innocent persons.

Washington , October 2, 1944.

38 The Chargé near the Polish Government in Exile reported the receipt of the note in his telegram 109, September 29, 5 p.m.

The Chargé to the Czechoslovak Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/10–644

[Document 798]

The Chargé to the Czechoslovak Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State

London, October 6, 1944.
[Received October 14.]

Sir: In continuation of my telegram No. 17 and despatch No. 189 of October 2, 194439 reporting the willingness of the Czechoslovak Government to associate itself with a possible declaration by the United Nations warning Germany against a reported plan to exterminate the inmates of certain prison camps, I have the honor to transmit a copy of a note of October 4, 194440 from Mr. Jan Masaryk, Czechoslovak Minister of Foreign Affairs, in which he quotes a telegram which he has received on this subject from the World Jewish Congress in New York. On behalf of his Government, Mr. Masaryk also asks the United States Government to consider whether there is any possibility of assisting the internees whose lives are evidently in extreme danger, and adds that he is also approaching the Governments of Great Britain and the Soviet Union on this subject.

Respectfully yours,

Rudolf E. Schoenfeld

39 Neither printed.

40 Not printed.

The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./10–1044: Telegram

[Document 799]

The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Caserta, October 10, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received October 10—7 p.m.]

700. Italian Foreign Office, having received information of increasing German persecutions in northern Italy involving barbarous tortures and massacre of hostages, has asked ACC41 whether fresh warning could not be given Germany that such conduct will not pass unnoticed. It proposes that such a warning be given by Allies and Italian Government simultaneously and publicized through radio and press. ACC will be instructed to inform Foreign Office that question has been referred to the two Governments.

Text of Italian memo of particulars sent by pouch.42

Kirk

41 Allied Control Commission for Italy.

42 Not printed.

Memorandum by Mr. E. Tomlin Bailey of the Special War Problems Division 740.00116 European War/10–1044

[Document 800]

Memorandum by Mr. E. Tomlin Bailey of the Special War Problems Division

[Washington,] October 10, 1944.

Mr. Gunningham43 telephoned to say that he had been informed by the Foreign Office that they did not think it necessary that the British and American protests concerning the German mistreatment of parachutists had to be identical. The Foreign Office is forwarding copies of the correspondence and statements made during the discussions with Germany after the fall of Crete and Mr. Gunningham promised to send copies of these documents to the Department for its information as well as a copy of the British note which is shortly to be sent.44

43 H. W. Gunningham, Second Secretary of the British Embassy at Washington.

44 Mr. Gunningham transmitted copies of the 1940 correspondence in his note of October 20, 1944; none printed.

The Department of State to the Polish Embassy 740.00116 European War/10–244

[Document 801]

The Department of State to the Polish Embassy

Memorandum

Reference is made to the Memoranda from the Polish Embassy of September 23, 1944 and October 2, 1944 relative to the information received by the Polish Government regarding plans of the German authorities in Poland to exterminate thousands of innocent persons held in concentration camps at Oświęcim and Brzezinki. The Memoranda from the Embassy suggested that a joint Anglo-American declaration be issued warning German officials that if they carried out these plans they would be brought to justice.

In compliance with this suggestion, the United States Government issued the following statement on October 10, 1944: “The United States Government has been informed by the Polish Government that it had received reliable information that German officials in Poland are making plans for the extermination of tens of thousands of innocent persons of Polish and other United Nations nationalities as well as Jewish deportees from areas under German control who are now held in concentration camps, particularly those at Brzezinki and Oświęcim.

“The United States Government takes this occasion to warn again the German Government and Nazi officials that if these plans are carried out those guilty of such murderous acts will be brought to justice and pay the penalty for their heinous crimes.”

The release of this statement was coordinated with the British Government which, it is understood, issued a similar and parallel statement on the above-mentioned date.

Washington , October 11, 1944.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/10–1144: Telegram

[Document 802]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 11, 1944.
[Received October 11—2:37 p.m.]

8578. Reference Embassy’s airgram A–1225, October 9.45 Following announcement of Foreign Office was broadcast yesterday evening by BBC and appeared in today’s newspapers: “The Polish Government have notified His Majesty’s Government that they have received reliable information that the German authorities are planning the mass execution of the inmates of the concentration camps at Oświęcim and Brzezinky (Birkenau). In these camps thousands of people from many European countries are imprisoned.

“His Majesty’s Government wish to make it clear, beyond any possibility of doubt that if this plan, or any similar plan elsewhere, is in fact carried out, they will hold responsible all those who are in any way involved, from the highest to the lowest, and in full cooperation and agreement with the Allies will spare no effort to bring them to justice.”

Winant

45 Not printed.

The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/10–1744: Telegram

[Document 803]

The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Rome, October 17, 1944—9 a.m.
[Received 10:10 a.m.]

537. Italian Foreign Office has informed SAC46 of a communication received from National Committee of Liberation in Northern Italy reporting a sharp increase in German atrocities in Northern Italy and has requested urgent intervention of United Nations in this matter to cause Germans to cease atrocities.

At request of SAC, the ACI46a will consider at its next meeting scheduled for October 20 the problem of German atrocities in Northern Italy with a view to advising on means of inducing Germans to cease.

537 to Dept., repeated London as 34, Moscow as 29 and by hand to AmPolAd47 as 77.

Kirk

46 Supreme Allied Commander (Mediterranean).

46a Advisory Council for Italy.

47 The American Political Adviser on the Staff of the Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater, Theodore J. Hohenthal.

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) 740.00116 E.W./10–1744: Telegram

[Document 804]

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk)

Washington, October 18, 1944—6 p.m.

307. In considering recommendations to be made on basis your Caserta 700, October 10, and Rome 537, October 17, regarding atrocities Northern Italy, ACI should endeavor to develop concrete facts in particular cases to serve as basis for statement by the governments should such a statement be recommended.

While this Government is of course desirous of doing everything within its power to prevent such atrocities and to punish the perpetrators, it must be borne in mind that repeated pronouncements may lose their force unless they are supported by evidence of fresh acts calling for fresh warnings.

You should also have in mind the fact that when the French Committee of National Liberation requested in June and August last that a declaration be issued regarding atrocities against the French, the Department instructed Algiers in its 2554 [2555] of September 2 to state that the position of the Allied Governments, including the Moscow declaration, had been explicitly stated and widely and repeatedly published; also that that position would continue to be referred to in propaganda and otherwise as opportunity offered; and that in the judgment of this Government the issuance of a new declaration regarding German war crimes would not be profitable at that time and might well be inadvisable.

If a declaration should now be issued with respect to Italy it would probably be necessary to include France. The Department in considering whether it should recommend such a declaration would need to be supported to the fullest extent possible by facts both with respect to Northern Italy and France, which could if necessary be made available to the press. Memorandum referred to in your Caserta 700 of October 10 has not yet been received in Department.

The foregoing is merely for your guidance in consideration of the question by the ACI.

Hull

The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./10–1844: Telegram

[Document 805]

The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Rome, October 18, 1944—midnight.
[Received October 19—10:10 a.m.]

549. If, at next meeting of ACI, I am called upon to express views on request of Italian Government outlined in my 537, October 17, 9 a.m., I propose to agree, in the absence of instructions to the contrary, to refer the matter to my Government for decision as to any steps which may properly be taken in the premises.

In connection with foregoing and with reference to Caserta despatch 817, October 12, 1944,48 transmitting list of atrocities, a message was received October 16, 1944 at AFHQ from Fifth Army reporting another German atrocity, this time committed about August 19, 1944, in village of Santa Anna, Tuscany, which at time had about 500 inhabitants. Substance of message as follows: According to evidence taken by Fifth Army war crimes commissioner more than 400 civilians in town including many women and children were massacred. Approximately 280 were machine gunned or burned in church and about 100 were burned in their houses or machine gunned attempting to escape and three children under two years of age were impaled. Responsible individuals have as yet not been identified. Believed that German action was in reprisal for Partisan activities.

549 to Department, repeated London as 35, Moscow 30, and by hand to AmPolAd as 78.

Kirk

48 Not printed.

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/10–1944

[Document 806]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

No. 647

His Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and, under instructions from His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, has the honour to inform him that His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom are becoming increasingly concerned, as the conclusion of hostilities against Germany draws in sight, about the safety of the Allied prisoners of of war in Germany, who according to the information in the possession of His Majesty’s Government number about 3¾ million scattered in camps throughout that country. His Majesty’s Government foresee danger arising either in consequence of the chaotic conditions that will result from a German collapse, or alternatively as a result of a deliberate threat by Hitler and his associates to murder some or all of the prisoners unless the Allies agree to come to terms. The object of this manoeuvre might, in the opinion of His Majesty’s Government, be either to avoid unconditional surrender or to save the lives of the most important Nazi gangsters and war criminals or to attempt to cause dissension among the Allies in the final stages of the war.

2. Mr. Eden, in conjunction with the British Chiefs of Staff, has been considering the best method of meeting this danger, and has come to the conclusion that the most promising counter-action would be the issue, at the appropriate time, of a joint Anglo-American-Soviet warning to the effect that individual commandants and guards, no less than the German military authorities, will be held individually responsible for the safety of the prisoners of war in their charge and that excuses or attempts to shift responsibility on to the S.S. or Gestapo will not be entertained. As regards the appropriate time for the issue of the proposed warning, it is the view of His Majesty’s Government that it should not be issued until either (1) organised German military resistance has ceased or (2) Hitler has issued a threat to murder prisoners of war or a clear indication of such an intention has reached the Allied Governments. His Majesty’s Government suggest that the warning might be issued in the name of the three Allied Governments, through whom action might be co-ordinated with a view to securing synchronization; they further suggest that it would be desirable that the Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force and the Supreme Allied Commander Mediterranean be invited to recommend the issue of the proposed warning if and when they thought such action to be necessary.

3. Lord Halifax has the honour to communicate to Mr. Hull herewith the draft text of a warning which His Majesty’s Government suggest might be suitable for issue at the appropriate time, and to enquire whether the United States Government is in principle willing to participate in the joint issue of such a warning and if so whether it concurs in the terms of the draft text enclosed herewith and agrees with His Majesty’s Government’s views as to the appropriate time for its issue. Lord Halifax has the honour to add that His Majesty’s Ambassador at Moscow has been instructed to make a similar approach to the Soviet Government.49

Washington , October 19, 1944.

[Enclosure]

Text of Proposed Warning

“The Governments of the United Kingdom, United States and U.S.S.R. on behalf of all the Allied Nations at war with Germany hereby issue a solemn warning to all commandants and guards in charge of Allied prisoners of war in Germany and German occupied territory and to members of the Gestapo and all other persons of whatsoever service or rank in whose charge Allied prisoners of war have been placed, whether in battle zones, on lines of communication or in rear areas. They declare that they will hold all such persons, no less than the German High Command and competent German military, naval and air authorities, individually responsible for the safety and welfare of all Allied prisoners of war in their charge.

Any person guilty of maltreating or allowing any Allied prisoners of war to be maltreated, whether in battle zone, on lines of communication, in a camp, hospital, prison or elsewhere, will be ruthlessly pursued and brought to punishment.

They give notice that they will regard this responsibility as binding in all circumstances and one which cannot be transferred to any other authorities or individuals whatsoever.”

49 The Secretary of State on October 24, 1944, advised the British Ambassador that the text of the proposed warning had been referred to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for consideration.

The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./10–2044: Telegram

[Document 807]

The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Rome, October 20, 1944—3 p.m.
[Received 4:42 p.m.]

564. My 549, October 18, midnight and Department’s 307, October 18, 6 p.m. At today’s meeting the ACI agreed in principle to recommend to the respective governments represented on the Council that with reference to the German atrocities in Northern Italy a statement be issued by the governments warning the Germans.

The text of the recommendation will be drafted shortly and submitted to all representatives for approval. Pending approval of this text the Council is requesting complete lists of all reported atrocities from both the Italian Government, through the ACC, and AFHQ, these lists will be added as an annex to the above mentioned recommendation at the time of its transmission to the respective governments.

It appears from today’s discussion on this subject that both the Greek and Yugoslav representatives in transmitting the Council’s recommendation to their respective governments will add their own observations and comments thereon with special reference to atrocities on their respective territories.50

Kirk

50 On November 17, 1944, the Advisory Council for Italy agreed to postpone consideration of the problem of German atrocities in Northern Italy until further communication from the Italian Government.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 740.00116 EW/9–3044: Telegram

[Document 808]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, October 23, 1944.

3604. American Interests—Germany. Please request the Swiss Government to deliver the following textually to the German Government: The Government of the United States has received information which clearly shows that Allied military personnel who served as parachutists during the fighting in France were captured by the German authorities and treated as francs tireurs. The resulting murder and other brutal treatment of captured members of duly organized Allied military units is an unquestioned and uncivilized violation of the rules of warfare. The American Government will hold the German Government responsible as a state, and will hold the German authorities involved responsible as individuals and will exact full retribution for such atrocities. The American Government demands immediate cessation of this practice and receipt of formal assurance from the German Government that effective measures have been taken to prevent its recurrence.

Please report date of delivery to German Government of the foregoing protest.

Stettinius

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax) 740.00116 European War/10–1044

[Document 809]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the British Ambassador and has the honor to refer to the Embassy’s note No. 601, Reference: 3136/5/44, dated September 30, 1944, concerning the mistreatment of Allied parachutists who fall into German hands.

There is transmitted herewith for the Embassy’s information a copy of the Department’s telegram of today’s date to the American Legation at Bern51 which sets forth the protest which the Swiss Government is being requested to deliver to the German Government in this connection.

Washington , October 24, 1944.

51 Telegram 3604, October 23, supra.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 740.00116 E.W./10–2444: Circular telegram

[Document 810]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)52

Washington, October 24, 1944—4 p.m.

The following from Department and War Refugee Board is for Steinhardt and Katzki.53

Reference is made to Secretary Hull’s statement of October 10, 1944,54 reported in the Radio Bulletin of the same date.

For your information, Governor Thomas E. Dewey, Republican candidate for President, issued the following statement on October 19, 1944: “Information comes to this country from unquestionably reliable sources that the Nazis, trapped and knowing that they are faced with inevitable defeat, are now resorting to the known gangster terror device of threatening to exterminate their very victims—Poles, Jews and other non-German nationals—now imprisoned by them in their horrible concentration camps in parts of Poland and other countries still occupied by the Nazis.

The civilized world is now in a position in unmistakable terms to warn the Nazis—military commanders, members of the German Government, their aiders, abettors and supporters—that certain and inevitable justice awaits them for these brutal and wanton murders if their schemes should be carried out.

I am happy to note that our State Department has issued a warning that ‘if these plans are carried out those guilty of such murderous acts will be brought to justice and pay the penalty for their heinous crimes’ American public opinion will fully support the statement issued by our Department of State.”

You are requested to convey the contents of the foregoing statements to the appropriate authorities and to use all possible means to give the statements the widest publicity through any channels that may be available to you.

Stettinius

[On November 7, 1944, General Eisenhower issued a warning to the German people not to harm or persecute any persons in labor battalions and in concentration camps regardless of their nationality or religious faith. For text of the warning, see telegram 2563, October 30, to Moscow, printed on page 1174 [Pg. 1174 includes portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708].]

52 Repeated to Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.

53 Herbert Katzki, an agent in Turkey of the War Refugee Board.

54 See the Department’s memorandum to the Polish Embassy, October 11, p. 1254 [Pg. 1254 includes portions of Doc. 799, Doc. 800, and Doc. 801].

The Chargé to the Czechoslovak Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/11–744: Telegram

[Document 811]

The Chargé to the Czechoslovak Government in Exile (Schoenfeld) to the Secretary of State

London, November 7, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received 7:30 p.m.]

Zecho 22. In note of November 6 Czechoslovak Foreign Office states German radio reports recent capture in Slovakia of Czech General Viest and Brigadier General Golian together with other officers, and soldiers. Czech Government appeals to United States Government again to issue in any suitable form a warning to German military and other authorities against mistreatment of war prisoners in line with its declaration of September 7.55 Similar appeal is being addressed to British and Soviet Governments.

[ Schoenfeld ]

55 Department of State Bulletin, September 10, 1944, p. 263.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé to the Czechoslovak Government in Exile (Schoenfeld), at London 740.00116 European War/11–744: Telegram

[Document 812]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé to the Czechoslovak Government in Exile (Schoenfeld), at London

Washington, November 14, 1944—8 p.m.

8. The Department will issue a warning to German authorities56 in line with your Zecho 22, November 7, 7 p.m., on November 15. OWI publicity will be arranged. British Embassy here expects BBC to publicize similar British warning at about the same time.

Stettinius

56 For text of warning, see ibid., November 19, 1944, p. 596.

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./11–2344: Telegram

[Document 813]

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, November 23, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received 8:53 p.m.]

7702. Message contained [in] Department’s 3604, October 23 delivered October 25 Swiss Foreign Office which replies in note November 17 stating that Swiss Legation, Berlin, instructed communicate message German Government. When this instruction received Swiss Legation, Berlin, had just suffered on part German Foreign Office two refusals accept communications from United States Government (see Legation’s 7542 November 1557 and 766 [7668], November 2158 ) and as refusal accept Department’s 3604 appeared inevitable it reported situation to Swiss Foreign Office. After examining question in effort find notwithstanding this situation means transmit to German Government Department’s message, Foreign Office, Bern, submitted it under cover of note to German Legation, Bern, which has returned Department’s communication with following remark: “Wording has been chosen by Department of State which would oblige German Foreign Office refuse accept communication.”

Huddle

57 See footnote 43, p. 1178 [Pg. 1178 includes portions of Doc. 711 and Doc. 712].

58  Ante, p. 1178 [Pg. 1178 includes portions of Doc. 711 and Doc. 712].

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) 740.00116 EW/9–3044: Telegram

[Document 814]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle)

Washington, December 6, 1944.

4126. Please request the Swiss Government at its discretion as to manner and timing to press the German Government to investigate the matter protested in Department’s 3604 of October 23, 1944, and to take appropriate disciplinary and penal action against persons responsible for the abuses referred to.59

Stettinius

59 Telegram 8438, December 30, 1944, from Bern, reported that the Department’s communication had been delivered to the German Foreign Office by the Swiss Legation in Berlin on December 19 (740.00116 European War/12–3044).

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./12–1944

[Document 815]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

No. 730

His Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and has the honour to refer to his note No. 647 of the 19th October last regarding a proposed joint Anglo-American-Soviet warning to the effect that individual prisoner-of-war camp commandants and guards, no less than the German military authorities will be held individually responsible for the safety of the prisoners-of-war in their charge and that excuses or attempts to shift responsibility on to the S.S. or Gestapo will not be entertained.

2. Lord Halifax has now been instructed by the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to inform the United States Government that His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom propose that since the draft warning which was enclosed in his note under reference refers throughout to Allied prisoners of war, the text thereof should be modified to include after the words “Governments of the United Kingdom, United States and U.S.S.R. hereby issue” the words “on behalf of all the Allied Nations at war with Germany”.

3. Lord Halifax would therefore be grateful if the text of the proposed warning which is at present under consideration by the United States authorities might be amended accordingly and he would also be glad to learn how matters stand as to the acceptability of this proposal to the United States Government.

Washington , December 19, 1944.

Discussions regarding procedures and scope of the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War CrimesDiscussions regarding procedures and scope of the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes1

1 For previous correspondence regarding this Commission, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 402 ff.

[816] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 7, 1944—7 p.m. [Received 9:21 p.m.]

740.00116 European War 1939/1238: Telegram

[817] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 13, 1944—7 p.m.

740.00116 European War 1939/1238: Telegram

[818] The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell)

Washington, January 15, 1944.

740.00116 European War/1193

[819] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 19, 1944. [Received January 19—7:32 p.m.]

740.00116 European War/1258

[820] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 27, 1944. [Received January 27—8:39 a.m.]

740.00116 European War/1277: Telegram

[821] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 27, 1944—5 p.m.

740.00116 European War/1258: Telegram

[822] The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, January 27, 1944. [Received February 8.]

740.00116 European War/1308

[823] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , 3 February, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1839/1301

[824] The Acting Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Grimes Commission (Pell)

Washington, February 15, 1944.

740.00116 European War/1299

[825] Document No. C.7(1) : First Report of Committee I (Facts and Evidence) as Adopted at the 10th Meeting of the United Nations War Crimes Commission, 22 February, 1944

February 22, 1944

740.00116 European War 1939/1343

[826] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, February 25, 1944—1 p.m. [Received February 26—9 p.m.]

740.00116 European War/1332: Telegram

[827] The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, February 29, 1944. [Received March 8.]

740.00116 European War/1344

[828] The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, March 2, 1944. [Received March 10.]

740.00116 European War 1939/1346

[829] The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell)

Washington, March 13, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1939/1315

[830] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Washington , 15 March, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1939/1355

[831] The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Grimes Commission (Pell)

Washington, March 18, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1939/1344

[832] The Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington , April 8, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1939/1301

[833] The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, April 26, 1944. [Received May 3.]

740.00116 European War 1939/1416

[834] The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, May 2, 1944. [Received May 10.]

740.00116 European War 1939/1422

[835] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Washington , May 5, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1939/1419

[836] The Ambassador in Brazil (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Rio de Janeiro, May 6, 1944—noon. [Received May 13—4 p.m.]

740.00116 European War 1939/1428: Airgram

[837] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , 20 May, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1939/1434

[838] The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

Washington, 20 May, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1939/1434

[839] The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell)

Washington, May 22, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1939/1416

[840] The American Representative on the United Nations War Grimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, May 24, 1944. [Received May 31.]

740.00116 European War 1939/1453

[841] The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell)

Washington, May 24, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1939/1405

[842] Document No. C.23(1), 1 June, 1944: Scope of the Retributive Action of the United Nations

June 1, 1944

740.00116 EW/1469

[843] The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

Washington, 2 June, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1939/1459

[844] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

Washington , June 3, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1939/1419

[845] The Legal Adviser (Hackworth) to the First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth)

Washington, June 9, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1939/1459

[846] The Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Hurst) to the Secretary of State

[London,] 9 June 1944.

740.00116 Pacific War/6–944

[847] The Acting Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell)

Washington, June 10, 1944.

740.00116 E. W. 1939/1453

[848] Miss K. Isabel Poate, an Attaché of the British Embassy, to Miss Katherine B. Fite, Assistant to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

Washington, June 12, 1944.

740.00116 European War 1939/1470

[849] Document No. C.30, 15 June, 1944: Recommendation Regarding the Establishment in Enemy Territory of an Appropriate Agency to Assist the Commission in its Work, Adopted by the Commission on 13 June, 1944

June 15, 1944

740.00116 E.W./1479

[850] Document No. C.31, 16 June, 1944: Surrender by the Axis Powers of Persons Wanted for Trial as War Criminals

June 16, 1944

740.00116 European War 1939/1479

[851] The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell)

Washington, July 15, 1944.

740.00116 EW/7–1544

[852] Document No. C.34, 18 July, 1944: Surrender by the Axis Powers of Persons Wanted for Trial as War Criminals

July 18, 1944

740.00116 European War/7–2044

[853] Document No. C.36, 24 July, 1944: Suggestions by Committee II Regarding Co-operation With General Eisenhower’s Headquarters

July 24, 1944

740.00116 E.W./8–344

[854] Document No. C.38, 26 July, 1944: Establishment of the Far Eastern and Pacific Sub-Commission

July 26, 1944

740.00116 E.W./8–344

[855] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 27, 1944. [Received July 28—1:25 a.m.]

740.00116 European War/7–2744: Telegram

[856] The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

Washington, 29 July, 1944.

740.00116 EW/7–2944

[857] The British Chargé (Campbell) to the Secretary of State

Washington , July 29, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./7–2944

[858] The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, July 29, 1944. [Received August 1—2 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./7–2944: Airgram

[859] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 31, 1944—7 p.m.

740.00116 European War/7–2744: Telegram

[860] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 3, 1944—9 p.m. [Received August 3—7:35 p.m.]

740.00116 European War/8–344: Telegram

[861] The American Representative on the United Nations War Grimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, August 5, 1944. [Received August 9.]

740.00116 E.W./8–544

[862] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 10, 1944—8 p.m. [Received August 10—5:50 p.m.]

740.00116 EW/8–1044: Telegram

[863] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 11, 1944—midnight.

740.00116 E.W./8–1044: Telegram

[864] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Washington , August 15, 1944.

740.00116 EW/8–1544

[865] The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Hurst)

Washington, August 18, 1944.

740.00116 P.W./6–944

[866] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Washington , August 19, 1944.

740.00116 European War/8–1944

[867] The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, August 21, 1944. [Received August 30.]

740.00116 EW/8–2144

[868] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 28, 1944—5 p.m.

740.00116 E.W./8–2244: Telegram

[869] Document No. C.47, 4 September, 1944: Convention for the Surrender of War Criminals and Other War Offenders and Explanatory Memorandum

September 4, 1944

740.00116 E.W./9–844

[870] The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, September 16, 1944. [Received September 22.]

740.00116 E.W./9–1644

[871] The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell)

Washington, September 18, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./8–2144

[872] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

Washington , September 20, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./8–1544

[873] The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, September 22, 1944. [Received September 29.]

740.00116 E.W./9–2244

[874] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 26, 1944—8 p.m. [Received 11 p.m.]

740.00116 EW/9–2644: Telegram

[875] Document No. C.52(1), 26 September, 1944: Recommendation in Favour of the Establishment by Supreme Military Commanders of Mixed Military Tribunals for the Trial of War Criminals

September 26, 1944

740.00116 EW/9–3044

[876] The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, September 27, 1944. [Received October 4.]

740.00116 E.W./9–2744

[877] The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, September 27, 1944. [Received October 4.]

740.00116 E.W./9–2744

[878] Press Release Issued by the Department of State, September 28, 1944

September 28, 1944

740.00116 EW/9–2844

[879] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 30, 1944—3 p.m. [Received September 30—1:53 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./9–3044: Telegram

[880] Document No. C.50(1), 30 September, 1944: Draft Convention for the Establishment of a United Nations War Crimes Court

September 30, 1944

740.00116 European War/10–244

[881] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , October 3, 1944.

740.00116 EW/10–344

[882] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , October 3, 1944.

740.00116 EW/10–344

[883] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

Washington , October 4, 1944.

740.00116 European War/8–1944

[884] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 4, 1944. [Received October 4—11:30 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./10–444: Telegram

[885] Document No. C.58, 6 October, 1944: Explanatory Memorandum to Accompany the Draft Convention for the Establishment of a United Nations War Crimes Court

October 6, 1944

740.00116 E.W./10–944

[886] Document No. C.59, 6 October, 1944: Suggestions to Accompany the Recommendation for the Establishment of Mixed Military Tribunals

October 6, 1944

740.00116 E.W./10–944

[887] Document No. C.60, 6 October, 1944: Letter From the Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Hurst) to the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Eden)

[London,] October 6, 1944.

740.00116 European War/10–944

[888] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Washington , October 13, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./10–1344

[889] The Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington , October 17, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./10–344

[890] The Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington , October 17, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./10–344

[891] The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, October 19, 1944. [Received October 24.]

740.00116 E.W./10–1944

[892] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

Washington , October 26, 1944.

740.00116 EW/10–1344

[893] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , October 30, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./10–3044

[894] The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, November 2, 1944. [Received November 9.]

740.00116 E.W./11–244

[895] The Secretary of War (Stimson) and the Secretary of the Navy (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State

Washington, November 11, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./11–1144

[896] The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, November 24, 1944. [Received December 6.]

740.00116 EW/11–2444

[897] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 25, 1944—8 p.m.

740.00116 EW/11–244: Telegram

[898] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, November 27, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 9:15 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./11–2744: Telegram

[899] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , November 28, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./11–2844

[900] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 30, 1944—5 p.m. [Received November 30—12:07 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./11–3044: Telegram

[901] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 2, 1944—1 p.m.

740.00116 EW/11–2944: Telegram

[902] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of British Commonwealth Affairs (Achilles)

[Washington,] December 2, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./11–2844

[903] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of British Commonwealth Affairs (Achilles)

[Washington,] December 6, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./11–2844

[904] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, December 7, 1944—2 p.m.

740.00116 EW/11–2744: Telegram

[905] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

[Washington,] December 7, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./12–744

[906] The Chargé in China (Atcheson) to the Secretary of State

Chungking, December 9, 1944. [Received December 28.]

740.00116 P.W./12–944

[907] The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

New York, December 11, 1944. [Received December 12.]

740.00116 E.W./12–1144

[908] The Legal Adviser (Hackworth) to the American Representative on the United Nations War Grimes Commission (Pell)

Washington, December 12, 1944.

740.00116 EW/12–1144

[909] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Washington , 12 December, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./12–1244

[910] The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

Washington, December 13, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./12–1344

[911] The Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington , December 18, 1944.

740.00116 European War/12–744

[912] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , 26 December 1944.

740.00116 E.W./12–2644

[913] The Legal Adviser (Hackworth) to the First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth)

Washington, December 27, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./12–1344

[914] The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Bathurst) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

Washington, 27 December 1944.

740.00116 EW/12–2744

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War 1939/1238: Telegram

[Document 816]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 7, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received 9:21 p.m.]

163. The wisdom of your message 8230 of December 302 was apparent before it arrived. A press report had been released on Russian participation which Mr. Pell3 tells me had presumably come from some member of the Commission talking out of turn. Mr. Pell called the news item to the attention of the Chairman. I believe that there will be less leakage at future meetings. I don’t think any harm was done.

The question of Russian conditional membership has not been formally raised at a meeting of the Commission. Mr. Eden,4 Sir Cecil Hurst5 and Mr. Pell all agree that the question of membership is the concern of governments and not of the Commission.

In discussing this point with Mr. Eden, he told me that his suggestion to the Russians of having a single representative with each republic having an advisor was not acceptable to them at the time he raised it. We might be in a stronger position to press this point with our 48 States. The Russians already know the British position. The British supporting Dominion representation makes plausible the Russian position.

Winant

2  Ibid., p. 436.

3 Herbert C. Pell, American representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission.

4 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

5 British representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission, and Chairman of the Commission.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00116 European War 1939/1238: Telegram

[Document 817]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 13, 1944—7 p.m.

329. It is not quite clear from your 163, January 7, 7 p.m. whether you intended to suggest that the Department should broach this subject to the Soviet Government.6 In any event the Department doubts the wisdom of its taking any action at this time.

Hull

6 In telegram 349, January 14, 4 p.m., the Ambassador replied that telegram 163 was forwarded simply for information (740.00116 European War 1939/1750).

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) 740.00116 European War/1193

[Document 818]

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell)

No. 2 Washington, January 15, 1944.

Sir: With reference to your telegram of December 15, 1943 (the Embassy’s no. 8726)7 stating that it is important for you to have all materials on war crimes prepared by the War Department, there is transmitted herewith a memorandum prepared in the Office of the Judge Advocate General on the subject. The War Department, in transmitting the memorandum to this Department, noted that it is classified as confidential. It stated that there is also presently in preparation in the Office of the Judge Advocate General a memorandum on cases before military commissions in which the accused were charged with violation of the laws of war and put forward the defense that they acted pursuant to orders from superior officers. When a copy of this memorandum is received from the War Department, it will be transmitted to you.

Very truly yours,

For the Secretary of State:
Breckinridge Long

[Enclosure]

Memorandum Prepared in the Office of the Judge Advocate General, War Department, October 30, 1943 8

Subject: Trial of War Criminals.

1. By memorandum dated 1 October 1943, accompanied, for my information, by a copy of a study on this subject prepared by the Office of Strategic Services, dated 10 August 1943, you informed me that the Secretary of War directs that I make recommendations for guidance in any discussions involving the possible trial of war criminals by military tribunals; that my consideration be limited to trials involving enemy nationals; and that particular attention be paid to the following matters: a. Authority to establish such tribunals.

b. Jurisdiction.

c. Enumeration of war crimes.

d. Personnel of courts.

e. Procedure (pre-trial, trial, and review).

f. Authorized sentences.

g. Punishment (nature and place of execution).

2. In view of the comprehensive nature of this reference and your statement that the matter should be expedited, I submit herewith a preliminary memorandum on the matter, discussing the enumerated matters in the order stated. a. Authority to establish such tribunals. From the point of view of the constitutional law of the United States the authority to establish military tribunals by the Army of the United States is derived by implication from various provisions of the Constitution, which implement the international law of war—the laws and customs of war (Ex parte Quirin, 317 U.S. 1, 25–28 (1942)). International law is the fundamental source of the authority, which would exist to its full extent even in the absence of relevant constitutional provisions (United States v. Curtiss-Wright Corp., 299 U.S. 304, 318 (1936); Dig. Op. JAG, 1912, pp. 1066–1067; Rules of Land Warfare, FM 27–10, par. 7; MCM, 1928, par. 1). Thus General Washington, before the adoption of the Constitution, established a counterpart of a military commission to try Major John André during the Revolution. This was done, not by virtue of any provision of the Constitution, which did not then exist, but directly under the authority of the laws and customs of war. The constitutional powers of the President as Commander-in-Chief and of Congress have been implemented by Congress in such wise as to authorize, by expression or by necessary implication, the trial of war criminals by general courts-martial, military commissions, and provost courts (A.W. 12, 15, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 32, 38, 46, 80, 81, 82, 115). In the Army of the United States military commissions have ordinarily been convened by the same officers as are authorized by Article of War 8 to convene courts-martial (Dig. Ops. JAG, 1912, p. 1070 [I–C–8a(d) (d) (1)];9 Winthrop, Military Law (1920 reprint) p. 835). In addition to national military tribunals, the use of international tribunals is authorized by international law.

b. Jurisdiction. (1) Question of Territorial Limitations: Although it has in the past been thought that the power of military commissions to hear and decide offenses against the laws of war was limited to such offenses as were alleged to have been committed within the territorial limits of the command of the convening authority (see Winthrop, Military Law (1920 reprint), p. 836), no such territorial limitation exists. The laws of war, being a part of international law, are governed by relevant customary practices of states, which have solidified into law, together with the general principles of law recognized by civilized nations. For present purposes, the pertinent law is the customary practice of military tribunals to take jurisdiction of offenses committed beyond particular territorial commands (e.g., case of Henry Wirz (1865) House Ex. Doc. No. 23, 40th Cong., 2d Sess.; case of T. E. Hogg, et. al. (1865), referred to in Winthrop p. 837; and cf. Ex parte Quirin, supra. Reflecting the same practice, Lieber wrote: “A prisoner of war remains answerable for his crimes committed against the captor’s army or people, committed before he was captured, and for which he has not been punished by his own authorities.” (G.O. 100, 24 April 1865, par. 59) Instead of being territorial, the validity of this aspect of jurisdiction is determined by physical custody of the accused, or lack of it.

(2) Limitations as to Persons: From the point of view of international law, all persons, military and civilian, charged with having committed offenses directed against the United States or our cooperating cobelligerents in violation of the laws of war are subject to the jurisdiction of military tribunals (Articles of War 12 and 15; Ex parte Quirin, supra, at 27; Dig. Ops. JAG, 1912, p. 1067; Winthrop, p. 838). Constitutional guaranties play a somewhat indefinite role in relation to those war crimes which are committed in the United States, and limit pro tanto the broad international rule. Thus the Supreme Court emphasized in Ex parte Quirin, supra, that military commissions had jurisdiction only “within constitutional limitations”. Though the Court has not defined this term, some limits are suggested by a comparison of the facts of Ex parte Milligan, 4 Wall. 2 (1867), with those of the Quirin case, and with Articles of War 81 and 82. Within the meaning of that phrase (“within constitutional limitations”), the jurisdiction of United States military tribunals over offenses against the laws of war committed in the United States extends to citizens and other nationals of the United States as well as aliens (Ex parte Quirin, supra, at 45–16). Members of our own forces are usually tried by court-martial, rather than by military commission, for war crimes alleged to have been committed by them.

(3) Limitations as to Subject Matter—Law Applicable Military tribunals in the trial of alleged war criminals, may apply: (a) General international treaties or conventions declaratory of the law of war, and particular treaties establishing rules of the law of war expressly recognized by the belligerent states;

(b) International customs of war, as evidence of a general practice accepted as law;

(c) Pertinent general principles of law, including criminal law, recognized by civilized nations;

(d) Judicial decisions and the teachings of the most highly qualified publicists of the various nations, as subsidiary means for the determination of rules of the law of war; and

(e) Local law and military regulations and orders, during military occupation.

(4) Limitations of Time: Military tribunals have jurisdiction of war criminals for offenses which take place both during time of actual hostilities and so long as a state of war continues. This includes the period of an armistice or military occupation, up to the effective date of a treaty of peace, and may extend beyond by treaty agreement.

c. Enumeration of War Crimes: A tentative, comprehensive, but not exhaustive, list of war crimes is attached hereto as Appendix A. In addition thereto attention is invited to the following Articles of War: 75, 78, 80, 81, and 82. No exhaustive list can be drawn up, inasmuch as some war crimes arise directly from violations of the broad general principles of the laws of war. This fact is important in view of the ingenuity shown by Nazi leaders in the treatment of the civilian population in countries occupied by them. The principles may be stated and illustrated as follows: (1) Outrages or unnecessary violence against persons or property, including action which amounts to a ruthless disregard of human life or its vital necessities, such as acts of brutality causing unnecessary suffering or suffering inflicted for spite or revenge;

(2) atrocities;

(3) torture;

(4) deliberate deprivation of necessary food, shelter, or clothing beyond the proper military necessities;

(5) cruelty generally;

(6) acts of a treacherous or heinous nature;

(7) acts of perfidy, including perfidious ruses;

(8) acts or omissions causing direct and unnecessary bodily harm or such injury by calculated indirection;

(9) dishonorable expedients, such as the degradation of persons;

(10) wanton or unnecessary destruction or devastation of property by organized troops or marauders;

(11) acts or omissions, recognized as crimes by all important systems of criminal law, which are committed in connection with the execution of the war.

It should be observed, however, that not all violations of treaty provisions concerning the laws of war are war crimes. An illustration will suffice: Article 6 of the Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War provides that, with certain exceptions, effects and objects of personal use of prisoners of war shall remain in their possession (FM 27–10, par. 79). During the transportation of prisoners of war or at other times, it may be necessary for the custodian of prisoners of war to store such objects. If, through the clear negligence of such a storekeeper, the property were lost or destroyed there might well be a violation of the treaty provision, but it would, in no sense, be a war crime.

d. Personnel of Courts: Lieber pointed out that the character of the courts which exercise jurisdiction under the laws of war “depends upon the local laws of each particular country” (G.O. 100, 24 April 1863, par. 13). It has been customary to try war criminals by military tribunals. In the United States, the personnel of military commissions and provost courts have usually been commissioned officers of the United States. There is, however, no legal objection to the use of qualified civilians or enlisted men (Winthrop, p. 835). Alleged German war criminals were tried by German civilian judges for offenses committed during World War I. The same point is implicit in paragraph 356 of Field Manual 27–10 of the Rules of Land Warfare, which states that no individual should be punished for a violation of the laws of war except by a military tribunal “or some other tribunal of competent jurisdiction”. A military tribunal with mixed inter-allied personnel may properly be established by the commanding officer of cooperating cobelligerent forces. Whether national or mixed international military tribunals are used to administer the laws of war is a question of policy only. The use of a national tribunal has the practical advantage that the members of such a tribunal are familiar with and may readily follow the established military law and procedure of their own country; whereas, before an international tribunal may function, during its sessions, and while its sentences are under execution, many novel, difficult, and time-consuming questions will arise and have to be solved as to its appointment, composition, procedure, and powers.

No particular number of members of a military tribunal is required for the trial of war crimes. In United States practice the number has varied from three to thirteen. Five was the usual number for military commissions established during the Civil War. Seven members were appointed to the commission which tried the saboteurs in 1942.

No law member is required to sit on a military tribunal, and no officer was so designated in the recent saboteur trial, but the appointment of a law member would be lawful and may be desirable. The prosecuting officer need not be a Judge Advocate or officer of the Army. The Attorney General, a civilian, was a member of the “prosecution” in the saboteur case. John A. Bingham, a civilian, was introduced as an “Assistant or Special Judge Advocate” in the trial, by military commission, of the conspirators in the assassination of President Lincoln (Pitman, The Assassination of President Lincoln and the Trial of the Conspirators, (1865) p. 18).

e. Procedure (pre-trial, trial, and review): A proposed code of procedure for trial by military commission is presently being prepared by this office. It will be submitted with the full reply of this office to the reference in this case or as soon thereafter as it is completed. In the meantime your attention is invited to the following Articles of War, as they relate to the procedure of military tribunals designed to apply the laws of war: 24, 25, 26, 27, 38, 46, 115. See also Manual for Courts-Martial (1928), par. 2. With regard to possible variations in respect of the admissibility of evidence, the number of votes required to convict, and the mode of review, the following excerpt, from the order of the President establishing the military commission for the trial of the saboteurs, is informative: “The Commission shall have power to and shall, as occasion requires, make such rules for the conduct of the proceedings, consistent with the powers of Military Commissions under the Articles of War, as it shall deem necessary for a full and fair trial of the matters before it. Such evidence shall be admitted as would, in the opinion of the President of the Commission, have probative value to a reasonable man. The concurrence of at least two-thirds of the Members of the Commission present shall be necessary for a conviction or sentence. The record of the trial including any judgment or sentence shall be transmitted directly to me for my action thereon.” (7 F.R. 5103)

During trial, pleas in bar on the ground of superior orders and that alleged offenses were committed as a matter of reprisal may be expected. The nature of these defenses, which is fundamental, will be dealt with comprehensively in the full memorandum in reply to this reference. In the meantime your attention is invited to a discussion of the same problem, though specifically related to martial law, set forth in Chapter IX of Wiener, A Practical Manual of Martial Law.

f. Authorized Sentences: The law on this point is well summed up as follows in the Field Manual on the Rules of Land Warfare: “All war crimes are subject to the death penalty, although a lesser penalty may be imposed. The punishment should be deterrent, and in imposing a sentence of imprisonment it is not necessary to take into consideration the end of the war, which does not necessarily limit the imprisonment to be imposed.” (FM 27–10, par. 357; to the same effect see British Manual (Ch. 14) par. 450 and G.O. 100, 24 April 1863, par. 44). The following is a good statement of authorized sentences, summarizing United States practice: “Except in a case of a spy whose sentence must be death (sec. 1343, R.S.), the discretion of the military commission in the imposition of sentence is not in terms restricted or defined by the existing law. R. 7, 62, Jan., 1864. The sentence, however, should award a criminal punishment; a judgment of debt or damages, on conviction of a criminal offense, would be irregular and property disapproved. R. 3,190, July, 1863. Where a military commission was acting under the reconstruction laws, practically as a substitute for a state criminal court, held that it should, in general, in determining the proper measure of punishment to be inflicted, take into consideration the State statute law, if any, prescribing the penalty or penalties for the offense. R. 29,406, Nov. 1869; C. 12397, Apr. 10, 1902” (Dig. Ops. JAG, 1912, p. 1072).

While general courts-martial may, under A.W. 12, try any person subject to the laws of war, they may not give the death penalty except in cases where the Articles of War specifically so provide (A.W. 43).

g. Punishment (nature and place of execution): There are no limits on the nature of the punishment, except that they must not be of a cruel or unusual nature. Banishment, however, would not be an unusual punishment for a war crime. A death sentence may be executed by means of shooting, hanging, electrocution, or other means not involving unnecessary cruelty. For sentences less than death, the choice of a place of incarceration is not limited, except that such a place must comply with the minimum international standards for such institutions. For types of sentences and punishments which have been imposed, see Winthrop, pp. 842–844.

3. As noted in paragraph 2 hereof, one or more supplementary memoranda will hereafter be submitted to you.

Thomas H. Green
Brigadier General, U.S. Army Acting The Judge Advocate General.

Appendix A

Tentative List of War Crimes

Use of civilian clothing by troops to conceal their military character during battle.

Disguised poisoning of wells or streams.

Making use of poisoned or otherwise forbidden arms or ammunition, such as explosive or expanding bullets.

Firing on the flag of truce.

Misuses or abuse of the flag of truce.

Refusal of quarter, or directions to give no quarter.

Treacherous request for quarter.

Deliberate destruction of religious, charitable, educational, and historic buildings and monuments.

Deliberate firing on or bombardment of undefended places.

Maltreatment of dead bodies on the battlefield.

Employment of prisoners of war on unauthorized work.

Unnecessarily harsh treatment of women and children.

Abduction of children.

Abduction of girls and women with the object of prostitution.

Mass deportation, unrelated to bona fide military necessity.

Systematic terrorism.

Attempts to denationalize the inhabitants of occupied territory.

Deportation of civil population in occupied territories and forced labor.

Compulsory enlistment of civilians in enemy forces, or of soldiers among the inhabitants of occupied territory, or their use in dangerous or unhealthful war work.

Forced labor of civilians in connection with the military operations of the enemy, such as use of civilians as a screen for troops, or for clearing mine fields or removing mines, or for any other work immediately connected with actual fighting.

Causing death by wilful starvation of populations by excessive removal of foodstuffs or by depriving persons of shelter, clothing or other means of sustenance.

Killing or ill-treatment of wounded or prisoners of war.

Causing death of civilians or prisoners of war by compelling the sick and wounded to work.

Inhuman internment or unnecessary segregation.

Torture of troops or civilians in any form.

Ill-treatment of inhabitants in occupied territory.

Wanton devastation or destruction of property.

Pillage and plunder.

Confiscation of property.

Imposition of collective penalties, except as legitimate reprisal.

Exaction of illegitimate or of exhorbitant contributions and requisitions.

Breach of parole by prisoners of war.

Attack on or destruction of hospital ships.

Causing death of survivors by giving orders destined to prevent the saving of their lives, when such saving was possible.

Destruction of relief ships.

Wilful or reckless bombardment of hospitals and other privileged buildings.

Improper use of privileged buildings for military purposes.

Misuse of the Red Cross flag and emblem and other violations of the Geneva Convention of a criminal nature, including failure to respect the status of protected personnel.

Destruction of merchant ships and passenger vessels without warning and without provision for the safety of passengers or crew.

Destruction of fishing boats.

Omission of a superior officer to prevent war crimes when he is aware of their commission and is in a position to prevent them.

Individuals engaging in guerrilla warfare, sabotage, and spying are subject to the death penalty.

The laying of delayed-action mines, at the time of retreat, in places which will presumptively be used largely by the civilian population.

Murder, rape, and other felonies are also triable as war crimes.

7 Not printed.

8 Filed separately under 740.00116 European War/1227.

9 Brackets appear in the original.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/1258

[Document 819]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 19, 1944.
[Received January 19—7:32 p.m.]

514. From Pell. Following conference at Foreign Office, Commission was organized formally at meeting held January 18. Rules of organization and procedure were adopted. Foreign Office ready to drop proposed technical committee provided governments concur. All members agree that Commission is adequate. Consensus is that Commission should take broad view of functions and make recommendations to governments on means of enforcement, including choice of tribunals. Refer to Embassy’s 8504, December 6 [7] and your 8229 December 30.11 Request authorization that Mr. Preuss12 act as alternate at any meeting or part thereof. Detailed report follows.13 [Pell.]

Winant

11  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 432 and 435, respectively.

12 Lawrence Preuss, divisional assistant (legal) in the Division of International Security and Organization; detailed to assist the American representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission until April 1944.

13 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/1277: Telegram

[Document 820]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 27, 1944.
[Received January 27—8:39 a.m.]

716. From Pell. At meeting of War Crimes Commission January 25, Norwegian representative reported that his Government would be willing to have all work relating to war crimes centralized in present Commission and that it considered technical committee superfluous. Chinese, Australian, Belgian, Dutch and Polish representatives said the same. Chairman Hurst concurred for Great Britain. No disagreement was expressed. [Pell.]

Winant

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00116 European War/1258: Telegram

[Document 821]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 27, 1944—5 p.m.

673. For Pell. The Department has no objection to allowing Mr. Preuss to act as alternate at meetings of Commission as suggested your 514, January 19.

Matter of dropping technical committee has not been brought to Department’s attention by the British Government. Your detailed report not yet received.

Hull

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/1308

[Document 822]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

No. 13526 London, January 27, 1944.
[Received February 8.]

Sir: I have the honor to report at various meetings of the War Crimes Commission, and in private discussions among the members, there has been a certain amount of talk of the so called Technical Committee, which was proposed at the meeting of the diplomatic representatives in London before my arrival. At the time of this proposal the whole situation was very vague.

Sixteen representatives have so far been appointed to the War Crimes Commission,14 which has met and in order to carry on its work at all has done a good deal of the work which might have been referred to the Technical Committee had it been called into existence. The majority of the members of the Commission feel that the Commission itself is quite able to handle the entire question of war guilt, and it appears to be the opinion of their governments, including that of Great Britain, that the work would be better done by a single organization with a few special standing committees.

The Chairman suggested the uselessness of the Technical Committee, and at the meeting Tuesday, January 25, as reported in my telegram 716, Norway, China, Belgium, Australia, Poland and Great Britain concurred in this point of view.

The Commission has decided to appoint committees to consider the various aspects of the work and to bring in recommendations. These committees will examine the facts of all cases of outrages presented by the various governments to the Commission, and will recommend what is to be done with them.

It seems to be the unanimous opinion that offences committed against the citizens of any one country, or against their property, would be reserved for consideration and trial in the courts of the offended country. This would apply not only to Germans, Japanese or other foreigners, but with a special force to those citizens who have cooperated with the enemy. There remain, however not only the high German officials, but a good many more in lower places, who have committed offences against more than one nation, whose disposition will have to be decided. It is generally assumed that the interested governments will set up some sort of a tribunal to take care of cases which do not fall within the jurisdiction of any particular nation. Questions of capture, and the particularly thorny one of extradition, will, of course, be settled by joint action of the governments concerned. In its consideration of these matters the Commission may make some recommendations binding on nobody.

I am, myself, convinced that unless some serious preparation be made for the just punishment of ascertained offenders, we will see a carnival of massacre, when Germany is finally entered by the troops of nations which have for four years suffered from the excessive brutality of foreign occupation. These men will not be restrained by the hope that in the future something may be done. It will be difficult enough to keep them in order if they know that the machinery is prepared and ready to start.

Respectfully,

Herbert Pell

14 For list of the personnel of the United Nations War Crimes Commission, see History of the United, Nations War Crimes Commission and Development of the Laws of War (London, His Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1948), Appendix I, pp. 499 ff.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00116 European War 1839/1301

[Document 823]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

War Criminals

His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom have been considering the question of the definition of the distinction between war crimes to be dealt with by summary military jurisdiction by commanders in the field and war crimes to be dealt with by the machinery of the United Nations Commission for Investigation of War Crimes. A paraphrase of a telegram from the Foreign Office on this subject is attached.

2. The Foreign Office have also had under consideration the question of a procedure for bringing cases and evidence related thereto to the Commission, and the suggestion has been made that Circular APO 512 issued by Allied Force Headquarters, Algiers on November 27th, 1943,15 might provide a useful model for this purpose.

Washington , 3 February, 1944.

[Enclosure]

Paraphrase of Telegram from the Foreign Office

We think it would be desirable to seek agreement with the United States authorities on the procedure for dealing with captured war criminals. The British Chiefs of Staff agree with us that an early attempt should be made to coordinate the British and American policy in this matter with a view to the issuing of common instructions to all commanders in British, American and Anglo-American theatre of operations to ensure that as far as possible the same principles are followed everywhere.

2. In our view the crux of the matter is to decide where a distinction should be drawn between crimes to be dealt with by summary military jurisdiction by commanders in the field on the one hand, and crimes to be dealt with by the machinery of the United Nations Commission for the investigation of war crimes on the other. It seems to us that this distinction should be drawn between war crimes committed in the course of operations which the commander is actually conducting and those not so committed. In the first case every commander possesses the right to try by appropriate military tribunal and punish on the spot such offences committed against his command. There can be no question of depriving commanders of the use of this right and we do not think it can in any way be considered to impinge upon the procedure of the United Nations Commission. In such cases the necessary evidence would presumably be available on the spot, and there is no need to refer cases to the Commission on this ground; the objective being speedy trial and punishment.

3. In cases where evidence was in no way connected with operations which the commander is conducting, and where his only concern arises from the fact that the accused happens to have fallen into his hands, it is probable that the necessary evidence would not be available on the spot. There would therefore inevitably be delay and there would seem no reason why such cases should not go before the Commission in the ordinary way.

4. An example may illustrate the distinction. If a commander captured a German who had committed offences against prisoners of war a short time before or during operations he would be tried on the spot. If, however, the German were accused of committing such offences a considerable time before, e.g. at a prison camp remote from the scene of operations the details of the case would be reported to the Commission in the normal way.

February 2, 1944.

15  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 429.

The Acting Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Grimes Commission (Pell) 740.00116 European War/1299

[Document 824]

The Acting Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Grimes Commission (Pell)

No. 6 Washington, February 15, 1944.

Sir: Reference is made to your despatches nos. 13399 and 13419 of January 20 and 21,16 respectively, regarding the matter of allowing the Commission to perform the duties which it was originally thought might be performed by a Technical Committee and the nature of the evidence to be submitted to tribunals before which war criminals will be tried.

The Department has sent you a telegram17 stating that it has no objection to allowing the Commission to make recommendations regarding the nature of the tribunals and procedure to be followed, etc., which the British Government originally suggested should be left to a Technical Committee, provided the other Governments think that this would be a preferable procedure. The Department calls attention to the fact, however, that, as previously stated, the proposal was made by the British Government, and it would seem that if that Government desires to depart from that proposal it should make a statement in the same manner in which the proposal was made rather than have the matter discussed repeatedly by the Commission, as seems to have been the situation. However, the Department has no desire to stand on formalities but does desire that there should be a definite and clear understanding before the duties of the Commission are enlarged.

The Department does not consider that the nature of the evidence to be collected and submitted will be determined by the nature of the tribunals which may be called upon to consider it. While there may be some variation between tribunals as to the admissibility and sufficiency of evidence, it should be the purpose of the Commission—whose primary duty it is to make investigations and assemble the evidence—to obtain the best possible evidence under all the circumstances in each case, and this without regard to the question as to the tribunal which may eventually be called upon to appraise the evidence.

There has been an exchange of communications between you and the Department regarding the possible use by you of a draft agreement, prepared in the Department, regarding the punishment of war criminals,18 such possible use being premised upon the further possibility that the Commission might be given the jurisdiction originally intended for the proposed Technical Committee. If such jurisdiction is conferred upon the Commission, you may cautiously use the draft in connection with discussions of the subject, on the understanding, as stated in the Department’s telegram no. 8229 of December 30, 1943,19 that the draft has not had the approval of the Department and has not been passed upon by other than the Committee which prepared it. It will be noted that the cardinal feature of the draft is an international tribunal to be composed of civilian jurists assisted by trial courts. In view of trends of thought which have since developed, and particularly in view of the Moscow Declaration,20 the Department is of the opinion that a simpler and more expeditious method of handling most of the cases may well be devised. It must be borne in mind that if these trials are not brought to a conclusion within a short period following the close of the war there will be every disposition to allow them to fade out with the lapse of time and the net result may be no more praiseworthy than that which followed the close of the first World War.

The Department’s present tentative view as to the procedure to be considered is as follows: (1) As many cases as possible, consistent with orderly procedure, should be disposed of by the military or civil tribunals of the respective countries against whose nationals the offenses were committed;

(2) Where offenses have been committed against nationals of different countries consideration should be given to the possibility of mixed military tribunals, that is to say, if an offender has committed offenses against nationals of two or more of the United Nations, he might be tried before a military tribunal on which each nation would be represented. At this point you might well consider the memorandum prepared by the Office of the Judge Advocate General, which was transmitted to you with the Department’s instruction no. 2 of January 15, 1944;

(3) As a possible alternative to the procedure just suggested in paragraph 2, or possibly in addition to that procedure, consideration might be given to an international tribunal composed of civilian jurists to try mixed cases, i.e., those involving offenses against nationals of more than one country, or cases in which higher officials are charged with ultimate responsibility for policies and practices executed by subordinates.

It is to be borne in mind that while a tribunal of the character last-mentioned might in the long run command greater respect, it is likely to be more deliberate in its operations and hence lend itself in greater measure to dilatory tactics which would undoubtedly be resorted to by accused persons and their counsel. Here lies the danger, referred to above, of prolonging trials until the general interest in the administration of international justice will have subsided and the culprits will have all the advantages resulting from a lapse of time.

These are but rough suggestions submitted for your guidance in order that you may know that the draft on the punishment of war criminals, referred to above, is not to be considered as the last word in the Department’s thinking.

Very truly yours,

Edward R. Stettinius, Jr.

16 Neither printed; despatch 13390 was a confirmation of telegram 514, January 19, p. 1274 [Pg. 1274 includes portions of Doc. 819, Doc. 820, and Doc. 821]; despatch No. 13419 transmitted the minutes of the January 18 meeting.

17 Telegram 1077, February 11, to London, not printed.

18 Not found in Department files; but see Document 11/11, 14 April 1944: Draft Convention on the Trial and Punishment of War Criminals, p. 1299 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 834].

19  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 435.

20 Declaration of German Atrocities, ibid., p. 768.

Document No. C.7(1) : First Report of Committee I (Facts and Evidence) as Adopted at the 10th Meeting of the United Nations War Crimes Commission, 22 February, 1944 740.00116 European War 1939/1343

[Document 825]

Document No. C.7(1) : First Report of Committee I (Facts and Evidence) as Adopted at the 10th Meeting of the United Nations War Crimes Commission, 22 February, 1944 21

February 22, 1944

Preparation and Presentation of Cases of War Crimes to the Commission

As a result of examining a certain number of cases which have been transmitted to the Commission, Committee I proposes that the Commission should call the attention of the National Offices to the following points: 1. In the opinion of the Commission the papers sent to it in any particular case should state: (1) What is the offence alleged?

(2) Can the offender be identified?

(3) What was the degree of responsibility of the offender having regard to his position?

(4) Was the offence committed on the offender’s own initiative or in obedience to orders, or in carrying out a system or legal disposition?

(5) What evidence is available in support of the charge?

(6) Any indication of the probable defence.

(7) Whether the case appears to be reasonably complete.

2. It is desirable that in transmitting a charge the National Office should, in addition to specifying the heading in the List of War Crimes under which the charge falls, indicate what provisions, if any, of the national criminal law (whether civil or military) have been infringed by the accused.

3. It is understood that it may in some instances be impossible, for reasons of security, to identify a witness or witnesses by name in the documents transmitted to the Commission, but the National Offices are requested at least to state, in general terms, the evidence or information on which the charge is based; and all necessary information in regard to the witnesses should be available for communication orally to Committee I or to the Commission, if they are requested.

4. Committee I would be grateful if the National Offices would supply at least four copies of each case transmitted to the Commission—carbon copies on thin paper will suffice—in addition to the signed original.

5. It is important that the cases should be marked, in the place provided in the Form (i.e. “Charge No. . . . . .”) with national serial numbers indicating the way in which the charges are filed by the National Offices. The object is to provide a fool-proof method by which the cases can be identified in any correspondence relating to them between the Commission and the Offices. Unless this is done, cases may be confused with one another, particularly where the name of the accused is not known.

6. Titles, whether military or civil, and the names of military, naval and air formations, units, government departments or organisations etc. should not be translated, but should be left in their original language, with or without a translation, in order that they may be correctly stated in the Commission’s list of persons charged with war crimes.

7. Reference to prisoners of war camps, should show, if possible, (a) whether the camp is one for officers or for other ranks,

(b) the official number or description,

(c) the country in which the camp is situated and its exact location.

8. In view of the possible death or disappearance of witnesses, or of their geographical dispersal, and of the deliberate destruction of evidence by the Axis in occupied countries, the Commission wishes to call the attention of the National Offices to the necessity of recording at once, while it is still available, evidence of war crimes in an authentic form, with a view not merely to the work of the Commission but also to prosecution for such crimes before the competent tribunals.

21 Transmitted to the Department by the American Representative on the Commission in his despatch 14138, February 29, 1944; received March 8.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/1332: Telegram

[Document 826]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, February 25, 1944—1 p.m.
[Received February 26—9 p.m.]

1566. The communication quoted below has just been received from the Foreign Office. The conclusions reached are in harmony with the position which you directed me to take in opposition to the establishment of a separate Technical Committee of Legal Experts. It was partly because of my intervention and suggestion in collaboration with Mr. Pell and Mr. Eden that the following procedure has been recommended by the British Secretary of State. I hope the Department will concur in these recommendations. The text of the communication dated February 24 is as follows: “You will recall that at the meeting of Allied diplomatic representatives held at the Foreign Office on the 20th October 1943 to make arrangements for the establishment of the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes,23 it was agreed that it would be desirable to set up in due course, in addition to the Commission, a Technical Committee of Legal Experts to make recommendations to the governments concerned upon matters of a politico-legal nature relating to the punishment of war criminals. It was, however, at the same time agreed that the actual establishment of this Committee should be deferred.

2. His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom understand that the consensus of opinion among the members of the United Nations Commission now is that the most suitable procedure would be for the Commission itself to consider and make recommendations upon these general questions and for no Technical Committee of the nature originally proposed to be established. It appears that the Commission has already agreed to set up three sub-committees to consider respectively (1) Facts and evidence; (2) means and methods of enforcement; (3) legal questions.

3. Having regard to the views of the members of the Commission upon this subject, His Majesty’s Government are in the circumstances inclined to agree that their proposal for the establishment of a Technical Committee should not be proceeded with and that the functions with which it was originally proposed that the Technical Committee should be entrusted should now be assumed by the Commission itself. His Majesty’s Government consider that it would be convenient if any government represented on the Commission were at liberty to send a special representative, should it so desire, to sit with the members of the Commission when matters of this nature are under discussion, and they assume that this would present no difficulty. They would be glad to receive confirmation that Your Excellency’s Government is in agreement with this course.”24

Winant

23 See telegram 7238, October 21, 1943, from London, Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 421.

24 The Department’s concurrence was transmitted in telegram 1629, March 4, 2 p.m., to London (740.00116 European War/1332).

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/1344

[Document 827]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

No. 14144 London, February 29, 1944.
[Received March 8.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that at the meeting of the War Crimes Commission’s Committee on Means of Enforcement, held on Friday, February 25, the subject of an international enforcement organization was taken up in general debate.

Lord Atkin, a British Law Lord representing Australia, said that he considered a court to be necessary to provide jurisdiction over cases which cannot be appropriately dealt with by national tribunals, and especially over Germans, for crimes committed against Jews, etc. He suggested as a subject for future discussion the questions of what law such an organization will administer, what crimes it will try and what will be its constitution. He thinks that all trials should be conducted by legal standards and suggested a group of trained judges with some lay members, especially soldiers. He also suggested that any tribunal should have on its bench a judge of the offended country. It would be manifest that a single agency would not be sufficient to try all cases and that the judicial body must be divided into separate groups. He was definitely opposed to juries.

We must also decide on how judges are to be selected. The question of evidence, he considered, should be left to the third committee of the War Crimes Commission on Legal Questions.

Ambassador Colban, of Norway, said that the Norwegian officials of justice believe that a court of some sort will be necessary.

General de Baer, representing Belgium, said that the Belgian Minister of Justice also believes in the necessity of a court. He mentioned that the court should have jurisdiction over those accused by one or more nations; over crimes committed in Germany and the crimes against stateless persons, or those persecuted for religion or race. He also advocated the division of the court into groups and opposed the idea of a jury. His most novel suggestion was that the court should have jurisdiction over nationals of the United Nations if their national government for any reason preferred that they should be so tried. He suggested the possibility in Belgium of political repercussions among the Flemish element if too many of them came before Belgian courts.

Mr. Ecer, of Czechoslovakia, believed that the Czech Minister wanted a court. He mentioned that it had been suggested that the more important of the members of the Axis Government should be punished by executive act and not tried in a court. He believed that the court should try all types of war criminals, irrespective of rank, and expressed the fear that unless adequate machinery of justice were provided the result would be the universal application of indiscriminate lynch law.

Mr. Gros, of France, said that we must have a court to cover gaps in national laws. Some crimes on the list of war crimes suggested sometime ago to the Commission, are not, he said, punishable under French law. He also thought we were not attempting to set up an international criminal court but a special court for the trial of crimes arising from the war, which need not be a permanent organization.

Dr. de Moor, representing the Netherlands, said that the Dutch Foreign Ministry believes that a court is necessary. He thought that it should have limited jurisdiction and be organized primarily to fill gaps in national legislation and decide questions of a dual or concurrent jurisdiction. He wanted the punishable crimes to be accurately defined on the list of war crimes. He said that plundering was the only one that was clearly covered by Dutch law, although about twenty were indirectly covered. For example, massacre can be tried as murder. He also thought that we should have a big blanket clause to cover new offenses. He feared the propaganda effect of a public trial of Hitler, and other more important members of the Axis Government. Ambassador Colban here interposed an iteration of the suggestion of Mr. Gros, that the court should be temporary and ad hoc.

Mr. Preuss, the last to speak, made a masterly summing up of the situation. He was much impressed by the evident unity on important matters expressed by members of the Committee, and was convinced that a court is necessary. He feared that in certain countries there would be a rapid softening up of feeling after the war which would make trial by national courts exclusively either a farce or extremely un-uniform. He reminded the Committee that in 1919 the Commissioners of the United States had desired a joint Military Commission, and had not opposed the establishment of judicial machinery by the Allied and Associated Powers. He believed that general public opinion in the United States was in favor of trial by an international court and was opposed to merely political action. He suggested the proposal prepared by the United States Government25 to cover gaps in the legislation of the various nations. He pointed out that persons extradited from neutral countries should be exclusively tried by the international court, basing this suggestion on the perfectly tenable point that neutral governments would be much more likely to surrender refugees to an international organization than to national courts. He suggested that no list of crimes could be exhaustive, and that there was need for an omnibus clause to cover new manifestations of war crimes. He continued with the thought that there should be a fairly large number of judges which could be increased and could be divided into chambers, and proposed that each country should nominate three judges from whom the court would be selected.

Dr. Liang, speaking for the Chinese Representative, believed that a court would be necessary.

It will be noted that I, as Chairman of the Committee, was the only member who did not take an active part in the discussion. I confined myself to directing the course of debate and occasional suggestions, which prevented it from leaving the subject.

It must be realized that all through this discussion the members of the Committee have used the word “international court” simply as a convenient phrase referring to some sort of an organization for the trial of those accused of war crimes. No opinion has crystallized either in favor or against a body composed exclusively of jurists or some sort of a military tribunal. Most of the Commission seem to prefer a combination of both. My own opinion is that there must be a judicial body, however composed, preferably of jurists, soldiers and laymen. The reason I suggest laymen on such a body is that they would be less likely to consider the immediate case before them quite alone and regardless of future consequences to the peace of the world. Such a body must recognize itself to be primarily a part of the machinery organized to make the outbreak of future wars less probable. For this reason I am opposed to the idea of direct political action in the case of the more important members of the Axis Government.

Respectfully,

Herbert Pell

25 Not found in Department files; but see Document II/11, 14 April, p. 1299 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 834].

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War 1939/1346

[Document 828]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

No. 14173 London, March 2, 1944.
[Received March 10.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that at the eleventh meeting of the War Crimes Commission, held on Tuesday, February 29, 1944, Mr. Gros, representing France, asked whether countries not represented on the Commission could send in reports of war crimes which they had suffered, and other information. He suggested the example of Brazil. Incidentally, Mr. Gros was stationed in Brazil, in the French service, for some time, and is married to a Brazilian. Sir Cecil Hurst, Chairman of the Commission, said that he would find out, and asked if Mr. Gros knew, for sure, whether or not Brazil wanted to join. Mr. Gros said yes; that he had definite information that Brazil was anxious to join the Commission.

Some member of the Commission, I could not see who, asked about Abyssinia. Chairman Hurst suggested that the Commission could not issue invitations ex motu proprio. He suggested that the Commission should recommend invitations to the various Governments to become members of the Commission. I suggested that it would be better for the individual members to enquire of their particular Governments, and ask for instructions.

Mr. Preuss brought up the case of Cuba, San Salvador, Panama and various other American Governments, which were at war with Germany, and suggested that it would be invidious to select some and leave out others. I suggested that too large a Commission might be unwieldy.

As a result of this meeting, Chairman Hurst will discuss the question with the British Foreign Office, and will report on the situation. He referred to the Russian question.

Respectfully,

Herbert Pell

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) 740.00116 European War 1939/1315

[Document 829]

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell)

No. 7 Washington, March 13, 1944.

Sir: Reference is made to your despatch no. 13754 of February 8, 194426 requesting instructions on certain questions which you think are likely to arise in the forthcoming discussions in the War Crimes Commission.

(1) You raise the question as to the earliest date on which a war crime could have been committed. On this point the Department is willing that you refer for purposes of discussion to the view expressed by the Legal Subcommittee as set forth in Policy Summary, Document H2016, May 28, 1943,27 cited in your despatch under reference. As indicated in the Department’s instruction 3514 dated December 22, 1943,26 this document and the others transmitted to you on that date do not necessarily represent the final view of the Department. It is suggested that in the determination of the date as of which war crimes shall be made punishable the Commission might desire to consider the possibility of adopting different dates for the European and Far Eastern theaters of war. Perhaps the date suggested in the Policy Summary might be considered for the Far Eastern Theater and September 1, 1939 be considered for the war in Europe.

(2) You suggest that discussions will probably be held regarding the apprehension of war criminals demanded for trial, a problem which will include the question of extradition of war criminals from neutral countries. As you are aware, the British, Soviet and United States Governments last summer approached the governments of the principal neutral states on the question of asylum for war criminals.28 A summary of the replies received was enclosed in the Department’s instruction no. 1 dated January 15, 1944.26 The practical problem of the apprehension in and extradition from neutral countries of war criminals will of course be determined by the attitude of the governments of those countries at the end of the war. Extradition treaties usually except from their provisions offenses denominated as political in character. Some of the countries may claim that war crimes fall within this category. However, the matter is receiving consideration.

(3) The third question raised in your despatch relates to the tribunal before which war criminals are to be tried. The Department’s tentative views on this subject have been indicated in its instruction no. 6 dated February 15, 1944.

In regard to your question as to the rule to be applied in the case of a person who is demanded by two countries, it appears to be inadvisable to lay down a hard and fast rule. Generally speaking, it would seem that a criminal should be surrendered to the country making the more serious charge. The question of the available evidence would have to be taken into consideration, since it is conceivable that the country making the more serious charge would lack the evidence on which to base a prosecution.

(4) You inquire whether acts by German authorities against German nationals actively opposed to the existing German Government are to be considered as war crimes. The Department is of the opinion that to assume to punish officials of enemy governments for action taken against their own nationals pursuant to their own laws would constitute an assumption of jurisdiction probably unwarranted under international law. The Moscow Declaration refers specifically to “atrocities, massacres and cold-blooded mass executions which are being perpetrated by the Hitlerite forces in the many countries they have overrun”.

(5) Finally you call attention to the problem of the potentially large number of war criminals, pointing out that the people of the occupied countries will not be satisfied with the trial of only a few “supreme criminals”, as indicated by Mr. Terje Wold, the Norwegian Minister of Justice. The number of criminals brought to trial presumably will be dependent on the nature of the evidence assembled and the possibility of preparing individual cases.

Very truly yours,

Cordell Hull

26 Not printed.

27 Not found in Department files. For a later view of the Department on the beginning of the war in the Far East, see instruction 19, July 15, p. 1333 [Pg. 1333 includes portions of Doc. 850 and Doc. 851].

26 Not printed.

28 See Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 460 ff.; see also post, pp. 1410 [Pg. 1410 is part of Doc. 915] ff.

26 Not printed.

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War 1939/1355

[Document 830]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

No. 153

His Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State, and has the honour to invite Mr. Hull’s attention to the following matter, on which an expression of the views of the Department of State is desired.

2. His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom have recently been considering the procedure for dealing with German war crimes against Italians. The Moscow Declaration on German atrocities contained references to such crimes and the Italian Government, it is felt, may well look to the major Allies to help them to secure redress for them. Moreover, as the campaign in Italy proceeds, information relating to such crimes is likely to come into the hands of Allied Commanders. There is no agreed procedure for dealing with such information, and German crimes against Italians do not at present fall within the scope of the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes, which has hitherto been intended to deal only with war crimes committed by the enemy against nationals of the United Nations.

3. His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom assume that there can be no question of giving an Italian representative a seat upon the Commission. It has been the aim hitherto to restrict membership to those of the United Nations most closely concerned with war crimes committed during the present war. On this basis His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom have resisted pressure to give a seat to an Ethiopian representative. It would seem that to arrange for Italian representation would make it impossible to resist other demands for extension of the Commission’s membership. There would be a further anomaly that the Commission would be dealing with crimes committed both by and against Italians.

4. In view, however, of Italy’s co-belligerent status, His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom suggest that it might be possible to arrange, without undue objection on the part of the other Allies concerned, for German crimes against Italians to be considered by the Commission as at present constituted. It would in their view be preferable that the Italian Government should not be placed in direct contact with the Commission for this purpose. His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom feel that it would be undesirable to give the Italian Government an opportunity of entering into discussion with the Allied Governments on general questions relating to the treatment of war criminals, or of raising the question of what help Italy might expect from the Allies in implementing the Moscow Declaration. His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom would accordingly propose that they and/or the United States Government, as being the authorities into whose hands information relating to such crimes is most likely to fall, should act as the agents of the Italian Government and themselves pass on such information to the Commission on the Italian Government’s behalf.

5. The above suggestions are, of course, put forward on an entirely tentative basis. If some such course were agreed upon between the United States Government and His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom, it would, it is presumed, be necessary to ask the concurrence of the other Allied Governments represented upon the Commission. The Italian Government might then be informed of the arrangements proposed, and suitable instructions forwarded to the Allied authorities in Italy.

6. Viscount Halifax would be glad to receive in due course any comments which Mr. Hull may have to make on the suggestion put forward above.

Washington , 15 March, 1944.

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Grimes Commission (Pell) 740.00116 European War 1939/1344

[Document 831]

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Grimes Commission (Pell)

No. 8 Washington, March 18, 1944.

Sir: The receipt is acknowledged of your despatch no. 14144 dated February 29, 1944 concerning the discussion of an international enforcement organization at the meeting of the Committee on Means of Enforcement on February 25. Apparently your despatch and the Department’s instruction no. 6 dated February 15, 1944 crossed in the mails. The instruction referred to summarizes the Department’s tentative views on the subject.

Very truly yours,

Cordell Hull

The Department of State to the British Embassy 740.00116 European War 1939/1301

[Document 832]

The Department of State to the British Embassy

Memorandum

The British Embassy’s Aide-mémoire of February 3, 1944 raised the question of the distinction between war crimes to be dealt with by summary military jurisdiction by commanders in the field and war crimes to be dealt with by the machinery of the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes. To the Aide-mémoire was attached a paraphrase of a telegram from the British Foreign Office on the subject.

The War and Navy Departments are of the opinion, and this Department agrees, that since under the laws of the United States the tribunals of the Army and Navy are the only ones empowered to try cases which involve violations of the laws of war committed in overseas theaters of operations, their jurisdiction should not be limited, and that the military commanders should retain the power to try and punish at their discretion all offenders subject to their jurisdiction. Should an international tribunal later be agreed upon to try certain classes of war criminals who are also subject to military jurisdiction, appropriate instructions can always be issued by superior military authority that cases involving persons falling within such classes be not tried before military tribunals.

The second paragraph of the Aide-mémoire refers to the question of a procedure for bringing cases and evidence related thereto to the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes and the suggestion that Circular APO 512 issued by Allied Force Headquarters at Algiers on November 27, 194331 be used as a model. The Department has this matter under consideration and another communication will be addressed to the Embassy at a later date on this subject.

It is the present view of the Department that as regards cases tried by the military courts of the United States, it should be sufficient for the purposes of the Commission to file with it a brief statement of the pertinent facts along the lines specified in the paragraph numbered 1 of document C 7 (1) adopted by the Commission at its meeting of February 22, 1944. A copy of this paragraph is enclosed.32 Such a procedure would avoid the unnecessary work involved in communicating all the evidence to the Commission.

Washington , April 8, 1944.

31  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 429.

32  Ante, p. 1280 [Pg. 1280 includes portions of Doc. 824 and Doc. 825].

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War 1939/1416

[Document 833]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

No. 15255 London, April 26, 1944.
[Received May 3.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that at the meeting of the War Crimes Commission held on Tuesday, April 25, it was decided to discuss at the next meeting of the Commission the enclosed proposals of General de Baer, representative of the Belgium Government. I should be obliged if the Department would give me its opinion of them.

Respectfully,

Herbert Pell

[Enclosure 1]

Document No. C.12, 21 April, 1944: Extension of the Commission’s Competence to War Crimes Not Committed Against United Nations Nationals

Proposal by the Chairman of Committee I

1. We have all been shocked by the deportations and shootings of hostages which have been carried out by the Nazis in neutral, co-belligerent, or enemy countries such as Denmark, Hungary, Roumania, Italy, etc. The fact that these people were the victims of Nazi measures goes to prove that they acted against the Germans; in all probability their activity was directed towards helping the Allies. Again, on March 27th, 320 Italians were shot as hostages because 32 Germans had been killed in Rome on the 23rd. Obviously, it is a German General who has signed the order to shoot these innocent people, and his name will be disclosed sooner or later. There is little doubt that this man should be considered as a war criminal.*

The question then arises by what body measures for the punishment of these crimes will be designed. It is impracticable, for obvious reasons, to include representatives of enemy countries and even of “co-belligerents” in the War Crimes Commission. No National Office will bring these cases before our Commission, and therefore no voice will be raised to demand punishment for the guilty.

2. Some of the principal criminals have signed Orders or Decrees which are in themselves, criminal, but, because they have not acted within the territory of any one of the United Nations, no National Office will investigate their case. A study of the documentation available points out that there may be some possibility of indicting some of these persons for measures which they have taken in Germany. (E.g. Ministers, Chief of Gestapo, Generals who have signed orders or decrees allowing crimes to be committed in occupied countries.)

It is therefore proposed:

That any member of the War Crimes Commission shall be entitled to bring before Committee I the case of any person accused of a war crime irrespective of the nationality of the victim or the place where the crime was committed.

N.B.—It is needless to say that the War Crimes Commission will be entitled to reject any case submitted in this way.

Example:

Name of accused: General von Hanneken.

Rank: C. in C. German Forces of Occupation in Denmark.

Date of crime: August to December 1943.

Charges: (1) Murder, systematic terrorism,

(2) Deportation of civilians,

(3) Exactment of illegitimate contributions.

Short Statement of Facts

About August 30th, 1943, General von Hanneken took over complete control of Denmark, and assumed full powers, including the right to inflict all forms of punishment. He decided that offences such as sabotage would be tried by German Courts-Martial with death penalty provided. The system of hostages was also introduced. The order is signed: “Hanneken” Pursuant to these measures: 1. Executions took place among which on November 22nd two Danish labourers were executed by the Germans, and on December 3rd five Danes were executed. Notices of the execution giving the names of the victims were posted and appeared in the Press. In respect of these, Hanneken himself approved the execution by refusing to grant pardon;

2. Deportations were carried out: on October 1st one thousand Gestapo men rounded up Jews in Copenhagen: 1600 Jews were arrested, and on October 11th two (or perhaps three) deportation ships had already left Copenhagen for an unknown destination;

3. On December 5th Hanneken imposed upon the city of Copenhagen a fine of 2 million Kroner for the shooting of a German soldier. The order was posted on public buildings and published in the Press; it is signed: “Hanneken.”

[Enclosure 2]

Document No. C.14, 25 April, 1944: Proposal by the Chairman of Committee I

After an existence of 5 months during which the Commission has been actively engaged in its work—the main body and its divisions sometimes holding as many as five meetings a week—and during which Committee I has been formed with the specific object of “investigation” which was originally the purpose of the Commission itself, some facts appear and it is possible to draw some provisional conclusions.

The facts are the following: 1. The cases which have been brought by the National Offices to the Commission are comparatively few;

2. Most of the cases brought are relatively unimportant; they do not concern persons in a high position of responsibility or crimes of an outstandingly sensational nature;

3. The tempo at which the cases are being brought does not entourage us to hope that, in the near future, the Commission will be in a position to deal with a large number of cases. All this is likely to create some disappointment when the time comes for the Commission to give an account of its work.

It is not that Committee I has not loyally tried to carry out its mission as set up in the various speeches and statements which we consider to be our terms of reference. It is not either that the National Offices are indifferent to the progress of our work (some have forwarded a number of cases, whereas others have forwarded fewer charges, but they are more complete).

The great obstacle is the difficulty of obtaining circumstantial evidence from abroad: it is easy to understand that, as the elements of each case have to be forwarded to this country by underground methods and as there are so many other more pressing matters, evidence upon war crimes is slow to come over.

The question then is: what remedies are there to this situation?

As has been said many times, it is impossible for this Commission to undertake the “investigation” of all the war crimes which have been committed: apart from the fact that the Commission has neither the machinery, the equipment nor the staff, there is no body which has the legal means to do this at present. We therefore depend entirely upon the National Offices for all that concerns the preliminary “fact finding.”

The dossiers which we have now at hand can be grouped into two categories:

(1) The dossiers in which we have, together with some evidence about the crime, the reasonably complete identity of the accused, and (2) the dossiers in which we have little or no indication of his identity.

As to the first category: there is not the slightest doubt that the dossiers which have been submitted are only a small proportion of those which could be submitted. It seems that hitherto the National Offices have restricted themselves to sending us only “crimes” in the popular conception of that word, and the consequence is that (although in some cases not only the actual perpetrator but also the immediate superior who ordered the crime is the object of a dossier), the person in whom the crime really originated is not mentioned. We are referring specially to those German lawyers who, in the tranquility of their study, have conceived those measures which have afforded others the possibility to unleash their savage instincts with impunity and covered in advance those unspeakable acts under a cloak of legality.

There are many accused in respect of whom a dossier could be easily constituted by means of one single document which would be a complete proof in itself. We shall give a few examples taken among many: (a) decree providing excessive penalties for unimportant or inexistent transgressions;

(b) decrees providing the death penalty for acts of sabotage;

(c) decrees making the criminal nature of an act depend upon the nationality, race or religion of the person who did the act (e.g. decrees upon the pollution of the “Herrenvolk,” etc.);

(d) a decree providing capital punishment for mere omissions, such as failing to report to the Police the existence of arms or weapons of which one may have had no knowledge;

(e) decrees providing capital punishment for the relatives of persons such as fugitives, or saboteurs, when the Germans have been incapable of laying hands on the accused themselves;

(f) the signature of a decree by which all artistic property belonging either to the State or to churches or to private persons is subject to confiscation;

(g) a person in authority who after having threatened to execute hostages has carried out his threat and publishes the names of those he has had executed;

(h) notices signed by a commanding officer or an administrator announcing that he has imposed a collective fine upon a city in punishment for the shooting of a German;

(i) decrees or notices ordering deportations;

(j) decrees ordering compulsory enlistment of Allied nationals in the German army (cfr. in Alsace—according to a B.B.C. broadcast on 17 April 1944); and so on.

If the United Nations fail to indict those who have signed these decrees or orders, which are at the root of the evil, then it can again be said that justice strikes “according to whether you are powerful or wretched …”35 A parody of justice of that kind should be avoided at all costs.

There is little doubt that if some research work is conducted on these lines a quantity of dossiers can be made available for the Commission in the near future. The attention of the National Offices should be once more drawn in this direction.

However, as the punishment of crime is the concern of the United Nations as a whole, it may be proper for us, if the National Offices fail to send us those cases, to examine whether the Commission should not itself assume this part of the work. (N.B.—This will obviously mean, as well as an increase of our staff, that for some members or persons their work on this Commission may become a whole time job.)

In the second category of dossiers the identity of the accused is either completely or partly unknown and there is often no indication of his rank, unit or position. In some cases the perpetrators have been provided with assumed names, in others (torturers in Gestapo chambers) they were masked. If the number of dossiers of this kind sent in is not much larger this is merely because some National Offices do not think it worth while to send us dossiers when little or nothing is known about the accused and the chances of laying hands on him are so slight. The massacre of Lidice is believed to come under this category and also the lethal chambers of Eastern Poland.

In view of the difficulties involved it has been proposed in cases such as these to apply the law of Moses, reprisals,—or alternately collective responsibility, and to execute in cold blood, after the war, so many Germans as they have executed Allies.

Solutions which are so far removed from democratic conceptions may, however, not carry much weight or be the best suited to bring us a lasting peace. Moreover, it is impossible to visualize the United Nations putting such a policy into actual practice.

On the other hand it is imperative that the responsible people be punished and therefore some other means should be suggested. To this effect the following suggestion is tentatively proposed. It is impossible that major crimes (such as Lidice, etc.) have been perpetrated without the knowledge and consent of responsible persons who are in charge or in command. One of the first things we should do is therefore to obtain as clear as possible a view of the civil and military organisation in each one of the occupied countries, since the beginning of the war, together with the names and identity of the persons who are responsible for each sector or district. Moreover, in view of the fact that when the Germans retreat from the Western European countries they are likely to carry out the same policy of scorched-earth as they have done in Russia and in Italy, it is necessary that we be provided also with the names of officers who will be in command in the various army groups at least as far down as the commandants of regiments. The measure which is suggested is placing into custody immediately after the armistice all persons (civil and military) who are susceptible of carrying some responsibility in the atrocities which have been committed. After their arrest their names should be broadcast and, possibly, their photos widely published in all the occupied countries in order to allow possible victims to lodge complaints against them. Those against whom, after a reasonable time, no complaints have been lodged should be released whereas the charges brought against the others should be immediately investigated. Thus without resorting to the repellent notion of collective responsibility we can achieve the purpose of justice by a perfectly admissible “mesure de sûreté.” Any refusal to co-operate with the investigation officials, by making complementary investigation necessary, would automatically provoke a prolongation of the “mesure de sûreté.”

This may be a bold and unprecedented measure. Far from depriving the Germans from natural guides who might help them into obtaining a more healthy outlook, this measure will allow the healthy part of the German population to find their own way more easily, under allied guidance. Moreover, it is in the interest of the safety of the occupying forces: those who will resist any allied endeavour to pacify the country will be found less among the ordinary public than among the leading classes; it is these people who will find it most difficult to accept the defeat; by segregating them for a time we may make our own task of occupation easier.†

Does this mean that from now on National Offices should be discouraged from sending incomplete cases to the Commission? No, on the contrary. We believe that it should be for this Commission to obtain and centralise such information as would allow us to locate responsibility where National Offices are individually unable to do so.‡

We will then have a number of dossiers which will be half-ready, and which can be completed either as the liberation of occupied countries proceeds, or else soon after the Armistice (see hereafter no. 4).

There are other suggestions which could be usefully discussed.

1. We are at this moment working in a watertight compartment. The necessity for us to know what kind of occupation the United Nations are visualizing for Germany has already been stressed in our meetings. There may be a United Nations’ Occupation Board but there may also be a division of Germany into zones of occupation. If we are to prepare a scheme we should have some idea of the general framework within which it will have to fit.

2. In the same way when we make suggestions for the inclusion into the Armistice of some terms concerning retribution for war crimes it would be most valuable for our Commission to obtain some indication, either of the lines upon which we could usefully work (together with what has been already done) or else, that our collaboration in this field is not needed or desired.

3. Some sort of liaison with the supreme command may also be necessary, for the first measures will surely be taken by the military and it is upon those measures that may depend the ultimate success or fiasco of the whole scheme. (Perhaps a United Nations’ Adviser on criminal matters to the High Command.) Failing this, some military advice or discussions with the military as to the practical possibility of carrying out any scheme which we may have in view would also be of the greatest value for us.

The lack of success with which “Amgot”37 has met in Italy in respect of the punishment of war criminals, and the criticisms which have been directed in the Press against the lack of policy of that organisation incline us to hope that the apprehension of war criminals will not be one of its activities.

Incidentally the muddle to which has led the question of punishment in Italy and which has already caused much disappointment is a lesson that a policy on entirely different lines should be followed when it comes to dealing with the Germans.

4. It may be necessary, in the near future, to suggest the creation of another body charged with new duties, more directly concerned with prosecution.

In 1918 the Allies were expressly prevented by Article 6 of the Armistice38 from prosecuting anyone. This time we will not be prevented, but, as we have no prosecuting machinery ready, the result is likely to be exactly the same: valuable time will be lost which the Germans will use to build up obstacles. Therefore we must have some machinery ready to operate, at the moment of the Armistice, and the necessary men ready to step in and take charge.

If, when the Armistice comes, chaos, thanks to which most criminals will escape, is to be avoided, some United Nations organisation must be instituted in Germany (United Nations Criminal Justice Office—or; United Nations War Crimes Prosecuting Office) charged with the following duties: (a) finding the war criminals, (b) arresting them and keeping them in preventive custody, (c) taking down their statements (denial or admission of guilt, indication of perpetrator or partners in crime, line of defence, names of witnesses for the defence, etc.), (d) eventually maybe making a summary investigation on those statements, and finding the witnesses, (e) forwarding the accused together with his dossier to the place or country where the trial is to be held, (f) maybe: completing the half-ready cases mentioned above on page 4.

The Office would act as a sort of judicial agency to which the Courts of all Allied countries could apply to obtain persons accused, witness evidence, or any information on war crimes. It goes without saying that the Office, although working in conjunction with the various armies of occupation, should have its own staff, agents, etc., and that the necessary executive powers should be vested in it. One man should be at its head, fully responsible. If necessary he might work under the authority of the War Crimes Commission, but it should be his show, and if anything goes wrong, the blame should be his. If, in 1920 some individual (instead of various anonymous diplomatic commissions) had been responsible for the punishment of war crimes, it might not have ended in a fiasco.

The suggestions in this paper should, in the idea of the Committee, apply not only to Germany but also to the liberated territories of the Allies. In respect of these territories however this regime should be restricted to the transitional period only, i.e. until the governments of those countries have resumed the actual administration of the land.§

5. May we be allowed once more to point out that any scheme for the punishment of war criminals is unlikely to succeed without the sincere co-operation of all the great Allies, and namely U.S.S.R., and that new efforts should be made to secure the co-operation of the U.S.S.R.

6. It should also be borne in mind that after the Armistice changes of nationality of war criminals should not be recognised. The Commission has been told that some preparations have been made to confer a neutral nationality upon some enemy persons, and upon allied persons who have worked for the enemy; counter-measures should be framed in time.

7. Political action. Caution should be used in dealing with criminals politically:

If it is contemplated to punish some enemy leaders by political rather than judicial action, the consequences of such action should be carefully measured: if such punishment is death, and is inflicted soon after the Armistice,║ there is less objection than if it is mere exile (cfr. Napoleon). But if the main criminals, who are responsible for the waging of war as well as for having taken part in the most heinous crimes (annihilation of the Jewish race, deportations, policy of terrorism) are merely to be exiled, it will be morally impossible for any court to inflict a more severe punishment (death) upon persons accused of lesser atrocities or who have merely acted upon order of those major criminals. Many of us consider political action as undesirable altogether, and would prefer judicial action, but, if for reasons of expediency it is impossible to do otherwise, political action should be exceptional, and restricted to cases such as Hitler, Hirohito, and others such as Mussolini who are in fact, if not in name, heads of states.

* Likewise, on 17 April 1944 the B.B.C. announced that 605 hostages had been shot at Trieste for having blown up a cinema for German troops. [Footnote in the original.]

35 Omission indicated in the original.

† It is also possible that if, when the time comes, the German army in full retreat on all fronts are warned that any scorched-earth policy will meet with drastic punishment, this warning may have a preventive action (cfr. the warning which was issued by President Wilson in October 1918 to the Germans against devastating the industries, the coal mines and even the orchards in the North of France.) [Footnote in the original.]

‡ Obtaining such information may become even more important when the United Nations are occupying Germany; it may then become necessary to institute a body of persons to collect and investigate German records. Such persons should of course be familiar with the German language. [Footnote in the original.]

37 Allied Military Government, Occupied Territory.

38 For terms of the Armistice with Germany, signed November 11, 1918, see Foreign Relations, The Paris Peace Conference, 1919, vol. ii, p. 1.

§ It is likely that the transitional period will be very short; it is also likely that there will be little scope for any such Office to operate in Allied countries, for German war criminals, rather than remain in liberated countries to face the wrath of their victims, will almost certainly flee to their homeland together with their retreating armies. [Footnote in the original.]

║ In an unspectacular way, preferably by hanging: there is no reason to make the execution of these people other than ignominious. Moreover it is more difficult to make a hero out of a man who was obscurely hanged than out of a man who was shot and who may even have been allowed to give the theatrical order of “Fire” at his own execution. [Footnote in the original.]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War 1939/1422

[Document 834]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]

No. 15345 London, May 2, 1944.
[Received May 10.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that at the meeting of Committee II of the War Crimes Commission, held on Friday, April 28, we discussed the possibility of an international court, taking as a basis for the discussion the enclosed plan which was prepared by Mr. Preuss and Dr. de Moor, the representative of the Netherlands. It is very like the one originally prepared in the State Department.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Herbert Pell

[Enclosure]

Document II/11, 14 April, 1944: Draft Convention on the Trial and Punishment of War Criminals

Chapter I

Scope of War Crimes

article 1

offences

The offences listed hereinafter, committed in violation of the laws of war, by members of the armed forces, the civilian authorities, or other persons acting under the authority of, or claim or colour of authority of, or in concert with, a state or other political entity engaged in war or armed hostilities with, or in hostile occupation of territory of, the United Nations, or any one of them at any time since July 7, 1937, shall be punishable as war crimes, in accordance with the provisions of this Convention: (1) Murder or massacre.

(2) Execution of hostages.

(3) Rape.

(4) Abduction of women for the purpose of enforced prostitution.

(5) Segregation, internment or deportation of civilians under degrading or inhuman conditions, or under conditions unrelated to bona fide military necessity.

(6) Forcing civilians to take part in military operations or preparations, in a manner calculated to endanger their lives.

(7) Wilful deprivation of localities or districts of foodstuffs, shelter, clothing or other means of sustenance, in a manner calculated to cause unnecessary suffering.

(8) Deliberate attack upon defenceless persons or upon centres of civilian population for the purpose of terrorisation.

(9) Attack upon survivors of merchant vessels or aircraft which have been abandoned or destroyed.

(10) Looting or pillage.

(11) Wanton devastation or destruction of property.

(12) Killing or maltreatment of wounded or prisoners of war.

(13) Refusal to give quarter.

(14) Deliberate attacks on hospitals or hospital ships, and other offences against sanitary personnel or the Red Cross.

(15) Other similar acts, which by reason of their atrocious character, their ruthless disregard of the sanctity of human life and personality or their wanton reference with rights of property, are unrelated to reasonably conceived requirements of military necessity.

article 2

persons liable

All persons, irrespective of their rank or position, who have committed, or have ordered, caused, aided, abetted or incited another person to commit, a crime specified in Article 1, shall be punishable, as principals or accessories, in accordance with the provisions of this Convention: Provided, that the application of this Article shall be subject to the provisions of Article 30.

[Chapter I

(Alternative Articles)

Scope of War Crimes

article 1

definition of war crimes

War crimes, within the meaning of this Convention, are acts, committed in violation of the laws of war, by members of the armed forces, the civilian authorities, or other persons acting under the authority of, or claim or colour of authority of, or in concert with, a state or other political entity engaged in war or armed hostilities with, or in hostile occupation of territory of, the United Nations, or any one of them at any time since July 7, 1937.

article 2

persons liable

All persons, irrespective of their rank or position, who have committed, or have ordered, caused, aided, abetted or incited another person to commit, a crime specified in Article 1, shall be punishable, as principals or accessories, in accordance with the provisions of this Convention: Provided, that the application of this Article shall be subject to the provisions of Article 30.

article 3

offences

The following offences shall be deemed to be war crimes within the meaning of this Convention: (1) Murder or massacre.

(2) Execution of hostages.

(3) Rape.

(4) Abduction of women for the purpose of enforced prostitution.

(5) Segregation, internment or deportation of civilians under degrading or unhuman conditions, or under conditions unrelated to bona fide military necessity.

(6) Forcing civilians to take part in military operations or preparations, in a manner calculated to endanger their lives.

(7) Wilful deprivation of localities or districts of foodstuffs, shelter, clothing or other means of sustenance, in a manner calculated to cause unnecessary suffering.

(8) Deliberate attack upon defenceless persons or upon centres of civilian population for the purpose of terrorisation.

(9) Attack upon survivors of merchant vessels or aircraft which have been abandoned or destroyed.

(10) Looting or pillage.

(11) Wanton devastation or destruction of property.

(12) Killing or maltreatment of wounded or prisoners of war.

(13) Refusal to give quarter.

(14) Deliberate attacks on hospitals or hospital ships, and other offences against sanitary personnel or the Red Cross.

(15) Other similar acts, which by reason of their atrocious character, their ruthless disregard of the sanctity of human life and personality or their wanton interference with rights of property, are unrelated to reasonably conceived requirements of military necessity.]41

Chapter II

Election and Organization

article 3

establishment of the tribunal

There shall be established for the trial of persons charged with the commission of offences specified in Article 1, a United Nations War Crimes Tribunal and such Divisions thereof as may be constituted in accordance with the provisions of Articles 6 and 7.

article 4

seat of the tribunal

The seat of the Tribunal shall be at London. The Tribunal may decide to meet elsewhere for the trial of any particular case or group of cases.

article 5

qualifications of judges and members of the tribunal

The Judge and Members of the Tribunal shall be chosen regardless of their nationality from among persons who possess the qualifications required in their respective countries for appointment to high judicial office, or are experts in international law, in criminal law or in military law. They shall be competent to read both, and to speak one, of the official languages of the Tribunal.

article 6

composition of the tribunal

1. The Tribunal shall be composed of fifteen [eleven, nine]41a Judges, who shall be elected in accordance with the provisions of Article 8.

2. Nine [seven, five]41a Judges of the Tribunal shall constitute a quorum.

article 7

composition of the divisions of the tribunal

1. The Divisions of the Tribunal shall be drawn from the panel of Members of the Tribunal, who shall be chosen in accordance with the provisions of Article 8.

2. Each Division shall consist of not less than five judges who shall be designated from time to time by the Tribunal. The Divisions shall sit at such places, and shall continue to exist for such periods, as the Tribunal may direct.

3. A Member of the Tribunal shall have the rank and dignity of a Judge of the Tribunal, and during any period in which he shall sit as a judge of a Division he shall be entitled to the privileges and emoluments of a Judge of the Tribunal.

4. Two-thirds of the judges of a Division shall constitute a quorum.

article 8

election of judges and members of the tribunal

The Judges of the Tribunal and Members of the panel of the Tribunal shall be elected in accordance with the following provisions: a) Within thirty days after the date on which this Convention becomes effective, each member of the United Nations shall appoint as Members of the Tribunal, three persons [four],41a at least one of whom shall not be a national. The names of the persons so appointed shall be transmitted to the Chairman of the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes, who shall forthwith communicate them to the members of the United Nations.

b) Within fifteen days following the notification of the above list, the Chairman of the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes shall call a conference of the heads of diplomatic missions of the United Nations, accredited to the Court of St. James’s, to meet at London at such time as he may direct. Members of the United Nations which are not represented at the Court of St. James’s may appoint a special representative.

c) The conference shall proceed to the election of Judges of the Tribunal. The representatives of the members of the United Nations shall, by secret ballot and by such method of voting as they may determine, elect the Judges of the Tribunal from among the Members of the Tribunal.

d) Any state which becomes a party to this convention subsequent to the date on which it becomes effective shall appoint Members of the Tribunal as provided in Paragraph (a) of this Article.

article 9

term of office

1. Judges and Members of the Tribunal shall be chosen for a term of three years, unless the Tribunal has ceased to exist before the expiration of that period.

2. Judges and Members of the Tribunal shall be eligible for re-election.

3. Judges and Members of the Tribunal shall continue to discharge their duties until their place has been filled.

article 10

vacancies

1. In the event of a vacancy among the Judges of the Tribunal, whether resulting from resignation or from any other cause, the Tribunal shall proceed to the election of a Judge from among the Members of the Tribunal. A Judge so elected shall hold office for the remainder of his predecessor’s term.

2. In the event of a vacancy among the Members of the Tribunal, whether resulting from resignation or from any cause other than the election of a Member as a Judge of the Tribunal, the member of the United Nations which appointed the Member whose place is vacated shall designate his successor, who shall hold office for the remainder of his predecessor’s term.

article 11

increase in number of judges and members

In the event that the number of Judges or Members of the Tribunal is not, in the opinion of the Tribunal, adequate for the speedy despatch of its business or that of its Divisions, the President of the Tribunal shall call a conference of the heads of diplomatic missions of the United Nations accredited to the Court of St. James’s. This conference, after considering the recommendations of the Tribunal, and acting by such methods as it may determine, shall take such action as it may deem appropriate.

article 12

institution of the tribunal

1. The date of the first meeting of the Tribunal shall be set by the conference of representatives of members of the United Nations referred to in Paragraph b) of Article 8.

2. Within fifteen days following its convening, the Tribunal shall establish rules for regulating its administration and procedure, and that of its Divisions. The Tribunal shall have the authority to amend or to supplement these rules from time to time.

article 13

declaration on assuming office

Every Judge of the Tribunal or of its Divisions shall, before taking up his duties, make a solemn declaration in open court that he will exercise his functions impartially and conscientiously.

article 14

election of officers

1. The Tribunal shall elect its President and Vice-President, appoint its Registrar, and otherwise perfect its organization and that of its Divisions.

2. The President and Vice-President shall be elected for a term of one year, and shall be eligible for re-election.

article 15

privileges and immunities

Judges of the Tribunal, Members of the Tribunal serving as judges of one of its Divisions, and the Registrar of the Tribunal, when engaged in their official business or travelling to or from any place at which such business is performed, shall enjoy diplomatic privileges and immunities.

article 16

incompatible activities

1. Judges of the Tribunal may not exercise any political or administrative function, or engage in any activity of a professional nature during their term of office, save with the previous consent of the Tribunal. Any doubt upon this point shall be settled by the decision of the Tribunal.

2. Members of the Tribunal shall be subject to the provisions of the preceding Paragraph during the time that they are assigned to active duty as judges of a Division of the Tribunal.

article 17

sessions of the tribunal and its divisions

1. The Tribunal shall remain permanently in session. It may recess from time to time as the business before it may permit.

2. Members of the Tribunal shall hold themselves at the disposal of the Tribunal and shall at all times, be prepared, after suitable notice has been given, to assume the duties of a judge of a Division of the Tribunal.

article 18

withdrawal of judges

The Tribunal shall establish rules which shall determine the conditions under which a Judge of the Tribunal or one of its Divisions shall be authorized or required to withdraw from participation in any case.

article 19

dismissal from office

The Tribunal, with the concurrence of not less than twelve, nine, seven Judges thereof, may dismiss a judge of the Tribunal or one of its Divisions who has ceased adequately to perform the functions of his office.

article 20

assessors

The Tribunal and its Divisions shall have the power to appoint experts in international law, in criminal law, in military law, or in any other field of law, to sit with them as assessors, but without the right to vote, in the trial of any particular case or class of cases.

Chapter III

Auxiliaries of the Tribunal

article 21

united nations commission for the investigation of war crimes

1. The United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes, established at a meeting of United Nations and Dominions representatives held at London on October 20, 1943, shall continue its existence during the life of this Convention, or until such time as it may, with the consent of the parties to the said agreement, be merged with the United Nations Commission for the Prosecution of War Crimes.

2. The Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes shall exercise such functions as may have been conferred upon it by the parties to the agreement by which it was established, or by the terms of this Convention.

article 22

united nations commission for the prosecution of war crimes

1. The conference of representatives of members of the United Nations referred to in Article 8 shall elect a United Nations Commission for the Prosecution of War Crimes of seven members, one of whom shall be designated Chief Prosecutor.

2. Members of the Commission for the Prosecution of War Crimes shall be chosen for a term of three years, unless the Tribunal has ceased to exist before the expiration of that period.

3. In the event of a vacancy among the members of the Commission for the Prosecution of War Crimes, the Tribunal shall proceed to elect a member, who shall hold office for the remainder of his predecessor’s term.

4. In addition to exercising such functions as may be conferred upon it by the terms of this Convention, the Commission for the Prosecution of War Crimes shall: a) Receive evidence of war crimes submitted to it by the Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes.

b) Select and prepare cases for trial by the Tribunal and its Divisions.

c) Conduct prosecutions before the Tribunal and its Divisions.

d) Ensure that the judgments and orders of the Tribunal and its Divisions are carried out.

5. The Commission for the Prosecution of War Crimes shall appoint its staff and shall otherwise perfect its organization.

article 23

general provisions

The provisions of Articles 5, 9, 16, 18 and 19 shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to members of the Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes and of the Commission for the Prosecution of War Crimes.

Chapter IV

Surrender, Extradition and Transfer of Persons Accused of War Crimes

article 24

surrender

The Tribunal shall have the authority to require, upon the motion of the Commission for the Prosecution of War Crimes or upon that of any member of the United Nations, that an enemy or former enemy state surrender into the custody of the Tribunal any person within its jurisdiction who is charged with an offence specified in Article 1, either for trial by the Tribunal or one of its Divisions, as the case may be, or for delivery to one of the United Nations.

article 25

extradition

The Tribunal shall have the authority to request, upon the motion of the Commission for the Prosecution of War Crimes, or upon that of any member of the United Nations, that a neutral or former neutral state deliver into the custody of the Tribunal any person within its jurisdiction who is charged with an offence specified in Article 1, for trial by the Tribunal or one of its Divisions, as the case may be, or, if he is a national or former national of a member of the United Nations, for delivery to such state.

article 26

transfer

The Tribunal shall have the authority to require any member of the United Nations to transfer into the custody of the Tribunal any person in the custody or within the territorial jurisdiction of that nation, and with respect to whom the Tribunal has jurisdiction, subject to the right of any member of the United Nations to retain custody of, and to bring to trial, its own nationals or former nationals, as provided in Article 28.

Chapter V

Jurisdiction With Respect to War Crimes

article 27

jurisdiction of the tribunal

1. Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, the Tribunal shall have jurisdiction to try all persons surrendered by an enemy or former enemy state pursuant to the terms of Article 24; or extradited from a neutral or former neutral state pursuant to the terms of Article 25; or transferred to the Tribunal by any one of the United Nations pursuant to the terms of Article 26; or any other person accused of an offence specified in Article 1 whose trial by the Tribunal is requested by the member of the United Nations which has him in custody, or by the state or states upon whose motion his surrender or extradition was required or requested: Provided, that the Tribunal may direct that any person or group of persons over whom it has jurisdiction shall be tried by one of its Divisions.

2. Any person referred to in Paragraph 1 of this Article who is a national or former national of a member of the United Nations shall, unless the Tribunal has jurisdiction under the terms of Paragraph 4 of this Article and chooses to exercise such jurisdiction, be delivered by the Tribunal to that state for trial.

3. Any person referred to in Paragraph 1 of this Article, who is charged with the commission of an offence or offences within the territory of a member of the United Nations, or against the person or property of one or more of its nationals or former nationals, shall, upon demand by such state, be delivered to it by the Tribunal for trial.

4. Any person referred to in Paragraph 1 of this Article, who is charged with the commission, at any one time or at different times, of offences within the territory, or against the person or property of nationals or former nationals, of more than one of the United Nations, shall be tried by the Tribunal or by one of its Divisions: Provided, that if the members of the United Nations claiming jurisdiction under the provisions of this Article so agree, such person shall be tried by such state as they may designate.

5. Whenever the Tribunal or one of its Divisions initiates the trial of any person for two or more offences, in accordance with the terms of Paragraph 4 of this Article, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal or of the Division, as the case may be, shall not be divested by the fact that the accused is acquitted of all charges except those which would, in the absence of other charges, have made the accused subject to the jurisdiction of the state within whose territory or against the person or property of whose nationals or former nationals, the offence or offences were committed.

article 28

jurisdiction of national courts

1. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal and of its Divisions shall not extend in any event to a national or former national of a member of the United Nations which has custody of such person.

2. A member of the United Nations shall not be precluded from trying persons in its custody, other than its own nationals or former nationals, over whom the Tribunal has jurisdiction under the terms of this Convention, unless their transfer for trial is required by the Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of this Convention.

3. A member of the United Nations shall in every case inform the Tribunal of the identity of the accused and of the nature of the charges against him before proceeding to the trial of any person for an offence specified in Article 1; [or for an offence committed with the intent to further the cause of the enemy or by means of the power or opportunity afforded by a state of war or armed hostilities, or by hostile occupation of the territory of the state which has custody of the accused.]42

Chapter VI

Law and Procedure

article 29

law to be applied

In the trial of persons charged with the offences specified in Article 1, the Tribunal and its Divisions shall apply: a) General international treaties or conventions declaratory of the laws of war, and particularly treaties or conventions establishing rules of the laws of war expressly recognized by the belligerent states;

b) International customs of war, as evidence of a general practice accepted as law;

c) General principles of criminal law recognized by civilized nations;

d) Judicial decisions and the teachings of the most highly qualified publicists of the various nations, as subsidiary means for the determination of the rules of the laws of war.

article 30

superior orders

1. The plea of superior orders shall not constitute a defence against a charge arising under Article 1 if the order was so manifestly contrary to the laws of war that a person of ordinary sense and understanding would know or should know, given his rank or position and the circumstances of the case, that such order was illegal.

2. It shall be for the Tribunal and its Divisions to consider to what extent irresistible compulsion shall be a ground for mitigation of the penalty or for acquittal.

4. [sic] A member of the United Nations shall not proceed with the trial of any person, other than its own national or former national, who is selected for trial before the Tribunal in accordance with the terms of this Convention and with respect of whom the Tribunal has jurisdiction, but shall permit such person to be dealt with as directed by the Tribunal. The fact that proceedings have been initiated or that sentence has been imposed by a national court shall not preclude the Tribunal from requiring the transfer of the accused.

5. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal, as provided in Article 27, shall not be affected by any agreement which has been concluded, or which may be concluded, by members of the United Nations for transfer to each other of persons accused of war crimes or other war offences.

article 31

official languages

1. The official languages of the Tribunal and other Divisions shall be English and French, but the Tribunal, or any one of its Divisions may direct that the proceedings shall be conducted in another language.

2. All documents submitted in any language other than one of the official languages shall be translated into one of the official languages. At the request of the accused, all documents shall be translated into a language with which he is conversant.

3. At the request of either party, oral proceedings may be conducted in whole or in part in a language other than one of the official languages, but in such case they shall be currently translated, at the request of the accused, into a language with which he is conversant.

article 32

production of evidence

The Tribunal or its Divisions shall, at the request of the accused, or of the Commission for the Prosecution of War Crimes: (a) Order any witness to attend and be examined before the court.

(b) Summon any person with expert knowledge in legal, military, naval, aerial or other relevant matters to give evidence in any case where it appears to the court that such special knowledge is necessary to the proper determination of the case.

(c) Order the disclosure and production of any document, exhibit or any other thing connected with the proceedings, the production of which it may deem necessary to the proper determination of the case.

(d) Issue letters of request or appoint special commissioners for the taking of evidence out of court whenever it is not possible otherwise satisfactorily to dispose of the case. Such evidence shall be taken under such safeguards prescribed by the Tribunal as will protect the interests of the accused and promote the administration of justice.

article 33

rights of the accused

1. The accused shall be informed in writing of the nature of the charges against him, which shall be set forth in sufficient detail to give to the accused a reasonable opportunity to prepare his defence.

2. The accused shall have the benefit of qualified legal counsel, chosen by himself with the approval of the Tribunal or the Division before which he is to be tried. If the accused is not represented by counsel of own choice, the court shall assign qualified legal counsel for his defence.

3. The accused shall have the right to be present during the conduct of proceedings against him in the Tribunal or in a Division.

article 34

publicity of hearings

Hearings before the Tribunal or before one of its Divisions shall be public unless the court, by a reasoned judgment, shall direct that the hearing shall take place in camera.

article 35

intervention

Any member of the United Nations may intervene, submit a statement of its case and appear in the oral proceedings in any case in which the accused is charged with the commission of an offence within its territory or against the person or property of one or more of its nationals or former nationals.

article 36

revision of judgments

The Tribunal shall establish rules which shall determine the conditions under which questions may be certified by its Divisions, and under which judgments of the Tribunal or of its Divisions may be reopened or reviewed.

[alternate article 36

revision of judgments

1. Against convictions pronounced by the Tribunal or by one of its Divisions, no proceedings other than an application for revision shall be allowable.

2. Proceedings for revision may be initiated by the Tribunal upon its own motion, upon the motion of the Commission for the Prosecution of War Crimes, upon the motion of the person convicted, or upon the motion of any member of the United Nations which has intervened in the case, and then only upon the discovery of some fact of such nature to be a decisive factor, which factor was, when judgement was given, unknown to the Tribunal, or a Division, or to the applicant.]43

article 37

ne bis in idem

1. No person shall be prosecuted before the Tribunal, before one of its Divisions, or before a national court of a member of the United Nations if such person has already been prosecuted before the Tribunal, before one of its Divisions, or before a national court of a member of the United Nations and has been convicted or acquitted on the merits of an offence which is specified in Article 1 and requires proof of substantially the same acts.

2. No trial or sentence by a national court of an enemy or former enemy state shall bar trial or sentence by the Tribunal, by one of its Divisions, or by a national court of a member of the United Nations for an offence specified in Article 1: Provided, that if a sentence has been imposed by a national court of an enemy or former enemy state, the penalty already undergone shall be taken into account in fixing any sentence which may be imposed.

Chapter VII

The Judgment, Its Execution and Pardon

article 38

delivery of judgment

1. The Tribunal and its Divisions shall sit in private to consider their judgments.

2. Every judgment or order of the Tribunal or of its Divisions shall be pronounced at a public session and shall state the reasons on which it is based.

3. The decisions of the Tribunal and its Divisions shall be by a majority of the judges participating, and shall be deemed to be the opinion of the entire court. No dissenting opinion shall be published or divulged in any way.

article 39

detention of the accused

The State on whose territory the Tribunal or one of its Divisions is sitting shall, if so directed by the court, supply suitable facilities for the detention of the accused.

article 40

penalties

1. The offences specified in Article 1 shall be punishable by death or by lesser penalty.

2. The Tribunal and its Divisions may impose pecuniary penalties.

3. The Tribunal shall determine the way in which fines shall be dealt with.

article 41

execution of sentences

Sentences involving loss of liberty or death shall be executed by a member of the United Nations designated with its consent by the Tribunal or by a Division which has imposed the sentence: Provided, that such consent cannot be refused by the state which has requested the surrender, extradition, or trial of the person convicted, or which has intervened in his trial.

article 42

pardon and commutation

The right of pardon or commutation of sentences imposed by the Tribunal or by one of its Divisions shall be exercised by the state which has to execute the penalty, in the absence of objection by any state which has requested the surrender, extradition or trial of the person convicted, or which has intervened in his trial.

Chapter VIII

General Provisions

article 43

expenses

1. All expenses involved in the execution of this Convention, including costs arising from trial proceedings and from the execution of such sentences as may be imposed, shall be defrayed from a common fund created by contributions from the members of the United Nations according to a plan which shall be adopted by the conference of representatives of the United Nations referred to in Article 8, paragraph 5.

2. All emoluments of the Judges of the Tribunal, the Registrar of the Tribunal, the Judges of the Divisions and the members of the Commission for the Prosecution of War Crimes shall be determined by the conference of representatives of members of the United Nations referred to in Article 8, paragraph 5. The salaries of the clerical and other personnel of the Tribunal and of its Divisions and of the Commission for the Prosecution of War Crimes, shall be determined by the President of the Tribunal and by the Chief Prosecutor respectively.

3. Further conferences of representatives of the members of the United Nations shall be convened by the Registrar of the Tribunal at intervals which shall not exceed one year for the consideration of financial questions involved in the execution of this Convention.

article 44

enforcement of convention

The members of the United Nations undertake: (a) To adopt such measures as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of this Convention;

(b) To impose upon enemy states, as a part of the terms of surrender, an obligation to deliver up for trial any and all persons charged with an offence or offences specified in Article 1, and to take all other steps necessary to facilitate the execution of this Convention; and

(c) To secure the recognition by neutral or former neutral states of an obligation to deliver up for trial any and all persons within their territories charged with an offence or offences specified in Article 1, and to take all other steps necessary to facilitate the execution of this Convention.

Chapter IX

Ratification, Denunciation and Termination

(Reserved)

41 Brackets appear in the original.

41a Brackets appear in the original.

41a Brackets appear in the original.

41a Brackets appear in the original.

42 Brackets appear in the original.

43 Brackets appear in the original.

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War 1939/1419

[Document 835]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Memorandum

On March 15th, 1944, His Majesty’s Ambassador addressed a note No. 153 to the Secretary of State putting forward, on behalf of His Majesty’s Government, certain suggestions regarding the procedure to be followed in dealing with German war crimes against Italians, as there was no agreed procedure for dealing with information relating to such crimes which was likely to come into the hands of Allied Commanders, and as German crimes against Italians do not at present fall within the scope of the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes.

2. His Majesty’s Embassy have now received a further telegram from the Foreign Office in which His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs reiterates the anxiety felt by His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom to obtain early agreement in this matter. Such agreement is felt to be particularly urgent as it has recently been brought to the attention of the Foreign Office that a copy of the Proceedings to Perpetuate Testimony concerning the alleged commission of war crimes by Lieutenant Lehmick Emden and Soldat Harold Thieke, German prisoners-of-war who were involved in the Caiazzo incident, and are now in the custody of the Allied Forces, has been transmitted by the Combined Chiefs of Staff to the State Department,44 for onward transmission to the United Nations War Crimes Commission “in accordance with paragraph 2 of Fan 260”.

3. It will be remembered that when the Caiazzo incident was under discussion, the Foreign Office put forward the view that this case did not properly speaking come within the competence of the United Nations War Crimes Commission (see paraphrase of telegram enclosed in Mr. Gore-Booth’s letters dated November 26th, 1943, to Mr. Green H. Hackworth and Mr. J. Wesley Jones of the Department of State45 ).

4. The Department of State expressed agreement with this view, and a draft directive to General Eisenhower agreed between the Department and His Majesty’s Embassy46 contained the following words:— “It is also considered that the Caiazzo incident does not come within the competence of the United Nations War Crimes Commission since the victims were not United Nations nationals.”

This sentence was subsequently omitted at the request of the United States Chiefs of Staff. It is understood that the United States Chiefs did not disagree with the sentence in question, but that they considered its contents to fall outside the scope of the directive under consideration.

5. The Foreign Office are concerned that it should have been proposed to forward to the War Crimes Commission the information regarding the above-mentioned two German prisoners-of-war involved in the Caiazzo incident, as it is felt that this action tends to prejudge the issues raised by them and put before the Department of State in His Majesty’s note No. 153.

6. His Majesty’s Ambassador would accordingly be grateful if he might receive the Department of State’s views on the Foreign Office’s proposals at the earliest possible moment, in order that an agreed procedure may be adopted.

Washington , May 5, 1944.

44 War Department memorandum dated March 24, 1944, transmitted to the State Department the record of investigation proceedings, including testimony taken in January and February 1944, relating to the alleged commission of war crimes near Caiazzo, Italy, on or about October 13, 1943 (740.00116 European War/3–2444).

45  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 428.

46 Not found in Department files.

The Ambassador in Brazil (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War 1939/1428: Airgram

[Document 836]

The Ambassador in Brazil (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Rio de Janeiro, May 6, 1944—noon.
[Received May 13—4 p.m.]

A–820. The Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Secretary General of the Foreign Office both disclaim any knowledge in connection with the report set out in the Department’s secret instruction No. 5884 of April 29, 1944,47 to the effect that the Brazilian Ambassador at London had approached the British Government regarding the question of Brazilian membership on the War Crimes Commission.

Caffery

47 Not printed.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00116 European War 1939/1434

[Document 837]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Memorandum

His Majesty’s Embassy have the honour, with reference to the Department of State’s memorandum of April 8th, (740.00116 European War/1301) to transmit to the Department herewith a paraphrase of a message received from the Foreign Office in regard to the distinction between war crimes to be dealt with by commanders in the field and those to be dealt with by the United Nations Commission for the investigation of war crimes.

Washington , 20 May, 1944.

[Enclosure]

Paraphrase of Telegram Received from Foreign Office, Dated May 12, 1944

We are not quite sure what the State Department have in mind in proposing that military commanders should retain the power to try and punish, at their discretion, all offenders subject to their jurisdiction.

2. On the one hand we agree that in general as many trivial offences as possible should be dealt with on the spot. Experience in Italy seems to have shown that the directive contained in telegram No. Fan 260 of 29th October, 1943, from the Combined Chiefs of Staff to General Eisenhower, and the instructions based thereon in A.F.H.Q. circular No. A.P.O. 512 of 27th November, 1943,47a have proved unduly restrictive in practice; local military authorities are precluded from dealing, for example, with minor cases such as the theft by Italians of parcels intended for Allied prisoners-of-war which took place before the Allied occupation. The proposal contained in my telegram No. 445 of 18th January48 may therefore need amending to give wider powers to those on the spot. We feel that the aim should be to avoid submission to the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes of a mass of trivial cases which would only clog the machinery and prejudice the expeditious handling of important cases.

3. On the other hand we feel that, so long as the United Nations Commission is in existence, and importance is attached to a uniform policy being followed in regard to the treatment of war criminals, the powers of the Allied military commanders must be clearly defined. The State Department’s present proposal might be interpreted as empowering military commanders to try and punish anyone falling into their hands. In the case of major war criminals and in cases in which other Allied Governments have a direct interest, this would not in our view be desirable.

4. We therefore suggest that local commanders should be empowered to try and punish (a) offences committed against their own command during the course of operations (as proposed in my telegram No. 445), and (b) all minor offences where the important consideration is that they should be rapidly disposed of; but that all more important cases other than under (a), and particularly those raising questions of principle or directly concerning other Allied Governments, should be dealt with through the machinery of the United Nations Commission. It is probable that the State Department have something of this sort in mind. We feel, however, that some more precise definition of their formula on the above lines is desirable.

5. As regards minor cases now arising in Italy, such as those referred to at end of second sentence of paragraph 2 above, we think trial by the Allied command preferable to trial by Italian authorities, since the latter might constitute an undesirable precedent for the treatment of other and more important war criminals later on.

47a For text of the circular of November 27, 1943, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 429.

48 See telegram transmitted to the Department in the British aide-mémoire of February 3, p. 1277 [Pg. 1277 is part of Doc. 823].

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth) 740.00116 European War 1939/1434

[Document 838]

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

Washington, 20 May, 1944.

Dear Mr. Hackworth: I have pleasure in communicating to you herewith some further material from the Foreign Office49 in regard to the punishment of war criminals.

It occurred to me in looking at the correspondence that our points of view are now pretty close and that what may be needed is a little careful drafting. Would it perhaps save time and trouble if you or your deputy could call together a small meeting of representatives of the War and Navy Departments and this Embassy to prepare a draft? It could then be submitted as an agreed draft to higher authority in the different departments, and, if it appeared necessary, by telegraph to the United Kingdom Government.

Yours very sincerely,

Paul Gore-Booth

49  Supra.

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) 740.00116 European War 1939/1416

[Document 839]

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell)

No. 13 Washington, May 22, 1944.

Sir: Reference is made to your despatch no. 15255 of April 26, 1944 enclosing certain proposals of General de Baer which the War Crimes Commission decided to discuss at its next meeting after April 25. You ask for the Department’s opinion of them.

The observations in question are so general in character that the Department finds difficulty in undertaking to comment on them in detail at present. However, certain aspects may be noted.

In regard to the proposal that any member of the Commission should be entitled to bring before Committee I the case of any person accused of a war crime, irrespective of the nationality of the victim or the place where the crime was committed, the Commission being entitled to reject any case submitted in this way, the Department is of the opinion that as thus safeguarded there may be no serious objection to it.

The Department perceives no objection to the preparation of dossiers either by the National offices or the Commission itself in respect to persons who have signed decrees sanctioning acts generally considered to be in violation of the laws of war.

The suggestion that the Commission obtain the names of the persons responsible for each sector and district of the occupied countries appears to have been covered by the resolution adopted by the Commission at its fourteenth meeting on April 4, 1944.50 In its instruction no. 12 of May 5, 1944,51 the Department informed you that in so far as the information is available it would forward you a list of such persons in American territory occupied by the Japanese.

The proposal that all persons civil and military susceptible of carrying some responsibility in the atrocities which have been committed be placed in custody immediately after the armistice would seem to be a matter of policy to be determined by the competent political and military authorities, which would have to be taken up with those authorities when and if the Commission adopts a recommendation on the subject.

The same is true of the suggestions numbered 1 through 4 listed on pages 5–6 of Doc. C.14.51a

As for suggestion numbered 5 on page 6 of that document that new efforts be made to secure the cooperation of the U.S.S.R., you will readily appreciate that this is a political question which should be left to the authorities charged with responsibility in policy matters. The governments of the countries represented on the Commission are fully aware of the desirability of cooperation between the allies.

The Department is addressing you a separate instruction on the proposal that changes of nationality of war criminals should not be recognized.

The question of whether political rather than judicial action should be taken against enemy leaders is, of course, a question of policy. However, the Department knows of no reason why the Commission should not express its views should it so desire.

Very truly yours,

Cordell Hull

50 The resolution requested that governments whose territories had been occupied bv the enemv cause lists to be made of all enemy civil and military persons in authority in each occupied district since 1939 (740.00116 European War 1939/1398).

51 Not printed.

51a  Ante, p. 1292 [Pg. 1292 is part of Doc. 833].

The American Representative on the United Nations War Grimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War 1939/1453

[Document 840]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Grimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

No. 15862 London, May 24, 1944.
[Received May 31.]

Sir: I have the honor to enclose a series of recommendations to the various governments adopted by the War Crimes Commission May 16, 1944.

It was the opinion of the Commission that a very large proportion of the offenses committed by the Axis Powers would not be discovered until after the liberation of the occupied countries.

It seemed reasonably obvious that a very large number of the accused would get away to Germany with the retreating forces. This would be especially true of government officials. It is believed that among those whose offenses will be discovered, or against whom suitable cases can be built, will be members of the S.S., Gestapo, etc. For this reason it was believed by the Commission that it would be a good idea to have a round up of such people, so that they would be available if needed. I know that this is a common proceeding in the ordinary police administration.

The Commission, therefore, makes the enclosed recommendations to the various governments, trusting that they will be accepted.

Respectfully,

Herbert Pell

[Enclosure]

Document No. C.21, 18 May, 1944: Recommendations to the Governments Adopted by the War Crimes Commission on 16 May, 1944

Measures to Ensure Capture of War Criminals

1. The mere establishment of lists of persons presumably guilty of war crimes, by building up and preparing complete cases and dossiers containing the proof of their guilt, can never suffice completely—though this was the original basis for the work of the Commission.

Those Governments in particular, whose territories are completely or almost completely occupied by the enemy lack the machinery, personnel and the necessary information.

Although they may cover a certain number of cases, they can not adequately deal in this way with the mass-criminality now existing in their countries. This first task should, however, be continued, and at the same time other means should be applied.

If those who have committed major crimes are not to escape punishment, all persons who have held a responsible position in the occupied countries or in the army or military or police organisations should be available, immediately after the armistice, to be examined upon any crimes which may have been committed in their sector or command.

2. For this purpose the governments, through their national offices, should compile and communicate to the Commission when they think it expedient, lists of all enemy civil and military persons in authority in each occupied district, including Gauleiters, Governors, Chiefs of the S.S., Chiefs of the Gestapo etc., with as complete particulars as possible regarding these persons’ identity and some of the more important crimes committed in the provinces, districts, towns or camps where they are or were in authority. The surrender of these persons by the enemy at the moment of the armistice may be demanded.

3. It is particularly necessary that on the conclusion of the armistice the military authorities should put and keep under control all persons whom they find to have been members of the S.S. or the Gestapo.

4. Analogous measures are recommended as regards other Axis Powers and satellites.

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) 740.00116 European War 1939/1405

[Document 841]

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell)

No. 14 Washington, May 24, 1944.

Sir: Reference is made to your despatch no. 14989 dated April 12, 194452 in which you state that a certain number of Germans, and perhaps citizens of other Axis countries, have taken out Spanish naturalization papers with the possible intention of thereby escaping the attention of the United Nations. It has been suggested, you say, that the United Nations should refuse to recognize any naturalization of citizens of enemy states completed after the beginning of the war. You add that you will not take part in any debate on the subject without instructions from the Department.

The suggestion which you mention has far-reaching implications, both from the point of view of law and policy. Your attention is called to the fact that undoubtedly many persons, formerly nationals of Axis states, have been naturalized in this country both before and after our entry into the war. It has been the historical policy of this Government to insist that the right of expatriation is, as stated in the joint resolution of Congress of July 27, 1868, “a natural and inherent right of all people”.53

It is the tentative view of the Department that the Commission should consider cases of war criminals regardless of any change in nationality such as is referred to above. The problems raised by such changes can be considered later, if and when the question arises.

Very truly yours,

Cordell Hull

52 Not printed.

53 15 Stat. 223.

Document No. C.23(1), 1 June, 1944: Scope of the Retributive Action of the United Nations 740.00116 EW/1469

[Document 842]

Document No. C.23(1), 1 June, 1944: Scope of the Retributive Action of the United Nations 54

June 1, 1944

Letter From the Chairman of the Commission to the Rt. Hon. Anthony Eden, His Britannic Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in the United Kingdom, 31 May, 1944

Sir: At the time when agreement was reached between the Governments of the United Nations for the institution of this Commission, the paramount consideration was the need to establish machinery for bringing to justice members of the enemy forces and officials in the enemy administrations, who had been guilty of violations of the laws and customs of war against members of the Allied forces or against inhabitants of Allied territory temporarily occupied by the enemy.

I have been asked by members of the Commission to inform you that in their view it would now be convenient to know whether it is the desire of the Governments of the United Nations that the activities of the Commission should be restricted to the investigation of war crimes stricto sensu, of which the victims have been Allied individuals.

Technically, a distinction can well be drawn between atrocities committed by the enemy which are violations of the laws and customs of war and those which are not, but it will probably be the general view that the need to exact retribution is as great in the one case as in the other.

A category of enemy atrocities which has deeply affected the public mind, but which does not fall strictly within the definition of war crimes, is undoubtedly the atrocities which have been committed on racial, political or religious grounds in enemy territory.

The publicity which was given to the appointment of the Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes led many people to assume that it would be part of the duties of the Commission to investigate atrocities of this character committed by the enemy in enemy territory as well as in occupied territory. I have been approached on occasions by bodies and individuals desirous of knowing whether they could help the Commission in this part of its work. If some other machinery for dealing with the above category of cases is to be set up, the Commission feels that a public announcement to this effect would be helpful, in order that the public at large may understand that effective steps will be taken to ensure that the authors of these atrocities are brought to justice.

The Governments of the United Nations may already have in view some plan for bringing the authors of these crimes to justice, but if that is not the case, it is right that you should know that the Commission is prepared to take up this work if by so doing it can assist the Governments of the United Nations.

In conclusion, I would say that it is the hope of the Commission that you will take the initiative in promoting any further discussion between the Governments of the United Nations which the suggestions made in this letter may be thought to require.

I am [etc.]

Cecil J. B. Hurst

54 Transmitted to the Department by the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission in despatch 16042, June 2, 1944; received June 12. A covering memorandum attached to the file copy reads: “The Secretary General ventures to call the attention of members of the Commission to the Commission’s request that each member will bring the Chairman’s letter, (C.23 (1)), to the notice of his Government.” (740.00116 EW/1469)

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth) 740.00116 European War 1939/1459

[Document 843]

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

Washington, 2 June, 1944.

Dear Mr. Hackworth: Following our conversation on May 20th, when I left with you a paraphrase of a message received from the Foreign Office55 on the subject of the procedure to be followed in dealing with war criminals, the Embassy telegraphed to the Foreign Office asking for their comments on the following two points.

1. We had understood from you that the Department of State were opposed to any limitation of the “powers” of military commanders, but might be willing to consider the issuing of a directive which, while not derogating from the powers of commanders, would instruct them in practice to adopt certain procedures: Would some such formula be acceptable to the Foreign Office?

2. We further said that you had pointed out that the United Nations Commission have no power to try cases, and that no tribunal has as yet been set up to try cases on their behalf. We asked whether the Foreign Office had any observations to contribute to a possible discussion on what would happen if delay in setting up such courts became indefinitely protracted. In other words, that the State Department would like to be sure that, if cases are referred to the United Nations Commission by the military commanders, there can be a fair certainty of legal action being taken, in spite of the non-existence at present of special machinery for such action.

A reply has now been received from the Foreign Office, a copy of which is enclosed herewith.

If the War and Navy Dpartments have accepted the suggestion for a meeting to discuss this matter, and prepare a draft, I think this Embassy is now sufficiently informed of the Foreign Office’s views, to be able to go ahead with only the minimum amount of telegraphic reference to London. May I know if the desirability of holding a meeting has yet been agreed?

Yours very sincerely,

Paul Gore-Booth

[Enclosure]

Paraphrase of Telegram Received from Foreign Office, London, Dated May 30th, 1944

Your point (1)

We would agree, if the directive to be issued to the Allied Commanders is in general conformity with the subject of paragraph 4 of Foreign Office telegram of May 12.

Your point (2)

We have always hoped that it will not prove necessary to attempt to devise special machinery for the trial of war criminals. The Moscow Declaration on German atrocities contemplated that they should be tried by national courts and this principle will presumably be followed wherever possible. We do not think it likely, however, that cases dealt with by the United Nations Commission will be brought to trial either by national courts or otherwise before the end of hostilities with the enemy country concerned. Indeed in our view it would be undesirable that they should, particularly in view of the danger of reprisals against Allied Prisoners of War in enemy hands. It was largely in order to ensure that the Allies acted on the same lines in this respect that the Commission was set up and it is for this reason desirable that cases (other than those arising in the course of operations with which Allied Commanders can properly deal at once) should wherever possible be handled through the Commission. If cases arise in which the United States Government have a direct interest and which they consider should for exceptional reasons be tried before the end of hostilities it would in our view be better that such cases should not go to the Commission.

55 See telegram of May 12 transmitted to the Department in British memorandum of May 20, p. 1316 [Pg. 1316 includes portions of Doc. 836 and Doc. 837].

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax) 740.00116 European War 1939/1419

[Document 844]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the British Ambassador and has the honor to refer to his note of March 15 making certain suggestions regarding the procedure to be followed in dealing with German war crimes against Italians, and to the Embassy’s memorandum of May 5, 1944 on the same subject.

After consultation with the War and Navy Departments, it is found that our three Departments concur in the proposal put forward in the Embassy’s note of March 15 that the British Government and the Government of the United States might act for the Italian Government in transmitting information regarding German war crimes against Italians to the War Crimes Commission. It is also agreed that the concurrence in the proposed procedure of the other allied governments represented on the Commission should be sought, and that if such concurrence is obtained, the Italian Government should be informed of the arrangement. The Department of State further agrees with the opinion of the British Government that it would not be in order to give the Italian representative a seat on the Commission.

In indicating their agreement with the procedure outlined above the War and Navy Departments expressed the view that it should be made clear that there is no intention of curtailing in any way the jurisdiction of military commanders in the field over violations of the laws of war. This is in line with their opinion communicated to the Embassy in the Department’s memorandum dated April 8, 1944, which was the subject of a recent memorandum from the Embassy dated May 20, 1944. The contents of the latter memorandum have been communicated to the War and Navy Departments and a further communication will be addressed to the Embassy when their replies have been received.

In its memorandum of May 5, 1944, the Embassy refers to the fact that the Combined Chiefs of Staff have forwarded to the Department of State a copy of the proceedings to perpetuate testimony in connection with the Caiazzo incident for possible transmission to the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes. The British Foreign Office is stated to be concerned that it should have been proposed to forward this information to the War Crimes Commission, as it is felt that this action tends to prejudge the issues raised by the Foreign Office and put forward in the Ambassador’s note of March 15, 1944. It is stated in the memorandum from the War Department forwarding a copy of the proceedings to this Department that the copy was sent at the request of the Secretary, Combined Chiefs of Staff, for transmission “if considered appropriate” to the War Crimes Commission. This Department will of course hold the record until a procedure for dealing with German crimes against Italians is finally agreed upon by all the Governments concerned.

Washington , June 3, 1944.

The Legal Adviser (Hackworth) to the First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) 740.00116 European War 1939/1459

[Document 845]

The Legal Adviser (Hackworth) to the First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth)

Washington, June 9, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Gore-Booth: I have your letter of June 2, 1944 enclosing a paraphrase of a message received from the Foreign Office on the subject of the jurisdiction of the military commanders in the field over war crimes, and inquiring whether a meeting of representatives of the Embassy and the Departments of War, Navy and State, which was suggested in your letter of May 20, has been agreed upon. I understand that you have been orally informed by a member of this office that the War and Navy Departments have indicated their willingness to take part in such a meeting.

Those Departments have asked the Department of State to procure from the Embassy particularized agenda of the points which the Embassy wishes to take up at such a meeting. I am enclosing a copy of the statement of this Department’s understanding of the British position which, in order to save time, was informally cleared with you over the telephone, and which is now being forwarded to the War and Navy Departments in response to their requests for agenda. The last sentence in this statement was inserted at your suggestion. According to our understanding of the position of the War and Navy Departments, they will desire to see the draft directive referred to in advance of any conference.

Sincerely yours,

Green H. Hackworth

[Enclosure]

Memorandum Prepared in the Legal Adviser’s Office of the Department of State

June 8, 1944.

Summary of the British Position

It is the Department’s understanding that the British concern regarding the jurisdiction of commanders in the field over war crimes results from the message from the Combined Chiefs of Staff to General Eisenhower of October 28, 1943. It appears to be the desire of the British to have an understanding between the British and American Governments so that a uniform policy may be followed in regard to the treatment of war criminals in British, American and Anglo-American theaters of operations. They suggest that (1) local commanders should have jurisdiction to try and punish offenses committed against their own command during the course of operations and all minor offenses and that (2) cases other than those mentioned above, particularly those raising questions of principle or directly concerning other Allied Governments, should be dealt with through the machinery of the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes. The British apparently feel it necessary to have some understanding on the question in view of the fact that we informed them on April 8, 1944, after consultation with the War and Navy Departments, “that since under the laws of the United States the tribunals of the Army and Navy are the only ones empowered to try cases which involve violations of the laws of war committed in overseas theaters of operations, their jurisdiction should not be limited, and that the military commanders should retain the power to try and punish at their discretion all offenders subject to their jurisdiction.” They feel that the matter can be adjusted by careful drafting of a directive to commanders in the field.

This statement of the British position which embodies the points which they wish to take up in conference with the Department of State and the War and Navy Departments has been cleared informally with the British Embassy. The Embassy has advised this Department that it will prepare in advance of a meeting with the three departments a draft of a directive for purposes of discussion.

The Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Hurst) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 Pacific War/6–944

[Document 846]

The Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Hurst) to the Secretary of State

[London,] 9 June 1944.

Establishment of a Far Eastern and Pacific Sub-Commission

Sir: It has been contemplated from the outset that the execution of the United Nations’ policy of punishing war crimes might necessitate the creation, in addition to the main Commission in London, of regional branches or panels for the investigation of such crimes. The United Nations War Crimes Commission has now decided to establish such a branch at Chungking for the investigation of Japanese war crimes under the name of the Far Eastern and Pacific Sub-Commission.

I have been requested by the Commission to bring this decision to the notice of the member Governments which are directly affected by the war with Japan and to give the following further information regarding the Sub-Commission.

The United Nations War Crimes Commission has agreed that:— (i) The Sub-Commission may sit at places other than Chungking as its work may require.

(ii) Recommendations for modifications of the principles and rules adopted by the main Commission which may be required by local circumstances shall be reported to the main Commission for approval.

(iii) Recommendations to the Governments must be made through the Commission.

(iv) The expenses of the Sub-Commission shall be met in the same manner as those of the Commission, that is to say, that each Government will pay the expenses of its representatives and the cost of preparing and transmitting cases to it, and the expenses incurred in the operation of the Sub-Commission itself will be met out of the budget of the main Commission. His Excellency the Chinese Ambassador in London, Dr. Wellington Koo, has been so good as to promise that his Government will provide the Sub-Commission with premises in China as is done in London for the main Commission by His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom.

The question of bringing Japanese war crimes before the main Commission was left open, but some members envisaged the possibility of their Governments bringing certain cases before the Commission. It was also the view of the Commission that the establishment of the Sub-Commission does not preclude the creation of other branches of the Commission.

The first task of the Far Eastern and Pacific Sub-Commission will be to study the numerous Japanese war crimes which some Governments are understood to desire to bring before it—cases evidence of which is in their possession and ready for examination. While some other interested Governments may not at present be in a position to transmit cases to the Sub-Commission, it is the hope of the Chinese Government as expressed by its representatives and of the War Crimes Commission as a whole, that as many of those Governments as possible will appoint representatives on the Sub-Commission, and in this manner both demonstrate the common interest of the United Nations in the punishment of war crimes and cooperate in ensuring that all war crimes committed by the same enemy shall be dealt with in accordance with the same principles.

If, as is hoped, your Government intends to be represented on the Sub-Commission, the decision and eventually the name of the first representative should be notified to the Chinese Government and to the Secretary-General of the Commission.

The Commission has invited the Chinese Government to be so good as to arrange for the organizing meeting of the Sub-Commission at the appropriate time.

I beg to request that you will be so good as to bring the foregoing to the attention of your Government.

I am [etc.]

Cecil J. B. Hurst

The Acting Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) 740.00116 E. W. 1939/1453

[Document 847]

The Acting Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell)

No. 15 Washington, June 10, 1944.

Sir: Reference is made to your despatch no. 15862 dated May 24, 1944 enclosing a series of recommendations adopted by the War Crimes Commission on May 16, 1944 (Doc. C.21).

These recommendations appear to amplify, with some modifications, the resolution adopted by the Commission at its meeting on April 4, 1944,56 to which reference was made in the Department’s instruction no. 12 dated May 5, 1944.57 In the latter instruction you were informed that a list of persons in authority in American territory occupied by the Japanese, as called for in the Commission’s resolution of April 4, 1944, would be transmitted to you at a later date.

It is noted that in the Commission’s recommendations of May 16, 1944 it is suggested that the Governments compile and communicate such lists to the Commission “when they think expedient.” This is in line with the views of the War and Navy Departments, which have informed this Department that for reasons of security it is believed desirable to retain in their files, for the present, information as to enemy personnel in authority in American territory occupied by the Japanese. They have assured the Department that information will be available at the proper time. Consequently, the Department is not in a position at present to forward you the lists referred to in its instruction no. 12.

The Commission’s recommendations embodied in Document C.21 enclosed in your despatch under reference have been forwarded to the War and Navy Departments.

Very truly yours,

Edward E. Stettinius, Jr.

56 See footnote 50, p. 1318 [Pg. 1318 includes portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839].

57 Not printed.

Miss K. Isabel Poate, an Attaché of the British Embassy, to Miss Katherine B. Fite, Assistant to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth) 740.00116 European War 1939/1470

[Document 848]

Miss K. Isabel Poate, an Attaché of the British Embassy, to Miss Katherine B. Fite, Assistant to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

Washington, June 12, 1944.

Dear Miss Fite: As agreed between you and Mr. Gore-Booth on the telephone, and confirmed in Mr. Hackworth’s letter to Mr. Gore-Booth of June 9th, (Le 740.00116 European War 1939/1459), we have drawn up a draft directive on the subject of the jurisdiction of the military commanders in the field over war crimes, which might serve as a basis for discussion at the proposed meeting of representatives of the Department of State, the War and Navy Departments, and this Embassy. Three copies of this proposed draft are enclosed herewith.

Perhaps you would telephone, either to Mr. Gore-Booth or myself, as soon as a date and time for the meeting has been arranged?58

Yours sincerely,

K. Isabel Poate

[Enclosure]

Draft Directive

In dealing with War Criminals you should be guided by the following:

Military commanders have the power to try and punish at their discretion all cases which involve violations of the laws of war committed in overseas theaters of operation. This directive indicates the policy to be followed in deciding which crimes should be dealt with by summary military jurisdiction and which should be referred to the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes.

1. Military commanders shall try and punish offences committed against their command during the course of operations.

2. Military commanders may try and punish offences committed shortly before operations where the necessary evidence is readily available on the spot.

3. Offences committed some time before operations and where evidence is not available on the spot, shall be referred to the Commission.

4. Minor offences where the important consideration is prompt disposition of the case shall be tried and punished by local military commanders.

5. Serious offences, other than those committed against their own command during the course of operations, particularly those involving questions of principle or directly concerning other Allied Governments, shall be referred by military commanders to their Governments through the ordinary machinery for eventual report to the Commission.

58 No record of the meeting found in Department files; it was evidently held on July 7.

Document No. C.30, 15 June, 1944: Recommendation Regarding the Establishment in Enemy Territory of an Appropriate Agency to Assist the Commission in its Work, Adopted by the Commission on 13 June, 1944 740.00116 E.W./1479

[Document 849]

Document No. C.30, 15 June, 1944: Recommendation Regarding the Establishment in Enemy Territory of an Appropriate Agency to Assist the Commission in its Work, Adopted by the Commission on 13 June, 1944 59

June 15, 1944

When the Allied forces are established in enemy territory, it will be of great assistance to the War Crimes Commission if a group or agency could be attached to, or form part of, the appropriate section of the Supreme Allied Command in order to help the Commission in the task with which it has been entrusted. The institution of such a group or agency would also relieve other branches of the army of many duties connected with the apprehension and collecting of evidence against men who are to be put on trial.

Proceedings against war criminals in territory restored to the control of Allied Governments will in general necessitate some action which must be taken in enemy territory, and must therefore be taken under the general control and direction of the Supreme Allied Command.

Men who are wanted for trial for acts in connection with the war must be identified, and their whereabouts ascertained; they must be arrested, kept in custody and handed over for trial by the competent courts. Evidence must be obtained in a form which will enable it to be used at the trial. Information must be collected as to cases of war crimes of which the perpetrators have not yet been identified.

The above work can only be done by men who are acquainted with the language and the legal system of the country in which the trial will take place.

The number of men who will be required for this work, their qualifications, and the powers which they will be authorised to exercise are details which can be considered at a later stage. They could be specified in the Order of the Commander-in-Chief which would be issued for the creation of the group or agency proposed above.

Subject to the general control of the Commander-in-Chief which must be safeguarded, the proposed group or agency should be in touch with the War Crimes Commission.

59 Transmitted to the Department by the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission in despatch 16378, June 19, 1944; received June 24. See also History of the United Nations War Crimes Commission, pp. 348–349.

Document No. C.31, 16 June, 1944: Surrender by the Axis Powers of Persons Wanted for Trial as War Criminals 740.00116 European War 1939/1479

[Document 850]

Document No. C.31, 16 June, 1944: Surrender by the Axis Powers of Persons Wanted for Trial as War Criminals 60

June 16, 1944

Note by the Chairman to the Governments Represented on the Commission

It is the declared policy of the United Nations to require in the armistice granted to each Axis Power that persons wanted in connection with war crimes shall be surrendered to the United Nations by that Power.

The United Nations War Crimes Commission begs to submit herewith to the Governments represented on the Commission the text of a draft armistice article which it considers to contain the provisions necessary for this purpose.

The text now submitted is that of an article for insertion in the armistice with Germany.

In the Commission’s opinion the same text should be suitable for use in the armistice granted to each of Germany’s European satellites subject only to: (1) substitution of the name of the State concerned for that of Germany, and

(2) insertion in section 2 at (d) of the names of the forces which in that State correspond to the Geheime Staatspolizei (Gestapo) and Schutzstaffel (SS).

Recommendations on these points will be made to the Governments by the Commission as soon as possible.

Different provisions may be necessary in the case of Japan, and the text will be submitted at a later date.

Draft Article for Insertion in the Armistice With Germany

1. The United Nations may, if they so decide, bring to trial before any Tribunal, national or international, any persons accused of crimes connected with, or incidental to, hostilities conducted by Germany against any one or more of the United Nations. This provision shall apply notwithstanding any procedure or prosecution before a court, military or civil, of Germany or of any State or political entity acting in alliance or in concert with Germany, irrespective of whether such proceedings have ended in a conviction or in an acquittal, provided that if a sentence has been imposed the penalty already undergone shall be taken into account in fixing any sentence which may be imposed;

2. To this effect Germany shall: (a) take all necessary steps to hand over forthwith to the authorities of the United Nations any persons whose surrender is demanded either at the time when this instrument becomes effective or at some subsequent date;

(b) give such assistance as may be required to the authorities of the United Nations in all measures necessary to give effect to the obligations recognised in Section 1;

(c) forthwith take and keep under control all property, both moveable and immovable, belonging to persons whose surrender is demanded, and hold it at the disposal of the authorities of the United Nations;

(d) give such assistance as may be required to the authorities of the United Nations in interning forthwith and keeping in custody until such time as the authorities of the United Nations may otherwise direct, any or all members and former members of the Geheime Staatspolizei (Gestapo) and of the Schutzstaffel (SS);

3. The right to apprehend the persons referred to in Section 2 may be exercised by any Agency, military or civil, acting on behalf of some or all of the United Nations which may be in control of German territory, or which may be appointed to give effect to the present provisions.

4. Such German authorities as may be allowed by the United Nations to continue or to exercise their functions shall take all necessary steps: (a) to comply forthwith with all requests of the said agencies and authorities relating to the identification, discovery, apprehension, arrest and delivery of accused persons without regard to their nationality and without any right to examine the case upon its merits. Such agencies and authorities shall be given every facility to supervise the way in which their orders are carried out;

(b) to disclose and produce any records or documents or any other things the production of which may be considered necessary to ensure the full knowledge of the acts with which the accused are charged and the just appreciation of responsibility, to obtain the presence of witnesses and to assist in any other way in which such assistance may be required;

5. Germany will on demand surrender to the civil or military authorities of the United Nations for trial before such tribunal as the United Nations may appoint for the purpose: (a) any person accused of obstructing the execution of the foregoing provisions or failing to comply with any direction relating thereto. For this purpose the German authorities shall, when requested to do so, provide the United Nations with the names of the officials who are responsible for the execution of the provisions of this instrument;

(b) any person accused of aiding and abetting a person whose surrender has been demanded, in evading apprehension, arrest or surrender;

(c) any person accused of destroying or concealing documentary evidence, impeding or obstructing the calling or the examination of witnesses, or of attempting to do so;

(d) any person inciting another to resist in any way the provisions concerning the surrender and the punishment of criminals covered by these provisions;

(e) any German official accused of prosecuting or punishing or any individual accused of molesting anyone in any way for having reported to the authorities or agencies of the United Nations any evasion of—or resistance to—the foregoing provisions concerning the surrender or punishment of persons accused of crimes covered by these provisions;

6. The offences enumerated in Section 5 shall not be subject to the jurisdiction of German courts.

60 Transmitted to the Department by the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission in despatch 16378, June 19, 1944; received June 24.

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) 740.00116 EW/7–1544

[Document 851]

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell)

No. 19 Washington, July 15, 1944.

Sir: Having in mind your several communications and discussions in the War Crimes Commission, it is deemed desirable that the position of this Government on some of the questions raised should be stated for your guidance.

These questions have to do with (1) the meaning of the term “war crimes” for the purposes of your Commission; (2) the period during which war crimes may be said to have been committed; (3) whether atrocities committed by Axis authorities prior to the actual outbreak of hostilities are to be included; and (4) whether punishment by an Axis power of its own nationals may be comprehended within the meaning of “war crimes”.

(1) For present purposes of the United Nations, “war crimes” are those committed during the existing war, which for different countries began on different dates. Such crimes may be committed by members of the armed forces, civilian authorities, or other persons acting under the authority of, or claim or color of authority of, or in concert with, a state or other political entity engaged in war or armed hostilities with, or in hostile occupation of territory of any one of the United Nations.

(2) It is believed that the present war in the Far East may be said to have begun July 7, 1937, the date of the Loukouchiao incident.61 It is understood that the Chinese representative on the Commission may feel that it should date back to the Mukden incident of September 18, 1931,62 it being considered that the period since that date has not been genuinely a peace period but rather a period of de facto war interrupted by uneasy truces. It is thought, however, that so far as concerns employment of machinery of the United Nations, July 7, 1937 would more properly represent the beginning of the present war in the Far East.

The War in Europe may be said to have begun on September 1, 1939, when Germany attacked Poland.63

As between Germany and Czechoslovakia, it would probably be permissible to say that March 10, 1939, when German forces invaded Czechoslovakia,64 might be regarded as the beginning of war as between those two countries.

As to countries other than those mentioned, the beginning of the war might properly date from the time when they respectively became involved in the war, whether by declaration of war or otherwise.

(3) Punishment for war crimes and for atrocities committed against individuals or minority groups prior to the outbreak of war are believed to be separate problems. Arguments have been advanced that persecutions of Jews in Germany, for example, following the advent of the Hitler regime in 1933 and prior to the outbreak of war in Europe, should be treated as war crimes on the theory that they were steps looking to or in preparation of the war which followed, and hence could be deemed to be war crimes. As reprehensible as those acts were and as much as we all desire to see proper retribution in those cases, it is the view of this Government that to try to bring such offenses into the category of war crimes and to treat them as such would be unwise. It would be difficult to justify such a classification in view of the fact that the laws of war apply only in time of war, and the term “war crimes” on its face refers to crimes committed during war.

The War Crimes Commission might be authorized by the participating governments to examine the question of the punishment of offenses committed in enemy territory against persons on account of their race, religion, or political opinions. In such case, the Commission’s action should be limited to the formulation of recommendations to the governments as to the ways and means of dealing with the subject. It has been pointed out in previous communications to you that many of the perpetrators of atrocities in the prewar period have also perpetrated atrocities and crimes during the war period and hence would be subject to be dealt with as war criminals. In fact it is believed that the arch offenders in these respects would be reached in this way.

(4) You have also raised the question as to whether the War Crimes Commission should assume jurisdiction over cases relating to punishment by Germany of German nationals during the war, as for example, punishment for acts of sabotage, it being possible that such acts were committed as a result of exhortation emanating from a United Nation.

As you have previously been instructed, all countries, including the United States, penalize acts of sabotage, and it would be going rather far to undertake to treat as war criminals officials of an enemy state for administering such penal laws regardless of the motivating influence by which the saboteur was actuated. As stated in the Department’s instruction no. 7 of March 13, the Department is of the opinion that to assume to punish officials of enemy governments for action taken against their own nationals pursuant to their own laws would constitute an assumption of jurisdiction probably unwarranted under international law.

Nothing herein contained is designed in anywise to interfere with the right of any state, acting on its own responsibility, to take such action as may be permissible under its laws with respect to such atrocities committed against it or its nationals as are not cognizable by the War Crimes Commission.

This instruction has been considered and approved by the War and Navy Departments and by the President.

Very truly yours,

Cordell Hull

61 Outbreak of hostilities between Japanese and Chinese forces at the Marco Polo bridge near Peiping; see Foreign Relations, 1937, vol. iii, pp. 128 ff.

62 See ibid., 1931, vol. iii, pp. 1 ff.

63 See ibid., 1939, vol. i, pp. 402 ff.

64 See ibid., pp. 34 ff.

Document No. C.34, 18 July, 1944: Surrender by the Axis Powers of Persons Wanted for Trial as War Criminals 740.00116 European War/7–2044

[Document 852]

Document No. C.34, 18 July, 1944: Surrender by the Axis Powers of Persons Wanted for Trial as War Criminals 65

July 18, 1944

Second Note by the Chairman to the Governments Represented on the Commission

In his first Note on this subject submitting to the Governments a draft Article which it was suggested should be inserted in the armistice with Germany (Doc. C.31),66 the Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission stated that: “In the Commission’s opinion the same text should be suitable for use in the armistice granted to each of Germany’s European satellites subject only to: “(1) substitution of the name of the State concerned for that of Germany, and

“(2) insertion in section 2 at (d) of the names of the forces which in that State correspond to the Geheime Staatspolizei (Gestapo) and Schutzstaffel (S.S.).”

The Chairman now begs to place before the Governments the Commission’s recommendation that in the armistice with each European satellite the text of section 2 point (d) should make provision for taking and keeping in custody any members or former members of the German Gestapo and S.S. who were found in that country, and also any members of the police forces of that country, whether civil or military, who had served or were still serving as district chiefs in any country occupied by Nazi forces.

As stated in the first Note, different provisions may be necessary in the case of Japan, and the text will be submitted at a later date.

65 Transmitted to the Department by the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission in despatch 16966, July 20, 1944; received July 25.

66 Dated June 16, p. 1331 [Pg. 1331 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850].

Document No. C.36, 24 July, 1944: Suggestions by Committee II Regarding Co-operation With General Eisenhower’s Headquarters 740.00116 E.W./8–344

[Document 853]

Document No. C.36, 24 July, 1944: Suggestions by Committee II Regarding Co-operation With General Eisenhower’s Headquarters 67

July 24, 1944

Certain quarters in London and even some newspapers in London have been informed that the Nazis are preparing a big organisation for the purpose of helping Nazi war criminals to escape. False documents are already being fabricated and other measures being taken for this purpose.

The United Nations War Crimes Commission had realised this danger. We have recommended two measures to the Governments for the purpose of ensuring the arrest of war criminals: firstly the establishment of a War Crimes Office attached to the Commander-in-Chief’s Headquarters, and secondly the internment of the S.S. and the Gestapo. But we must realise that the United Nations Governments are not an executive body authorised and able to carry out decisions. An example is the fate of the enquiry concerning the extermination of Jews which the Commission on May 30th asked the Chairman to address to the Foreign Office. Up to date no reply has been received.

The only body capable of action is the Supreme Command of the expeditionary forces in Europe, i.e. General Eisenhower’s Headquarters.

We understand that the Chairman of the Commission, together with Mr. Pell and General de Baer, have had informal informative talks about collaboration between the War Crimes Commission and General Eisenhower’s Headquarters. We are all convinced that without direct and close collaboration between the Commission and those headquarters the work of the Commission will be a failure.

We understand that there are already liaison officers at General Eisenhower’s Headquarters for all kinds of business but there is no liaison officer for the punishment of war criminals. It is believed that the establishment of collaboration between the Commission and General Eisenhower’s Headquarters, and especially the establishment of a War Crimes Office, is possible only through the combined Chiefs of Staffs in Washington. We feel confident that the combined Chiefs of Staffs will accept our offer of collaboration and that they will give appropriate instructions to General Eisenhower. The elaboration of detailed schemes would be the task of General Eisenhower’s Headquarters and of our Commission here in London, but General Eisenhower must have at least a general authorisation for the purpose from the combined Chiefs of Staffs.

In view of the fact that the war is approaching its end, and especially in view of recent events in Germany, Committee II asks the Commission to take immediate steps to establish direct and close cooperation with General Eisenhower’s Headquarters, and to submit through the British Foreign Office to the combined Chiefs of Staffs the Commission’s recommendations concerning: a) Establishment of a War Crimes Office;

b) Internment of the S.A., S.S. and Gestapo;

c) Establishment of permanent collaboration through a liaison officer between the Commission and General Eisenhower’s Headquarters.

67 Transmitted to the Department by the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission in despatch 17273, August 3, 1944; received August 9. For additional information regarding these suggestions by Committee II, see History of the United Nations War Crimes Commission, p. 357.

Document No. C.38, 26 July, 1944: Establishment of the Far Eastern and Pacific Sub-Commission 740.00116 E.W./8–344

[Document 854]

Document No. C.38, 26 July, 1944: Establishment of the Far Eastern and Pacific Sub-Commission 68

July 26, 1944

Letter from the Chinese Ambassador to the Chairman of the Commission, Dated July 25, 1944

Dear Sir Cecil: I beg to inform you that the Chinese Government has appointed Dr. Wang Chung-hui, former Minister of Foreign Affairs and sometime Judge of the Permanent Court of International Justice, as the Chinese representative on the Far Eastern and Pacific Sub-Commission of the United Nations War Crimes Commission. It will be glad to provide suitable quarters for the Sub-Commission, and wishes to assure this body of a cordial welcome to Chungking. It will also be pleased to call the organizing meeting of the Sub-Commission in due course.69

Yours sincerely,

V. K. Wellington Koo

68 Transmitted to the Department by the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission in despatch 17273, August 3, 1944; received August 9.

69 The organizing meeting was held on November 28, 1944; see despatch 3213, December 9, from Chungking, p. 1399 [Pg. 1399 includes portions of Doc. 905, Doc. 906, and Doc. 907].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/7–2744: Telegram

[Document 855]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 27, 1944.
[Received July 28—1:25 a.m.]

5986. From Pell. War Crimes Commission Publicity Committee met July 26. Will make statement on work of Commission including section on powers of Commission and specific statement that so far it has not been authorized to consider offenses committed in Axis territory against Axis nationals because of race, creed or politics.

Czechoslovakia representative will announce his Government’s support on granting such powers. I understand United States Government will not object to such extension of powers. I shall certainly be asked questions at press conference Thursday August 3, 11 a.m. Please send official statement. [Pell.]

Winant

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth) 740.00116 EW/7–2944

[Document 856]

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

Washington, 29 July, 1944.

Dear Mr. Hackworth: With reference to the meeting which took place in your office on July 7th at which was discussed the draft of a directive to Military commanders in the field on the subject of treatment of war criminals, I am glad to inform you that we have now heard from the Foreign Office that they approve the draft which we agreed on that occasion.

I am sending you two extra copies of this letter for your convenience in informing the War and Navy Departments.

This Embassy is also communicating with the British Secretariat of the Combined Chiefs of Staff in order that preparations may be made for the issue of the agreed directive provided that the final concurrence of the United States Government authorities concerned is forthcoming.

Yours sincerely,

Paul Gore-Booth

The British Chargé (Campbell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./7–2944

[Document 857]

The British Chargé (Campbell) to the Secretary of State

No. 465

His Majesty’s Chargé d’Affaires presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and has the honour to draw Mr. Hull’s attention to the following matter.

2. The primary function of the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes is to compile lists of enemy nationals suspected of responsibility for war crimes, with a view to their eventual apprehension and surrender to the Allies for trial. The lists produced by the Commission will be submitted by them to the Allied Governments represented upon the Commission. Although no such list has yet been received from the Commission the time seems to have come when we might usefully consider procedure for the communication of the lists to the appropriate enemy authorities at the proper moment.

3. His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom contemplate that the lists will be communicated to Allied commanders in enemy territory, with instructions that they should present them to the enemy authorities in accordance with the general directives which they will presumably have received upon this subject. In the case of British and American Commanders, the lists would presumably be forwarded to them through the Combined Chiefs of Staff. As the headquarters of the War Crimes Commission are in London, it would seem appropriate that His Majesty’s Government should forward the lists to the Combined Chiefs of Staff through the British Chiefs of Staff. Should the United States Government feel it desirable to take parallel action and forward the lists simultaneously to the Combined Chiefs of Staff through their own channels, there would, of course, be no objection to this. The United States Government might, however, consider that such duplication was not necessary. In any case it is the view of the Foreign Office that there would seem to be no need for Governments other than His Majesty’s Government and the United States Government to take any action in regard to the copies of the lists which they will receive from the Commission.

4. In regard to the communication of the lists to the Soviet Commander-in-Chief in Germany, the position is complicated by the fact that the Soviet Government are not represented upon the War Crimes Commission. They will no doubt be preparing their own lists separately, and will presumably present these to the German authorities through the Soviet Commander-in-Chief. It will, however, be necessary for the British and American Commanders also to have copies of any such Soviet lists, and for the Soviet Commander-in-Chief to have copies of lists prepared by the War Crimes Commission, so that appropriate steps may be taken to ensure the apprehension of all the criminals concerned. In the view of His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom the most appropriate means of overcoming this difficulty would seem to lie in the communication to the European Advisory Commission70 by His Majesty’s Government and the United States Government of all lists forwarded by them to the Combined Chiefs of Staff and by the Soviet Government of all lists forwarded by them to the Soviet Commander-in-Chief.

5. Sir Ronald Campbell has the honour to enquire whether the United States Government agree to the suggestions set forth above. If the United States Government do approve these proposals, the Foreign Office in London would propose as the next step that these suggestions be explained to the Soviet Government and their concurrence invited.71

Washington , July 29, 1944.

70 For correspondence regarding this Commission, see pp. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1] ff.

71 On December 11, 1944, a member of the Department replied informally to an oral inquiry from the British Embassy that no formal reply had been made to its note of July 29 since there were pending before the Combined Chiefs of Staff draft instructions which contemplated a simpler procedure, namely communication of its lists directly by the Commission to theater commanders (740.00116 European War/12–944).

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./7–2944: Airgram

[Document 858]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

London, July 29, 1944.
[Received August 1—2 p.m.]

A–928. Personal for the Secretary.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I have already in telegram number 5986, July 27, reported that the Publicity Committee of the War Crimes Commission will have a press conference on Thursday, August 3rd. It is issuing a statement on the work of the Commission and includes a reference to the fact that the Commission has so far not received from the various governments the authorization to handle the question of offences committed by the Axis authorities on Axis nationals because of race, religion or political conviction. This, of course, includes Jews in Hungary, about whom you made an excellent and clear statement a few days ago,72 and also many Catholic and Protestant organizations, and a few individuals of Czech or Polish origin resident in and citizens of Germany.

On May 31st Sir Cecil Hurst, Chairman of the War Crimes Commission, sent a letter to Mr. Eden, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs,73 a copy of which was sent to the Department in despatch No. 16042, June 2, 1944.74 After referring to this category of crimes he says: “The Governments of the United Nations may already have in view some plan for bringing the authors of these crimes to justice, but if that is not the case, it is right that you should know that the Commission is prepared to take up this work if by so doing it can assist the Governments of the United Nations.”

So far no answer has been received to this letter, nor has any notice been taken of it by the various Governments to which it has been reported.

At the press conference, unless otherwise instructed, I shall express what I believe to be your opinion; that is, that the United States Government would be willing to entrust this duty to the Commission, if satisfactory to the other Governments. [Pell.]

Winant

72 Statement regarding Nazi atrocities in Hungary, Department of State Bulletin, July 16, 1944, p. 59.

73 See document No. C.23 (1), 1 June, p. 1321 [Pg. 1321 includes portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842].

74 Despatch not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00116 European War/7–2744: Telegram

[Document 859]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 31, 1944—7 p.m.

6032. For Pell. This relates to your 5986 of July 27.

1. In view of the fact that the functions of the War Crimes Commission are essentially investigative and advisory in character, it is hardly seen why it should make its work the subject of publicity.

2. In as much as statements regarding treatment of war crimes may have a direct and serious bearing on matters of a military character, no public statement regarding the Commission’s work should be made without the prior approval of the highest political and military authorities.

3. Any statement regarding offences against Axis nationals in Axis territory, as suggested by you, would be highly inopportune and might well be regarded as a license and encouragement to perpetration of further atrocities against people whom we desire to protect as far as possible.

4. It is not desired that you should associate yourself with any communiqué or other publicity regarding the work of the Commission except such as has been approved as indicated in paragraph 2.

5. Matters relating to war crimes at this juncture are too delicate and their possible implications are too far-reaching to be dealt with except with the greatest degree of caution.

6. It is desired that these views be brought to the attention of Ambassador Winant and to that of your colleagues.

Stettinius

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/8–344: Telegram

[Document 860]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 3, 1944—9 p.m.
[Received August 3—7:35 p.m.]

6209. Immediately on receipt of your 6032 of July 31, I contacted Mr. Pell and also brought the matter to Mr. Eden’s attention, as I found that in spite of Mr. Pell’s protest and dissent, the War Crimes Commission still planned to hold its press conference this morning. It was only with Mr. Eden’s intervention that it was cancelled.

Winant

The American Representative on the United Nations War Grimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./8–544

[Document 861]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Grimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

No. 17295 London, August 5, 1944.
[Received August 9.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that your telegram No. 6032 arrived Tuesday morning, August 1. I expressed to the Commission, at its regular meeting Tuesday afternoon, August 1, the substance in paraphrase as follows: 1. Duties of Commission mainly advisory to Government, therefore, publicity unnecessary.

2. Statements should only be made with approval of highest Army and Government people.

3. Persecutions in Germany should not be referred to as they might inspire future excesses.

4. I must not take part in making statements except approved by Government.

5. Greatest care must be exercised.

6. This point of view must be expressed to Commission.

The Chairman, Sir Cecil Hurst, said that any statement by the Committee would be given to the British censor.

Ambassador Colban stated that he believed that any statement might start a press controversy, and inquired of Sir Cecil whether the statement was one for publication which might start agitation, or one which merely outlined the work of the Commission and was to be treated as confidential.

Chairman Hurst said that critical articles about the Commission had been published implying that its work might end in a fiasco. He considered it advisable that a statement be issued. He further stated that a press conference would be held on Thursday, August 3, at which time he would hand to members of the press the statement which would outline the powers and the work of the Commission. He believed that this should clarify the situation.

Dr. de Moor asked if the United States Government meant that all statements should be submitted to the military authorities? I said that that was my understanding.

The existence of the Commission is, of course, universally known and its work has been considerably discussed. Since its first meeting I have subscribed to a clipping bureau in England and have received a great many items. I do not know to what extent the activities of the Commission have been reported in the American press or how much interest has been taken in its proceedings.

I clearly explained to the members of the publicity committee the attitude of the Department towards any reference to Axis nationals.

I expressed with great clearness the attitude of the Department to Sir Cecil Hurst, who assured me that no statement would be made which could possibly arouse retaliation, and that he would take full responsibility of any statement put out announcing the limitations of the powers of the Commission.

On Wednesday, August 2, accompanied by Colonel Hodgson,75 I saw Sir Cecil Hurst privately and insisted that the press conference should be postponed, and a statement, which had been sent to the United States and Argentine for release, should be cancelled. This was done.

On the afternoon of August 3rd I received the following letter from Sir Cecil: “united nations war crimes commission, royal courts of justice,

Strand, W. C. 2, August 3, 1944.

Dear Mr. Pell: In view of the urgent request which you have made to me I have asked the Allied Information Office to postpone the Press Conference arranged for August 3rd.

The request has put me in a most embarrassing position, and I fear that the instructions sent to you by the State Department are due to a misunderstanding of the position.

I have as you know ever since the Commission was instituted, done my utmost to discourage the Press from taking any interest in our work, because I felt it was better for the Commission not to be the subject of too much attention until we have had time to ascertain and fix the best lines on which to work. Recently, however, some articles have been published in London which showed that this policy must be varied. These articles would have led the public to assume that nothing was being done by the Commission and that the policy of the United Nations as regards war criminals after this war would be as great a fiasco as it was after the last war.

Accordingly, on the advice of the Allied Information Office, I agreed to receive the Press, and with the help of some of my colleagues I drew up a statement explaining the lines on which the Commission works. This statement was to have been given to the Press, not for publication, but as a guide to the newspapers themselves in order that they might understand the lines on which the Commission proceeds. The British Press is quite trustworthy and given a chance they will always do their best to keep the public straight.

I have asked the officials of the Allied Information Office when telling the Press that the Conference must be postponed, to let them know that this is not due to any crisis that has arisen, but due to the fact that I thought it would be wise that Governments should get the text of the statement before it was issued.

Believe me,

My dear colleague,

Very Sincerely yours,

Cecil J. B. Hurst.”

I am enclosing a copy of the proposed statement which was cancelled after being given to the Allied Information Office, which I understand to be an intergovernmental organization.

I am submitting the statement from the Commission for approval, and will endeavour to achieve the suppression of such parts as the Department may disapprove. It is possible that this question may come up before the Commission on August 8th and almost certainly not later than the 15th.

It would manifestly be of great assistance to me if the Department were to give me some indication to guide me in my efforts to tone down any future statements which I may not be able to suppress.

Respectfully,

Herbert Pell

[Enclosure]

Draft Statement for the Press on Origin and Composition of the United Nations War Crimes Commission

August 3, 1944.

The United Nations War Crimes Commission—originally known as the Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes—has now been in operation for some nine months and its organisation and work have reached a stage which makes it desirable to issue a statement concerning them.

The intention to set up the Commission was announced on 7th October, 1942, by the Lord Chancellor75a in a speech in the House of Lords and by President Roosevelt in a declaration of the same date.76 Discussions between the Governments followed and the Commission was brought into being on 20th October, 1943, by a meeting of Government representatives at the Foreign Office. Six days later it held its first meeting (26th October, 1943).

The Commission is at present composed of representatives of the Governments of the United States of America, Australia, Belgium, the United Kingdom, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Greece, India, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland and Yugoslavia. Its Chairman is the United Kingdom’s representative, Sir Cecil Hurst, Vice-President of the Permanent Court of International Justice. Each Government has a single representative on the Commission, but the representative can be replaced by another government nominee, if he is unable to act or for some other special reason. The Commission may also hear experts.

Task of the Commission

investigation of evidence and compilation of lists of persons wanted for trial as war criminals

The task originally assigned to the Commission was indicated in Lord Simon’s speech of 7th October, 1942, in the following passage: “The proposal is to set up with the least possible delay a United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes. The Commission will be composed of nationals of the United Nations, selected by their Governments. The Commission will investigate war crimes committed against nationals of the United Nations, recording testimony available, and the Commission will report from time to time to the Governments of those nations, cases in which such crimes appear to have been committed, naming and identifying wherever possible the persons responsible.…77 The investigation should cover war crimes of offenders irrespective of rank, and the aim will be to collect material, supported wherever possible by depositions or other documents, to establish such crimes, especially where they are systematically perpetrated, and to name and identify those responsible for their perpetrations.”

In addition to “fixing these horrible crimes upon those enemy individuals who are really responsible, and who ought to be dealt with as criminals in respect of them”, the creation of the Commission was intended to enable the Governments to obtain surrender of the guilty persons in good time. On this Lord Simon said: “The Treaty of Versailles failed to secure the effective punishment of the principal criminals, partly owing to the fact that provision for this purpose was only contained in the final Treaty of Peace, negotiated and signed months and months after the Armistice in June, 1919. …77 We do not intend to make the same mistake as was made by postponing this demand until the final treaty of peace has been signed. Named criminals wanted for war crimes should be caught and handed over at the time of, and as a condition of, the Armistice, with the right to require the delivery of others as soon as the supplementary investigations are complete.”

The first and primary task of the Commission is accordingly that of investigating the evidence and drawing up lists of persons who, as the result of such examination, are wanted for trial as war criminals.

In practice the progress of this work of investigation depends primarily upon the efforts of the individual Governments rather than upon those of the Commission. Responsibility for deciding what alleged war crimes shall be brought before the Commission and for communicating to it the evidence on which they rely rests necessarily with the Governments. The gradual accumulation in the Commission’s files of evidence regarding the persons who have been responsible for the acts committed by the Axis armies and for the Axis military rule in occupied countries is indeed of importance in aiding identification of the individuals guilty of particular atrocities but the Commission has no machinery for directly collecting evidence itself. The procedure is as follows. The competent department of each Government, known as the National Office, transmits to the Commission those cases of war crimes for which it considers punishment should be inflicted on the perpetrators, and communicates to it at the same time the evidence on which it relies and its views of the case. This is done in a form prescribed by the Commission and meant to facilitate systematic examination and comparison of the cases and the application of uniform principles. On reaching the Commission cases are first examined by a “committee on facts and evidence”. The examination is mainly directed to the following questions—Do the charges made disclose a war crime or crimes? Is there sufficient material to identify the perpetrator? Is there a prima facie case against him? Each case is considered by the committee in the presence and with the assistance of a representative of the National Office which presented it and the Office may be asked to seek for additional evidence. Where the committee feels that one or other of the above three questions cannot safely be answered in the affirmative in regard to a particular charge, it nevertheless keeps the case in its files for further consideration if additional information is forthcoming. The committee reports to the Commission with which rests the final responsibility for deciding what persons should be put upon the lists of persons who are wanted for trial as war criminals and whose surrender should accordingly be enforced upon the Axis Powers.

The fact that the Commission is concerned with crimes committed in enemy occupied territory or in Axis territory and sometimes, as in cases of massacre of prisoners, on the field of battle itself, confronts the National Offices and the Commission with peculiar difficulties. The processes of normal criminal investigation are for the most part inapplicable. This is true above all of the identification of the guilty individual. The files contain a considerable number of cases in which the crime is abundantly proved but the perpetrator can be identified only as the holder of a particular post, a member of some unit of the enemy army and so forth. This situation should change as, with the expulsion of the Axis armies and the occupation of the Axis countries, local enquiries can be held and enemy records become available. In any event these possibilities will be utilised to the full before the cases referred to are dropped.

The competence which the Governments have given to the Commission does not extend to all the misdeeds and atrocities committed by persons serving the cause of the Axis. It is limited to war crimes. It does not cover the treasonable behaviour of collaborators with the Axis, the so-called “Quislings”, nor does it at present extend to the punishment of the atrocious acts which have been committed by the Axis Powers on their own territories against individuals of their own nationality on account of their race, religion or political opinions—although United Nations statesmen have announced the intention to exact retribution for these acts.

advisory functions of the commission

Some little time after its creation the functions of the Commission were enlarged to include that of making recommendations to the Governments upon such matters as the methods to be adopted to ensure surrender or capture of the persons wanted for trial as war criminals and the tribunals by which they should be tried. Such matters are dealt with in the first instance by a “committee on enforcement” and by a “committee on legal questions”. The legal committee also examines legal questions arising in the course of the Commission’s work.

As regards surrender and capture, it is, for obvious reasons, only possible to say here that recommendations which the Commission considers to be efficacious and important are made to the Governments.

The position as regards tribunals was clarified by the Moscow Declaration of German atrocities in Occupied Europe made by the United Kingdom, the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and published by the Moscow Conference on 1st November, 1943. It states that: “At the time of the granting of any armistice to any Government which may be set up in Germany, those German officers and men and members of the Nazi Party who have been responsible for or have taken a consenting part in the above atrocities, massacres, and executions will be sent back to the countries in which their abominable deeds were done in order that they may be judged and punished according to the laws of these liberated countries and of the Free Governments which will be erected therein.”

It will rest with each of the United Nations, not with the Commission, to decide what type of tribunal, whether the ordinary criminal courts or military tribunals or some new form of ad hoc tribunal, will be employed for the trial of war criminals who are brought to its territory for trial. The Commission is, on the other hand, concerned with, and is at present examining, the question whether some form of joint or interallied tribunal may not have to be created to deal with cases which cannot conveniently or effectively be tried before national courts.

75 Col. Joseph V. Hodgson, Deputy American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission.

75a Viscount Simon.

76 For text of President Roosevelt’s statement, see telegram 4867, October 6, 1942, to London, Foreign Relations, 1942, vol. i, p. 59.

77 Omission indicated in the original despatch.

77 Omission indicated in the original despatch.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/8–1044: Telegram

[Document 862]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 10, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received August 10—5:50 p.m.]

6429. From Pell. Hurst, Chairman War Crimes Commission, inquired if press statement in despatch No. 17295 satisfactory to Department. Hurst deeply concerned about articles appearing in British newspapers. He has stated that unless contrary advice is received from Department, he will assume that the press statement meets with its approval and accordingly will call press conference next week and release statement. Please instruct. [Pell.]

Winant

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00116 E.W./8–1044: Telegram

[Document 863]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 11, 1944—midnight.

6370. For Ambassador and Herbert Pell. Proposed press statement transmitted in despatch 17295, August 5 only just received and will promptly be submitted to the consideration of the appropriate authorities.

For Pell. Your telegram 6429, August 10. Request Sir Cecil Hurst to suspend publicity until this Government has had opportunity to indicate its views regarding statement which it will do at earliest possible moment.

For Ambassador. If necessary, obtain Mr. Eden’s assistance to postpone publicity.78

Stettinius

78 Telegram 6627, August 17, from the Ambassador in the United Kingdom reported that the press conference would be called in about 10 days (740.00116 European War/8–1744).

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/8–1544

[Document 864]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

No. 513

His Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and has the honour to refer to Sir Ronald Campbell’s note No. 465 of July 29th on the subject of War Crimes.

2. Lord Halifax has the honour to inform Mr. Hull that he has received from the Foreign Office copies of two letters from Sir Cecil Hurst, the United Kingdom representative on the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes and currently the Chairman of the Commission, forwarding recommendations by the Commission concerning (a) provisions which, if inserted in any armistice imposed upon Germany, would assist the work of the Commission and (b) measures to ensure the capture of war criminals.80

3. Lord Halifax is also informed that the Foreign Office have received from the Chairman of the War Crimes Commission a further note (No. C34) of July 18, amplifying the earlier recommendations regarding the provisions to be inserted in the armistice terms—(Document C31). This further note states that the Commission recommends that in the Armistice with each European satellite country provision should be made for taking and keeping in custody any members or former members of the German Gestapo and the S.S. who were found in that country and also any members of the police forces of that country whether civil or military who had served or were still serving as District Chiefs in any country occupied by Nazi forces.

4. It is understood that copies of these three recommendations have been communicated to each of the other representatives upon the Commission and Mr. Pell, United States representative, will no doubt have forwarded copies to the United States Government.

5. His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs has considered what action might be suitable to be taken by His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom in regard to these recommendations. In his view the most appropriate way of dealing with them would be for them to be communicated either by His Majesty’s Government or by His Majesty’s Government and the United States Government jointly to the European Advisory Commission for the latter to consider as a part of its documentation upon the subjects with which they deal. If this were done they would be forwarded without comment or commitment on the part of His Majesty’s Government and it would be made clear that the communication of these recommendations to the Commission did not imply that His Majesty’s Government either approved them in toto or, in the case of the draft armistice provisions, concurred in the desirability of including this draft in any instrument of surrender for Germany. It would be for each of the Governments represented upon the European Advisory Commission to put forward their views on the recommendations through their own representatives when the questions were discussed in the Commission. The Foreign Office do not propose at present to discuss these recommendations with Allied Governments other than the United States Government.

6. His Majesty’s Government will give further consideration to the documents received from the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes, with a view to formulating their own views upon them. Meanwhile Lord Halifax has been instructed to inform Mr. Hull of the proposals outlined above and to enquire whether the United States Government concur in the procedure suggested.

Washington , August 15, 1944.

80 Documents No. C.31, 16 June, and No. C.21, 18 May, respectively, pp. 1331 [Pg. 1331 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850] and 1320 [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 840].

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Hurst) 740.00116 P.W./6–944

[Document 865]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Hurst)81

Washington, August 18, 1944.

Sir: I thank you for your letter of June 9, 1944, regarding the decision of the United Nations War Crimes Commission to establish at Chungking a Far Eastern and Pacific Sub-Commission.

This Government has designated the American Ambassador in Chungking, the Honorable Clarence E. Gauss, to represent it on the Sub-Commission.82 He will be assisted by the Judge Advocate of the United States Armed Forces in China-Burma-India. It has not yet been decided whether or not he will have a naval assistant.

This Government understands that the Sub-Commission will be an agency of the War Crimes Commission in London and will receive instructions from the Commission in London together with the necessary documentation.

Accept [etc.]

Cordell Hull

81 Transmitted to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission in instruction 21, August 18, 1944, for delivery to Sir Cecil Hurst.

82 Mr. George Atcheson, Jr., the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim at Chungking, served as American representative from November 13, 1944, until December 14, 1944, when the new Ambassador, General Patrick Hurley, was designated to represent the Government on the Sub-Commission. For list of other Americans on the Sub-Commission, see History of the United Nations War Crimes Commission, p. 130.

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/8–1944

[Document 866]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

No. 525

His Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and has the honour to refer to previous correspondence regarding the scope of the activities of the United Nations War Crimes Commission.

2. Lord Halifax has now been informed that on May 30, 1944, Sir Cecil Hurst, the United Kingdom representative on the Commission, and concurrently its Chairman, addressed a formal letter to His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs83 drawing attention to public demand that some machinery should be established for dealing with atrocities committed on racial, political, or religious grounds in enemy territory. The letter stated that if machinery for this purpose already exists the Commission feels that a public announcement to this effect would be helpful. If, on the other hand, the Governments of the United Nations have no plan in view for bringing authors of such crimes to justice, the Commission is prepared to undertake the task if desired. Sir Cecil Hurst suggests that Mr. Eden should take the initiative in promoting any further discussion that may be required on the subject between the Governments of the United Nations.

3. His Majesty’s Government have considered this question and have decided that in their view the War Crimes Commission should confine itself to collecting evidence of atrocities of this nature, e.g. those against Jews, only when perpetrated in occupied countries. It is felt that a clear distinction exists between offences in regard to which the United Nations have jurisdiction under International Law, i.e. war crimes, and those in regard to which they had not. Atrocities committed on racial, political or religious grounds in enemy territory fell within the latter category. The United Nations should, therefore, in the opinion of His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom, not themselves assume any formal obligation in regard to the punishment of those responsible for such atrocities. Any attempt on their part to do so or to attempt to enforce specific provisions for the prosecution of offenders by enemy authorities would give rise to serious difficulties of practice and principle.

4. On the other hand successor Governments in enemy countries after the war will have jurisdiction in such cases and the United Nations will be in a strong position to exert pressure upon them to exercise it. There would appear to be a strong case for leaving the door open for the exercise of such pressure.

5. His Majesty’s Government accordingly propose that their attitude in this question should be as follows: (A) Sir Cecil Hurst should be informed that His Majesty’s Government cannot agree to any extension of the terms of reference of the United Nations War Crimes Commission to enable it to deal with atrocities committed on racial, political or religious grounds in enemy territory.

(B) The United Nations should not assume any formal commitment to ensure the trial of those responsible for such atrocities; nor should they impose upon the enemy any formal obligation to try them or surrender them for trial. The United Nations should, however, be prepared to bring pressure to bear upon successor Governments in enemy countries to ensure that criminals are brought to justice. The War Crimes Commission should be informed of the general intentions of the United Nations in this respect.

6. Lord Halifax has been instructed to enquire whether the United States Government concur in the foregoing conclusions and, if so, whether they approve the lines of the proposed reply to Sir Cecil Hurst’s letter.

7. It is not the intention of His Majesty’s Government to consult the other Allied Governments in this matter.

Washington , August 19, 1944.

83 See Document No. C.23(1), 1 June, p. 1321 [Pg. 1321 includes portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842].

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/8–2144

[Document 867]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

No. 17584 London, August 21, 1944.
[Received August 30.]

Sir: I have the honor to report:

The War Crimes Commission has from the beginning tried to follow the scheme laid down in the Moscow Declaration; that in every case possible persons accused of war crimes would be tried by the courts of the offended nation. It was also stated in the Moscow Declaration that the arch criminals would be dealt with politically by the United Nations.

A good deal of difficulty has arisen because of our doubt as to where to draw the line. Manifestly, Hitler, Goering, Goebbels, Mussolini and a few others have offended all nations rather than any one in particular. There are, however, many doubtful cases, and I should be grateful for instructions suggesting a rule by which we could ascertain just who is to be turned over to the political authorities, and, if possible, some indication of the methods by which their cases will be handled.

There are many high up Nazis whose offenses have been fairly equally distributed against more than one nation. Seyss-Inquart84 and Henlein85 are cases in point. The former was very prominent in the betrayal and brutalization of Austria. They both have had conspicuous records in Czechoslovakia and in the Low Countries. More prominent than the ordinary governor of a conquered province, they are nevertheless far below Hitler and his immediate associates. Are they to be left for direct action by the governments, or are their cases to be considered by this Commission for judicial procedure?

Respectfully,

Herbert Pell

84 Arthur Seyss-Inquart, an Austrian Nazi, who became in turn Austrian Federal Chancellor, then Deputy Governor of Poland, and finally Reich Commissioner for occupied Holland.

85 Konrad Henlein, founder of the Sudeten German Party, who became Reich Commissioner for Sudeten German territories and then Gauleiter of Sudetenga’u and Reich Commissioner, May 1, 1939.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00116 E.W./8–2244: Telegram

[Document 868]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 28, 1944—5 p.m.

6891. For Pell. Your 6429, August 10, 6627, August 17, and 6804, August 22.86 You may inform Hurst that this Government raises no objection to the statement enclosed in your despatch 17295 of August 5, it being understood that the statement is to be given to the press not for publication but in strictest confidence solely as a guide for newspapers themselves in order that they may understand lines on which Commission proceeds, and not as a direct communiqué from the Commission.87

Hull

86 Telegrams 6627 and 6804 not printed.

87 Sir Cecil Hurst held the press conference at the Law Courts on August 30, 1944.

Document No. C.47, 4 September, 1944: Convention for the Surrender of War Criminals and Other War Offenders and Explanatory Memorandum 740.00116 E.W./9–844

[Document 869]

Document No. C.47, 4 September, 1944: Convention for the Surrender of War Criminals and Other War Offenders and Explanatory Memorandum 88

September 4, 1944

Draft Explanatory Memorandum

The draft “Convention for the surrender of War Criminals and other War Offenders” which the United Nations War Crimes Commission presents to its member Governments is an adaptation of a draft made by the Ministers of Justice of some of those Governments,—notably those of Belgium, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway and Poland.89 This original draft was brought before the competent committee of the Commission (Committee II) by Dr. de Moor (Netherlands) and was accepted by it as a basis of discussion. The present draft differs from the older draft in certain points, both as regards its purpose and as regards its details.

purpose of the draft

The Ministers of Justice draft was intended to operate both between the United Nations themselves and between them and neutral states. The present draft is only intended to provide for the surrender by one of the United Nations to another, of persons accused or convicted of war crimes or other war offences. It is not considered that it would be possible to obtain, or wise to attempt to obtain, adherence of neutrals to any formal general agreement regarding surrender of such persons.

A second difference is that the present draft provides for surrender as the result of an executive or administrative procedure, not a judicial procedure as was the case under the Ministers of Justice draft.

Like the Ministers of Justice draft, the present draft covers nationals of the United Nations who have aided the enemy against their own countries—the so-called Quislings. It distinguishes their case from that of war criminals and deals with it in Article II. The term “other war offenders” in the title and in the preamble of the Convention refers to them.

The purpose in view is to make it certain that the United Nations will reciprocally transfer to one another persons in their power who are wanted for trial as war criminals or Quislings, or have already been convicted on such charges, and to secure this result in the simplest possible way, avoiding the complications and delays of normal extradition procedure and, in particular, excluding the possibility of refusing surrender on the ground that the acts charged have the character of political offences. Several, if not all, of the United Nations will require to enact legislation in order to accept the Convention. It was urged by one member of Committee II that, for practical purposes, since the persons wanted would be prisoners of war in the hands of the armed forces of the requested state or refugees present in its territory without legal authorisation, all that was required could be done by executive action and there was no need for complicated treaty provisions. This view was not accepted by the Committee. Moreover, even if not acceptable to, or not needed by some of the United Nations, the Convention can operate between the other United Nations, and, as stated above, it has been considered desirable by the Ministers of Justice of five of the Governments represented on the Commission.

provisions of the draft

Articles I and II provide respectively for the surrender of war criminals and of Quislings.

The description of the offences referred to in Article I as “war crimes, including offences against the laws and customs of war” implies that there are offences which are war crimes without being violations of those laws and customs.

The definition of Quislings in Article II is based on the Ministers of Justice draft.

The expression “execution of sentence or judgment” is a recognition that the offenders in question may be tried by military commissions as well as by civil courts (cf. Article IV, last paragraph).

Article III is intended to prevent surrender being denied on the ground that the offence was political.

Article IV specifies that surrender is to be effected by the executive or administrative authorities and prescribes how the request for surrender is to be made and the particulars to be given in the request.

Articles V and VI show the cases in which surrender may be refused or postponed; they also provide for the same offender being transferred successively to several states and punished successively by several states, and they regulate these processes.

Article VII regulates transit of surrendered persons through the territories of third states which are parties to the Convention.

Article VIII requires production at the time of surrender of documents etc. needed for the trial.

Article IX places all the costs on the requesting state.

The purpose of Article X is to meet in advance possible objections to the Convention on the ground that it may prejudicially affect the operation of extradition treaties. To mark the difference between the Convention and an extradition treaty, it was also at one time proposed to use the word “transfer” instead of the word “surrender” in the title and throughout the text, but the latter word was ultimately preferred, on the ground that its implications were well known.

Article XI It is proposed that a provision be inserted here under which the Convention will go out of force at a particular date.

Article XII and XIII need no comment.

opening of the draft for signature

The draft is the work of the Government representatives sitting as members of an advisory body, and not of persons empowered to negotiate an international convention and open it for signature. To bring it into operation (with or without amendments) this further process must be gone through and be followed by the deposit of ratifications. Before these steps can be taken, the competent departments of the Governments may require time to examine carefully the somewhat novel provisions of the draft.

It is for this reason that the Commission is sending the draft at the present time to the Governments represented on it, notwithstanding that it has not yet concluded its examination of the question of setting up a joint United Nations tribunal for the trial of war criminals and that it may be desirable for the same meeting of plenipotentiaries to deal with both schemes.

what states mat become parties to the convention?

It has been said above that the Convention is intended to operate only as between the United Nations, and not as between those states and neutral states. What precisely are the states which should be admitted to become parties to the Convention can only be decided by the meeting of plenipotentiaries which opens it for signature. The same question will arise in regard to any convention which may be drafted to provide some form of joint United Nations tribunal to try war criminals. The Commission reserves the right to make a recommendation regarding this matter at a later date.

Convention for the Surrender of War Criminals and Other War Offenders

(Enumeration of the Heads of States)

Having resolved to conclude a Convention with the object of achieving the surrender of war criminals and other war offenders,

have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries the following:

(list of Plenipotentiaries)

Who, having communicated their full powers, found in good and due form, have agreed on the following provisions:

Article I

The High Contracting Parties mutually agree to surrender to each other according to the procedure hereinafter provided, for the purposes of trial or of execution of sentence or judgment, persons found within their jurisdiction who are charged with or convicted of war crimes, including offences against the laws and customs of war, which were committed either within the jurisdiction of the requesting state or against that state or its nationals or the armed forces of the state.

Article II

The High Contracting Parties further mutually agree to surrender to each other according to the procedure provided hereinafter, for the purposes of trial or of execution of sentence or judgment, all persons, nationals or former nationals, of the requesting state who are within their jurisdiction and are charged with or convicted of giving aid or comfort to the enemy or of an offence committed with the intent to further the cause of the enemy or of an offence committed by means of the power or opportunity afforded by a state of war or armed hostilities or by hostile occupation of territory of the requesting state.

Article III

The surrender provided for by Articles I and II shall be effected notwithstanding any contention that the offence was of a political character.

Article IV

The request for surrender shall be transmitted through the diplomatic channel, and shall be executed by the appropriate executive or administrative authorities of the requested state. The person whose surrender is requested under the terms of this Convention shall in no case have recourse to any form of judicial procedure provided in the extradition treaties, laws or regulations of the requested state. The request shall contain in any event: 1. In the case of an alleged offender: A. (1) the identity, nationality (if known) and description of the alleged offender;

(2) the description of the alleged offence and the maximum penalty which can be inflicted for that offence.

B. The Government requesting surrender shall in every case give written assurances to the Government from whom the surrender is requested to the effect: (1) that the trial will be conducted in accordance with legal procedure;

(2) that judgment or findings and sentence will be pronounced in open court;

(3) that the alleged offender will be afforded the assistance of counsel both before and during the trial.

2. In the case of a convicted offender: (1) the identity, nationality (if known), and description of the convicted offender;

(2) the description of the offence and the penalty imposed;

(3) the original or an authenticated copy of the judgment or findings and sentence given by the appropriate court in respect of the offence and in the presence of the offender.

The term “court” as used in this article shall include a military commission or other military tribunal.

Article V

The High Contracting Parties may decline to surrender to each other their own nationals and former nationals.

A High Contracting Party may refuse to surrender an alleged offender, if the offence for which his surrender is requested was committed within that Party’s jurisdiction.

In all cases where two or more High Contracting Parties request the surrender of the same alleged offender, such person shall be surrendered first to the Government of the State whose national legislation contains the heaviest maximum penalty in respect of the alleged offence regarding which surrender is requested.

Where the maximum penalties in respect of the offences for which surrender is requested are the same, surrender shall first be effected to the Government which first requested the surrender.

Article VI

If at the time when the request is made the alleged offender is undergoing investigation or is on trial in the courts of the requested state for a crime, whether a war crime or not, which is punishable with a higher maximum penalty than that for which the surrender is requested, that state may decline to surrender him until the proceedings are terminated.

In the event of sentence of detention in a penal institution having been pronounced, the execution of the sentence shall be suspended, if the surrender of the convicted person is requested in accordance with Articles I or II.

A sentence of death shall however be executed notwithstanding that one or more of the High Contracting Parties have requested the surrender of the offender.

When an alleged offender whose surrender has been requested by two or more High Contracting Parties has been tried and sentenced by their courts, the sentences shall be executed in the states concerned in the order of their dates; provided that, if the offender has been sentenced to death in one of the requesting states, he shall be surrendered to that state for execution.

Article VII

The Governments of the High Contracting Parties agree to allow the transit through their territories of persons who are being surrendered by one of the Parties to the present Convention to another Party, on production of a certificate emanating from the Government of the State from whom the surrender is obtained. During the passage through such territories the person who is being surrendered and his escort may be accompanied by officials designated by the Governments concerned.

Article VIII

The High Contracting Parties agree to produce at the time of surrender all documents, exhibits, or any other thing which may serve as proof of the alleged offence.

Article IX

The requesting state shall bear all costs arising out of a surrender made at its request under the terms of this Convention.

Article X

The present Convention constitutes an exceptional measure and shall not affect the operation of any treaty of extradition between or among the High Contracting Parties except as may be expressly provided by the terms of this Convention.

Article XI

(Denunciation and termination: Text provisionally reserved).

Article XII

The present Convention shall be ratified and the ratifications shall be deposited as soon as possible with . . . . . who will notify such deposit to all the signatories.

Article XIII

The present Convention shall come into force one month after the date on which it shall have been ratified on behalf of two of the High Contracting Parties. Thereafter it shall take effect in the case of each High Contracting Party one month after the date of the deposit of the ratification on its behalf with . . . . .

In faith whereof etc.

88 Transmitted to the Department by the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission in despatch 17938, September 8, 1944; received September 13.

89 Draft convention by the Ministers of Justice not found in Department files. For summary of the draft, see History of the United Nations War Crimes Commission, pp. 394–395.

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–1644

[Document 870]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

No. 18057 London, September 16, 1944.
[Received September 22.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that on the afternoon of Friday, September 15, I was visited by Dr. Ecer, the Representative of Czechoslovakia on the War Crimes Commission. Colonel Hodgson and I received him.

He was extremely annoyed at the non-receipt of an answer from His Britannic Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Eden, to a letter written by Sir Cecil Hurst, the Chairman of the Commission, May 31, 1944, a copy of which was enclosed in despatch number 16042, June 2, 1944 (C.23(1)91 ).

Dr. Ecer feels that this refusal to answer reflects on the dignity of the Commission, and hampers its work to an extent which will materially lessen its prestige. He pointed out that public opinion as expressed in the British newspapers was rather hostile to the statement put out by Sir Cecil Hurst, and also that public opinion was shocked at his statement of the limitations of the Commission’s authority.

He appeared to be ready to make a considerable disturbance which might be accompanied by some unpleasant publicity. I suggested that a diplomatic approach to the problem would be for him to request his Government now in London to ask their Ambassador to see Mr. Eden on this subject.

He informed me that there would certainly be questions asked in Parliament on this subject as soon as it meets. This obviously will result in publicity.

Respectfully,

Herbert Pell

91  Ante, p. 1321 [Pg. 1321 includes portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842].

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) 740.00116 E.W./8–2144

[Document 871]

The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell)

No. 26 Washington, September 18, 1944.

Sir: Reference is made to your despatch no. 17584 dated August 21, 1944 in which you refer to the distinction made in the Moscow Declaration between the treatment to be accorded persons taking part in atrocities in occupied countries and “the case of the major criminals, whose offences have no particular geographical localisation and who will be punished by the joint decision of the Governments of the Allies”. You ask for instructions suggesting a rule by which the War Crimes Commission could ascertain just who is to be turned over to the political authorities, and, if possible, some indication of the methods by which their cases will be handled. You also inquire whether certain “high up Nazis” who have offended against more than one nation are to be left for direct action by the governments or whether their cases are to be considered by the Commission for judicial procedure.

The Department is not in a position at the present time to give you instructions as to a line of demarcation between “major criminals” and other offenders. It is not believed, however, that this should in anywise interfere with the collection of evidence concerning war criminals of whatever category they may be or with the other work of the Commission.

Very truly yours,

Cordell Hull

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax) 740.00116 E.W./8–1544

[Document 872]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the British Ambassador and has the honor to refer to the Ambassador’s note no. 513 of August 15 regarding certain communications received by the Foreign Office from the Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission forwarding recommendations of the Commission regarding provisions to be inserted in the armistice imposed on Germany, measures to insure the capture of war criminals, and an amplification of the earlier recommendations regarding proposed armistice terms. Copies of these documents (C.21, C.31, and C.34)92 have been forwarded to this Government by Mr. Pell, the United States representative on the Commission.

It is stated in the Ambassador’s note that His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs has suggested that these recommendations might be communicated either by the British Government or by the British Government and the United States Government jointly to the European Advisory Commission. This would be done, it is explained, without comment or commitment on the part of the British Government, which would make it clear that the communication of these recommendations to the Advisory Commission did not imply that the British Government either approved them in toto, or concurred in the desirability of including the draft armistice provisions of surrender for Germany. It is noted that the Foreign Office does not propose to discuss these recommendations with Allied Governments other than the United States Government, and that the British Government will give further consideration to the documents received from the War Crimes Commission with a view to formulating their own views upon them.

In as much as the War Crimes Commission is located in London, the Department considers that it would be appropriate that the British Government should forward the recommendations in question to the European Advisory Commission, it being made clear that neither the British Government nor the Government of any of the countries represented on the War Crimes Commission has approved them or concurred in their desirability so far as the British Government is informed. It would then be, as suggested in the Ambassador’s note, for each of the Governments represented on the European Advisory Commission to put forward their views on the recommendations.

This Government, in the meantime, will study the documents received from the War Crimes Commission in order to be in a position to express its views in regard thereto.

Washington , September 20, 1944.

92 Dated 18 May, 16 June, and 18 July, pp. 1320 [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 840], 1331 [Pg. 1331 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850], and 1336 [Pg. 1336 includes portions of Doc. 852 and Doc. 853], respectively.

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–2244

[Document 873]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

No. 18169 London, September 22, 1944.
[Received September 29.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that on August 29, 1944, it was decided by the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes that the members of the Commission should transmit to their respective governments a copy of the draft Convention for the Surrender of War Criminals and a related explanatory memorandum. This document, C.47, 4 September 1944,93 was forwarded to the Department in Despatch No. 17938, September 8, 1944. The following comments are made by way of further explanation:

Article I: The phrase “war crimes, including offenses against the laws and customs of war” was inserted in this convention in committee by a close vote. The United States vote was cast in the negative. The effect of the proposed phrase—“War Crimes, including …”—is to leave the whole subject without a guiding definition in the practical application of the Surrender Convention.

This article does not contemplate trial in absentia.

Article II: This article is designed to aid in the transfer of a “Quisling” who would be tried nationally for treason or other similar crimes rather than for a war crime.

Article IV: Lieutenant Colonel Hodgson stated to the Commission that, in his opinion, the second sentence of Article IV was possibly incompatible with the Constitution of the United States, particularly if the Convention was to be effective after the conclusion of peace. Colonel Hodgson made it clear that he was expressing his personal opinion and not the official attitude of the United States. (See page 1 of the Minutes of 5 September 1944.)94

M. de Baer (Belgium) stated that his Government wished to see Article IV (1–A) amended by introducing therein the following safeguards, which had appeared in an earlier draft convention prepared by the five Ministers of Justice dealing with this same subject: “3 The indictment or warrant for the arrest of the alleged offender in respect of the alleged offence;

4 summary evidence of the alleged offence and of the alleged offender’s intent to further the cause of the enemy or of his having had recourse to the power, opportunity or means afforded by the state of war or the fact of the enemy occupation;

5 the appropriate court before which the alleged offender will be tried.”

Lieutenant Colonel Hodgson expressed the view that he considered the language appearing in the mentioned earlier draft, when modified to take into account trials by military tribunals, to be preferable.

Article VI: Article VI of the Convention was adopted after an extended consideration, during which it was pointed out that the second paragraph might necessitate extensive legislation. The members believed nevertheless that it should be adopted. This was the unanimous opinion of the continental European countries who expressed the view that the provision was necessary for countries situated in their position, and that other countries which found it unacceptable might make suitable reservations.

Ambassador Colban (Norway) expressed the hope that the Chairman of the Commission would ask the British Foreign Secretary to convene a Diplomatic conference which would be necessary for negotiating and signing the Convention.

Respectfully,

Herbert Pell

93  Ante, p. 1354 [Pg. 1354 includes portions of Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869].

94 Minutes of the meetings not printed.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/9–2644: Telegram

[Document 874]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 26, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received 11 p.m.]

3675. ReEmbtel 3654, September 25.95 For past several days the Soviet press has been devoting considerable space to articles urging stern justice for war criminals. The determination of the Soviet Government to hold German war criminals to strict accountability is reinforced by the frequent and prominent publication in the press of reports of the extraordinary state commission concerning atrocities committed by Germans in various parts of Soviet territory and also by reports of the German military and civil officials who have been detained by the Red Army in the Balkans as “suitable candidates” for inclusion in the category of war criminals.

In view of the emphasis now given to these matters in the Soviet press, I think I should point out that the Russian conception of war crime as of most other things is apt to be rather political than legal. Basically the Soviets recognize no law of war. Just as they reserve the right of the state to interpret on basis of political expediency the degree of guilt or innocence of every Soviet citizen so they will seek the interpretation of what constitutes war crime in the interests of the Soviet state as they see them. They will not hesitate to consider as war criminals persons who have committed no direct violations of the rules of war as we know them if they feel this is to be politically justified. Their action in arresting regular German army officers and diplomats in the Balkan countries as “suitable candidates for war criminal lists” seems to indicate that they view war crime as consisting not only in ordinary offenses against the laws of war but also on occasions in any prominent association with German wartime policies which appear to them particularly odious. It is clear in any case that they will be inclined to consider each case on its merits as they see them rather than to adhere strictly to classification by categories. There has as yet been no talk of war guilt in connection with the high-ranking German officers who have been signing anti-Hitlerite articles for publication in the Soviet press although the past responsibilities of many of these could not have differed very must [much] from those of the officers detained in the Balkans.

I believe that it would be well if our people who are giving consideration to these matters were to bear in mind these divergencies between Russian conceptions and our own.

Sent to Department as 3675, repeated to London for Pell as 187.

Harriman

95 Not printed.

Document No. C.52(1), 26 September, 1944: Recommendation in Favour of the Establishment by Supreme Military Commanders of Mixed Military Tribunals for the Trial of War Criminals 740.00116 EW/9–3044

[Document 875]

Document No. C.52(1), 26 September, 1944: Recommendation in Favour of the Establishment by Supreme Military Commanders of Mixed Military Tribunals for the Trial of War Criminals 96

September 26, 1944

Consonant with the Moscow Declaration, 1st November, 1943, the principle is accepted by the United Nations War Crimes Commission that, with the exception of major war criminals, whose offences have no particular geographical localization, war criminals, upon apprehension, will be sent back to the countries in which their crimes were committed in order that they may be judged by the courts of such countries. The mentioned countries thus have a paramount right to such criminals and their courts have primary jurisdiction. The recommendation contained herein is made in full recognition of these principles.

It is recognised that a military commander of an army in campaign has full power to constitute military tribunals and to try all offences against or affecting such army or arising out of or incident to the operations of the enemy or persons aiding or assisting the enemy. It is recognised also that a military commander of an army in occupation of enemy territory has full power to constitute military tribunals and to try all cases involving the safety of his army or the maintenance of law and order. Accordingly, such offences and cases are not within the purview of the recommendation contained herein and the recommendation is not to be considered as a limitation of these principles or as a restriction upon the mentioned powers of such military commanders.

The United Nations War Crimes Commission will recommend to the United Nations the creation by convention of a United Nations War Crimes Court or Tribunal, for the trial of war criminals. However, it recognises that delay may occur while its recommendation and the proposed convention are being considered by the United Nations thereby affecting the expeditious trial of cases. Accordingly, it is deemed necessary that some tribunal or tribunals be established in interim to try certain war criminals.

In case a United Nations War Crimes Court or Tribunal is established by convention it is considered desirable that, in addition thereto, other tribunals be established to try such war criminals as any United Nation may so request, to the end, that every means for the effective prosecution of war criminals are established and maintained, and that no war criminal escapes trial and punishment by reason of the inability to effect a speedy trial.

It appears that the Supreme Commander of co-operating United Nations military forces in each theatre of operations has the power and is entitled to establish military tribunals and prescribe their composition, power and procedure.

It is believed that such military tribunals provide a just and expeditious means for the trial of war criminals pending the establishment of a United Nations War Crimes Court or Tribunal, and thereafter in addition to such court or tribunal.

It is recommended, therefore, that the United Nations Governments request that the Supreme Commander of co-operating United Nations military forces in each theatre of operations appoint military tribunals for the trial of enemy nationals who are charged with having committed offences in violation of the laws and customs of war, upon the following conditions: (a) That, in accordance with the first paragraph hereof, a United Nations Government request in writing that such enemy nationals be tried by such a tribunal.

(b) That, in accordance with the first paragraph hereof and consistent with the jurisdiction of such tribunals, the United Nation so requesting such a trial surrender custody of the accused to the convening authority of the tribunal.

(c) That the United Nation so requesting such a trial produce substantial evidence of the guilt of the accused and fully co-operate with the convening authority or his designee in the preparation and trial of the case, including the attendance of witnesses and the production of documentary and other evidence.

(d) That the tribunal does not sit in the territory of any United Nation, excepting, however, when necessary the territory of the United Nation requesting such a trial.

96 Transmitted to the Department by the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission, in despatch 18311, September 30, 1944; received October 7.

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–2744

[Document 876]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

No. 18240 London, September 27, 1944.
[Received October 4.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that at the meeting of the Commission, September 26, Dr. Ecer, Representative of Czechoslovakia, resigned from the Committees of which he was a member, and apparently expects to withdraw from the Commission, although the Czechoslovak Government may appoint another representative.

Dr. Ecer, apparently with the support of his Government, is extremely indignant that no answer has been received from the British Foreign Office to a letter sent in the name of the Commission by the Chairman to the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs. This letter was sent on May 31, 1944, described in Document C. 23 (1).

I am very much afraid that a considerable amount of unfavorable publicity will come out of this and especially that the large Jewish population will be aroused into hostility.

When this subject came up I said nothing, but Lord Wright announced it as his belief that the Committee and other authorities were wrong in saying that offenses committed in Germany against German Catholics and Jews were out of the purview of the Commission, as he believed they constituted war crimes within any reasonable definition. This naturally caused a certain amount of flutter. Lord Wright, a Judge of Appeal, a member of the highest court now sitting in Europe, must be considered seriously. He is a vigorous man and undoubtedly will maintain his opinion.

Respectfully,

Herbert Pell

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–2744

[Document 877]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

No. 18241 London, September 27, 1944.
[Received October 4.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that I shall, as soon as the mimeographed copies are delivered to me, send to you two schemes for international tribunals which have been adopted by the Commission.97

When it was decided not to call into existence the so-called Experts or Technical Commission, and to give its duties to the War Crimes Commission, the tasks planned for this commission were placed in the charge of a committee of the existing War Crimes Commission, of which I was made Chairman.

In spite of the general agreement to turn over for trial as many cases as possible to the offended countries, the majority, and at last all of this committee, believed that there would remain an indeterminate number of cases other than those of the arch criminals, which would have to be tried by some international authority. We then proceeded to discuss the formulation of a constitution for such a court with the understanding that its jurisdiction would be limited to war crimes. At first the discussion centered around a plan which with considerable detail prescribed the proceedings and law to be adopted by such a court. It was finally decided to leave as much freedom as possible to the court, which will control its own procedure, places of meeting, and make its own rules. This plan passed the Commission yesterday, and will be immediately forwarded to the Department.

It also seemed obvious to the Committee that this court, which we are accustomed to referring to among ourselves as the “treaty court”, might very well take a long time to set up. Meanwhile, cases would accumulate. For this reason the Commission also recommends military courts to be set up by the Commander in Chief in each theater of operation, which would be able to begin their functions as soon as cases arise, and will be able to work wherever needed.

It is impossible to say how many cases may appear which require international rather than national treatment. Military courts which can be indefinitely multiplied may become necessary if cases are very numerous.

There is no intention on the part of the Commission to suggest that these courts are mutually exclusive. They are intended to supplement each other.

Some of the Representatives, conspicuously those of France and Belgium, prefer the treaty court and suggest that most of their cases would be brought before it. Others, including all the Pacific Powers, especially Lord Wright, a British Lord of Appeals, who as a Judge of the highest court now sitting in Europe, carries a great deal of weight, prefer the military courts.

It has seemed wisest to the Commission to offer both so that each nation may at any time and for any case choose which court it shall use. It is expected, however, that the military court will have to bear the whole burden for some time—until the treaty court can be got through. The best calculations we can make are that the military court could be set up and begin work in a little over a month, and that the treaty court could hardly expect to begin in much less than a year.

Respectfully,

Herbert Pell

97 See Documents No. C.52(1), 26 September, and No. C.50(1), 30 September, pp. 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875] and 1370 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 880], respectively.

Press Release Issued by the Department of State, September 28, 1944 740.00116 EW/9–2844

[Document 878]

Press Release Issued by the Department of State, September 28, 1944

September 28, 1944

At his press and radio news conference today, the Secretary of State said: “Considerable attention has been attracted by a statement that a list of war criminals compiled by the War Crimes Commission in London does not include the names of Hitler and other top Nazi officials. The answer to any suggestion that they have been or are likely to be overlooked by the United Nations is found in the Moscow Declaration of 1943 on German atrocities which, after stating that the perpetrators of atrocities in occupied territories will be brought back to the scene of their crimes and judged on the spot by the peoples whom they have outraged, specifically declares that the ‘major criminals, whose offenses have no particular geographical localization …98 will be punished by the joint decision of the Governments of the Allies.’

“The omission of the names of these people from any particular list compiled by the War Crimes Commission is without any significance whatsoever from the point of view of what the Allied Powers have in mind in regard to them.”

98 Omission indicated in the original press release.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–3044: Telegram

[Document 879]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 30, 1944—3 p.m.
[Received September 30—1:53 p.m.]

3740. An article by Ehrenburg in Red Star for September 27 demanding the stern punishment of war criminals includes the statement that in the list prepared by the London Commission, the names of Hitler and other leading Nazis are not included. This statement is made notwithstanding the fact that the Secretary’s denial of such charges has twice been published in Soviet press. Ehrenburg further states that fear lest German child murderers not receive their deserved punishment darkens dawn of victory for soldiers both in east and in west. In conclusion, Ehrenburg states that not vengeance but justice is demanded and promises that Soviets will not leave Fascist crimes unpunished.

Harriman

Document No. C.50(1), 30 September, 1944: Draft Convention for the Establishment of a United Nations War Crimes Court 740.00116 European War/10–244

[Document 880]

Document No. C.50(1), 30 September, 1944: Draft Convention for the Establishment of a United Nations War Crimes Court 99

September 30, 1944

(Names of the High Contracting Parties . . . . . desirous of ensuring that the perpetrators of war crimes committed by the enemy shall be brought to justice.

Recognising that in general the appropriate tribunals for the trial and punishment of such crimes will be national courts of the United Nations,

Mindful of the possibility that cases may occur in which such crimes cannot be conveniently or effectively punished by a national court,

Have decided to set up an Inter-Allied Court before which the Governments of the United Nations may at their discretion bring to trial persons accused of an offence to which the Convention applies in preference to bringing them before a national court, and

For this purpose have appointed as their plenipotentiaries:—

(names of the plenipotentiaries)

who—having communicated their full powers found in good and due form—

Have agreed as follows:—

Article 1

1. There shall be established a United Nations War Crimes Court for the trial and punishment of persons charged with the commission of an offence against the laws and customs of war.

2. The jurisdiction of the Court shall extend to the trial and punishment of any person—irrespective of rank or position—who has committed, or attempted to commit, or has ordered, caused, aided, abetted or incited another person to commit, or by his failure to fulfil a duty incumbent upon him has himself committed, an offence against the laws and customs of war.

3. The jurisdiction of the Court as defined above shall extend to offences committed by the members of the armed forces, the civilian authorities or other persons acting under the authority of, or claim or colour of authority of, or in concert with a state or other political entity engaged in war or armed hostilities with any of the High Contracting Parties, or in hostile occupation of territory of any of the High Contracting Parties.

Article 2

The judges of the Court and Members of the Court shall be chosen in accordance with the following provisions: (a) Within thirty days after the coming into force of the Convention, each of the High Contracting Parties shall appoint three persons as members of the Court. The names of the persons so appointed shall be transmitted to His Britannic Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in the United Kingdom, who shall communicate them forthwith to the other High Contracting Parties.

(b) Within fifteen days after the communication of the said names to the High Contracting Parties, His Britannic Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs shall call a conference of representatives of the High Contracting Parties to meet in London at such time and place as he may direct.

(c) The conference shall proceed to the election of the judges of the Court from among the members of the Court. The election shall take place by secret ballot and by such method of voting as the conference may determine. The number of judges to be elected shall be determined by the conference.

(d) Any state which becomes a party to the convention after it has come into force, shall appoint three members of the Court as provided in para. (a). These names shall in the same manner be communicated to the other High Contracting Parties.

Article 3

The members of the Court shall be nationals of the High Contracting Parties and shall possess the highest legal qualifications. They shall be conversant with either English or French.

Article 4

The date of the first meeting of the Court shall be set by the conference referred to in Article 2, para, (b)—this first meeting shall be in London. The Court shall thereupon decide upon its seat, which it may change at any time. The Court may decide to meet elsewhere than at its seat.

Article 5

1. In the event of a vacancy among the judges, the Court shall proceed to the election of a judge from among the members of the Court.

2. In the event of a vacancy among the members of the Court the High Contracting Party who appointed the member whose place is vacated shall designate his successor.

Article 6

Judges of the Court may not exercise any political or administrative function, or engage in any activity of a professional nature so long as they are judges of the Court.

Article 7

The Court shall elect its President and Vice-President, appoint its Registrar and otherwise perfect its organisation and that of its Divisions.

Article 8

Judges of the Court as well as the Registrar of the Court and the Officer appointed under Art. 11, para. 2 to conduct prosecutions, shall enjoy diplomatic privileges and immunities.

Article 9

1. A judge of the Court who desires to resign his post shall arrange with the President as to the date on which his resignation shall take effect.

2. The Court, with the concurrence of not less than three-fourths of the judges, may retire a judge who has ceased to be able adequately to perform the functions of his office.

Article 10

The Court shall establish rules for the administration and procedure of the Court and its Divisions. The Court shall have authority to amend or to supplement these rules from time to time.

Article 11

1. The responsibility for the conduct of prosecutions before the Court will in general rest with the Government of the United Nation by which the case is brought before the Court.

2. The conference referred to in Art. 2, para. (b) shall appoint an officer to whom may be entrusted the conduct of the prosecution in any case in which the Government of the United Nation primarily concerned prefers that the prosecution should not be undertaken by its own representatives.

3. This officer shall be assisted by such staff as the Court may think necessary.

4. The expenses incurred in connection with the prosecution of cases entrusted to the officer appointed by the Court shall be borne by the State which has transmitted the case to the Court.

Article 12

1. For the trial of cases the Court shall sit in Divisions. Each of the Divisions shall in the trial of cases assigned to it exercise the powers conferred upon the Court.

2. Each Division shall consist of not less than five judges who shall be designated from time to time by the President of the Court. The Divisions shall sit at such places, and shall continue to exist for such periods, as the President may determine.

3. Not less than five judges shall sit to hear and determine each case.

Article 13

Every judge of the Court shall, at the commencement of the first public session of the Court which he attends, make a solemn declaration in open Court that he will exercise his functions, and duly administer justice without partiality or favour, according to law.

Article 14

The Court may: (a) Order any witness to attend and be examined before the Court;

(b) Summon any person with expert knowledge to give evidence in any case;

(c) Order the disclosure and production of any document, exhibit or any other thing connected with the case;

(d) Issue letters of request;

(e) Appoint commissioners for the taking of evidence.

Article 15

Subject to the provisions of this Convention, an accused person appearing for trial before the Court shall, in addition to any specific rights which he may enjoy under the convention or under the rules be entitled: 1. To be informed in writing of the charges against him, which shall be set forth in sufficient detail to give him a reasonable opportunity to prepare his defence.

2. To have a reasonable opportunity to prepare his defence.

3. To have the benefit of qualified legal counsel chosen by himself. If the accused is not represented by counsel of his own choice, the Court shall assign qualified legal counsel for his defence.

4. To be present during the conduct of the proceedings.

5. To make such pleas and defences as are generally recognised by civilised nations.

6. To produce evidence upon his behalf.

7. To decline to give evidence against himself.

Article 16

Hearings shall be public unless the Court for reasons which it states directs that the hearing shall take place in camera.

Article 17

1. No person shall be prosecuted before the Court if he has already been convicted or acquitted of the same offence before a Court of one of the High Contracting Parties.

2. No trial or sentence by a Court of an enemy or former enemy state shall bar trial or sentence by the Court. If a sentence has been imposed by a Court of an enemy or former enemy state, the penalty already undergone shall be taken into account in fixing any sentence which may be imposed.

Article 18

The Court shall apply: (a) General international treaties or conventions declaratory of the laws of war, and particular treaties or conventions establishing laws of war between the parties thereto;

(b) International customs of war, as evidence of a general practice accepted as law;

(c) The principles of the law of nations, derived from the usages established among civilised peoples, from the laws of humanity, and from the dictates of the public conscience;

(d) The principles of criminal law generally recognized by civilised nations;

(e) Judicial decisions as subsidiary means for the determination of the rules of the laws of war.

Article 19

1. The Court shall sit in private to consider its judgment. The judges shall observe secrecy as to the nature of their deliberations.

2. Every judgment or order shall be pronounced at a public session and shall state the reasons on which it is based.

3. The decisions shall be by a majority of the judges participating.

Article 20

The Court shall have power to adjudge appropriate punishments including death or any lesser punishment.

Article 21

Sentences shall be executed as directed by the Court.

Article 22

The expenses incurred in connection with the establishment and functioning of the Court, the salaries and expenses of the judges and officials of the Court and of their staff, and by the execution of sentences imposed by the Court, shall be defrayed in such manner as the High Contracting Parties may determine.

Article 23

The High Contracting Parties undertake severally to adopt such measures as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of the Convention.

Article 24

The Convention shall be ratified.

The ratifications shall be deposited in London with the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

A procès-verbal shall be drawn up recording the receipt of each ratification and a copy duly certified shall be sent through the diplomatic channel to each of the High Contracting Parties.

Article 25

As soon as the number of ratifications deposited with the Government of the United Kingdom is deemed by that Government sufficient to justify the establishment of the Court, His Britannic Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs shall address a communication to that effect to the other High Contracting Parties, and the Convention shall enter into force on the tenth day after the dispatch of such communication.

Article 26

Members of the United Nations who are not signatories of the Convention are allowed to adhere to it.

For this purpose they must make their adhesions known to the High Contracting Parties by means of a written notification addressed to the Government of the United Kingdom, and by it communicated to all the other Contracting Parties.

Article 27

As soon as the President of the Court can fix a date by which the Court will have completed the trial of persons who are brought before it for offences within its jurisdiction, he shall address a notification to His Britannic Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to that effect.

Copies of his notification shall be communicated by him through the diplomatic channel to all the other High Contracting Parties, and he shall propose a date on which the Court shall be wound up and the Convention shall cease to operate.

Article 28

Unless an agreement is arrived at between the High Contracting Parties for the variation of the date referred to in the last paragraph of Article 27, the said date shall be communicated to the President and arrangements shall be made by him for winding up the Court by the said date.

Article 29

Without prejudice to the validity and the completion of any sentences imposed by the Court which may not have expired at the date fixed for the winding up of the Court, and without prejudice to the distribution between the High Contracting Parties of such expenditure as it may be necessary to incur after the date fixed for the winding up of the Court in connection with uncompleted sentences imposed by the Court, or in connection with the winding up of its affairs or the preservation of its archives or with other matters and subject to any further agreement which may be concluded between the High Contracting Parties, the Convention shall cease to have effect on the date fixed for the winding up of the Court.

99 Transmitted to the Department by the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission in despatch 18334, October 2, 1944; received October 7.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00116 EW/10–344

[Document 881]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

Ref: 152/153/44

His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs has received a formal letter from the Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission stating that the work of the Commission in dealing with war crimes committed by Italians is hampered by the lack of information from Italian sources. The Chairman asks whether the Italian Government can be obliged to afford access to military archives, records and information catalogue, and whether the Commission may be informed as to the quarter to which those who are responsible for the preparation of charges against war criminals should address themselves in order to obtain the information they want.

2. In Mr. Eden’s view, the Allied Commission in Italy would seem to be the appropriate body to assist the War Crimes Commission in this matter. He thinks that if the War Crimes Commission’s requirements in particular cases were communicated to the Allied Commission either through the Combined Chiefs of Staff and Supreme Allied Commander Mediterranean, or, since the War Crimes Commission is located in London, through His Majesty’s Government and the British Resident Minister Central Mediterranean (Mr. Macmillan), the Allied Commission could no doubt ensure the Italian Government’s compliance with the War Crimes Commission’s requirements.

3. Mr. Eden is seeking the views of Mr. Macmillan and of Sir Noel Charles1 on the above point and, subject to their views, considers that it would be desirable for this matter to be raised in the Advisory Council for Italy simultaneously with the question of the War Crimes Commission’s competence for dealing with German crimes against Italians.

4. Mr. Eden suggests that, if the United States Government agree, appropriate instructions might be sent to the United States representative on the Advisory Council.

Washington , October 3, 1944.

1 British Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00116 EW/10–344

[Document 882]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

Ref: 152/154/44

His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs has, in consultation with the British Resident Minister Central Mediterranean, and His Majesty’s Ambassador at Rome, been considering the best method of approach to the Allied Governments represented on the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes with a view to secure their concurrence in the proposal—put forward in Embassy Note No. 153 of March 15, 1944 and agreed to by the State Department in their note of June 3, 1944 (740.00116 European War 1939/1419)—that the terms of reference of the War Crimes Commission should be extended to include German war crimes against Italians, and that His Majesty’s Government and the United States Government should act for the Italian Government in transmitting to the War Crimes Commission information relating to these crimes.

2. Mr. Macmillan has suggested that the agency acting for the Italian Government in this matter should be the Allied Commission in Italy, and that the evidence of German war crimes against Italians should be communicated to the War Crimes Commission through the Supreme Chiefs of Staff by the Supreme Allied Commander Mediterranean, as the President of the Allied Commission.

3. Sir Noel Charles has agreed with this proposal and has suggested that the whole matter might, in the first instance, be laid before the Advisory Council for Italy for discussion.

4. Mr. Eden agrees with these views and thinks that the discussion of the matter by the Advisory Council would provide the best means of surmounting the two chief difficulties which arise; (a) the attitude of the Greek, Yugoslav and French authorities, and

(b) the interest of the Soviet Government in the matter.

5. As regards (a), the attitude of these three authorities towards the extension of the terms of reference of the War Crimes Commission to enable that body to deal with German war crimes against Italians, is thought to have been influenced—in May last when this matter was discussed in the Commission—by the fact that the Commission had made virtually no progress in considering crimes committed by Italians against nationals of the United Nations; this lack of progress being due to the failure of the National Authorities concerned to forward any number of cases of this nature to the Commission. Reports that Mr. Eden has recently received from His Majesty’s Representatives with the French Committee for National Liberation and the Greek and Yugoslav Governments, suggest however that some progress is now being made by these authorities with the preparation of cases of Italian crimes against their nationals. Mr. Eden feels, therefore, that, at least in the case of the Greek and Yugoslav Governments, it is unlikely that serious objection would now be raised to the proposal that the War Crimes Commission should deal with German crimes against Italians. A discussion of the proposal in the Advisory Council would, however, give these authorities an opportunity of airing their views, if they wished to do so.

6. As regards (b) above, Mr. Eden thinks that a preliminary discussion of this matter in the Advisory Council for Italy would give the Soviet Government, who are legitimately interested in anything affecting the Italian Government’s status but are not represented on the War Crimes Commission, an opportunity for expressing their views on the proposal.

7. If the United States Government agree with the foregoing suggestions, Mr. Eden hopes that the Department of State will find it possible to send suitable instructions to the United States representative on the Advisory Council.

8. Sir Noel Charles has been instructed to keep in touch with Mr. Kirk,2 so that he may concert with his United States colleague about raising this matter in the Advisory Council as soon as the latter has received his instructions from Washington.

Washington , October 3, 1944.

2 Alexander C. Kirk, American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax) 740.00116 European War/8–1944

[Document 883]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the British Ambassador and has the honor to refer to the Ambassador’s note no. 525 of August 19, 1944, regarding a letter addressed by the Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission to His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs stating that if the Governments of the United Nations do not have in view some plan for bringing to justice the authors of atrocities committed on racial, political or religious grounds in enemy territory, the Commission is prepared to undertake the task. It is stated that His Majesty’s Government has decided that in its view the Commission should confine itself to collecting evidence of atrocities only when perpetrated in occupied countries.

It is noted that in paragraph 5 (A) of the Ambassador’s note it is proposed to reply to Sir Cecil Hurst that His Majesty’s Government cannot agree to any extension of the terms of reference of the United Nations War Crimes Commission to enable it to deal with atrocities committed on racial, political or religious grounds in enemy territory.

The interested Departments of this Government, including the Department of State, are of the opinion that inasmuch as the statement just referred to would exclude from the jurisdiction of the Commission atrocities committed against non-nationals of the enemy country as well as nationals, it is too broad in scope. It is believed that atrocities committed against non-enemy nationals in enemy territory should be regarded as falling within the jurisdiction of the War Crimes Commission.

The conclusion is expressed in paragraph 5 (B) of the Ambassador’s note that the United Nations should not assume any formal commitment to insure the trial of those responsible for atrocities committed on racial, political or religious grounds in enemy territory, nor impose on the enemy any formal obligation to try them or surrender them for trial, but that they should be prepared to bring pressure on successor Governments in enemy countries to insure that criminals are brought to trial. It is proposed that the War Crimes Commission should be informed of the general intentions of the United Nations in this respect.

The Department of State agrees that pressure should be brought to bear on successor Governments in enemy countries to insure that nationals of those countries guilty of atrocities, who cannot be reached through procedures relating to war criminals, should, nevertheless, be brought to justice. Declarations by members of the United Nations must, in the opinion of the Department, be kept in mind and be made effective to the fullest extent possible. Particular reference is made to statements by President Roosevelt on March 24, 19443 and by Mr. Eden on March 30, 19444 relating to Axis atrocities against the Jews of Europe, which were without reference to nationality or the country where the atrocities have occurred. President Roosevelt stated “The United Nations have made it clear that they will pursue the guilty and deliver them up in order that justice be done.-’ Mr. Eden said “On this [the persecution of the Jews] His Majesty’s Government in common with their Allies … can only repeat their detestation of Germany’s crimes and their determination that all those guilty of them shall be brought to justice”. Therefore, while agreeing with the British Government that political pressure on successor Governments in enemy countries should be brought to bear to see to it that persons guilty of atrocities in enemy territory on racial, political or religious grounds be required to atone for their misdeeds, the Department of State suggests that this whole matter deserves most careful consideration from both the political and the juridical points of view. Specifically, it feels that an effort should be made to determine whether political pressure can not be implemented by more direct methods for dealing with perpetrators of atrocities who may not be classifiable as war criminals in the strict sense of that term, but who nevertheless represent elements and philosophies in enemy territory that will need to be dealt with if respect for law and order is to be established in those countries. It is believed that considerable disappointment would result if diplomatic pressure should fail and other ways were not found for dealing with these elements.

Washington , October 4, 1944.

3  Ante, p. 1230 [Pg. 1230 includes portions of Doc. 770 and Doc. 771].

4  Parliamentary Debates, House of Commons, 5th series, vol. 398, col. 1562.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./10–444: Telegram

[Document 884]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 4, 1944.
[Received October 4—11:30 p.m.]

8316. A number of questions were asked in the House of Commons this morning regarding the punishment of war criminals. The answers are summarized below:

Mr. Eden stated that crimes of the German authorities against German democrats and anti-Nazis, such as the recent murder of internees at Buchenwald Concentration Camp, were in a different category from the war crimes envisaged by the Allies, and that he could not agree that the terms of the War Crimes Commission should be broadened to include them. In reply to another question he stated that the British Government had received an assurance from the Spanish Government that it will deny asylum to any Fascists or Nazi war criminals whom the Allies desire to bring to judgment; and that he understood a similar assurance had been given to the United States.5 In reply to a supplementary question of the same kind regarding Portugal, Mr. Eden said he was not sure of the position and would have to have notice of the question. The Prime Minister, in replying to a question, said that Hitler, Goering, Goebbels and Himmler are on the British list of war criminals but that he could not speak for the United Nations; it should not be assumed, however, that these persons would be granted a formal trial.

Winant

5 See section entitled “Representations to neutral governments against the granting of asylum to persons guilty of war crimes,” pp. 1410 [Pg. 1410 is part of Doc. 915] ff.

Document No. C.58, 6 October, 1944: Explanatory Memorandum to Accompany the Draft Convention for the Establishment of a United Nations War Crimes Court 740.00116 E.W./10–944

[Document 885]

Document No. C.58, 6 October, 1944: Explanatory Memorandum to Accompany the Draft Convention for the Establishment of a United Nations War Crimes Court 6

October 6, 1944

The draft of the Convention is self-explanatory.7 But, during the discussion of the Draft there emerged from time to time certain points which, in the opinion of the Commission, would require elaboration. A number of these have been settled or clarified in the text of the draft Convention as it gradually took its definite shape. There remain, however, certain matters which, as they have not found their way into the final text, have to be specifically dealt with in this memorandum.

(a) During the preparatory work on the Convention certain drafts were submitted in which a detailed list of war crimes was included in Article 1. The list was not meant to be exhaustive and, after considerable discussion, the Commission found it appropriate not to include a detailed list but to confine itself to the terms of the first paragraph of Article 1—“an offence against the laws and customs of war”. It is considered that this will give the Court the necessary latitude of action to carry out the intention of the Allied Governments as expressed in numerous public statements, notably the Declaration in Moscow dated the 1st November, 1943.

(b) The Commission has considered the question of “Superior Orders”. It finally decided to leave out any provision on the subject for the same reason as that for which it left out the detailed list of war crimes. The Commission considers that it is better to leave it to the Court itself in each case to decide what weight should be attached to a plea of superior orders. But the Commission wants to make it clear that its members unanimously agree that in principle this plea does not of itself exonerate the offender.

(c) It will be noted that the only clause in the Convention which deals with the question of languages is Article 3 of the Draft, where it is stated that the members of the Court “shall be conversant with either English or French”. The Commission fully realises, however, that in the Far East, for instance, it is to be assumed that the Chinese language will be the one used by witnesses and perhaps by other persons participating in the work of the Court. It is also probable that the Russian language or other Slavonic languages may have to be used in some of the divisions of the Court. In addition, the German language will certainly be the one used in numerous documents and also in pleading before the Court. Obviously, the language question implies the necessity of quite considerable interpreting and translating work. The accused persons will be entitled to have documents translated into a language which they understand and will likewise be entitled to have oral statements interpreted into such language. The Commission has therefore considered it desirable that the Court itself should be left free to establish under Article 10 the necessary rules with regard to the language or languages in the sense that the official languages of the Court shall be English and French and/or any other language of the country in which the Court may sit.

6 Transmitted to the Department by the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission in despatch 18475, October 9, 1944; received October 14.

7 See Document No. C.50(1), 30 September, p. 1370 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 880].

Document No. C.59, 6 October, 1944: Suggestions to Accompany the Recommendation for the Establishment of Mixed Military Tribunals 740.00116 E.W./10–944

[Document 886]

Document No. C.59, 6 October, 1944: Suggestions to Accompany the Recommendation for the Establishment of Mixed Military Tribunals 8

October 6, 1944

The Commission realises that if Inter-Allied Tribunals are set up by the Supreme Allied Military Commanders, the composition, power and procedure of such Tribunals must be prescribed in the orders to be issued by them.

The following suggestions are submitted by the Commission because it believes that, if adopted, they would help to carry out the policy of the Allied Nations.

1. The judges of the Inter-Allied Tribunals should be nationals of the United Nations, possessing adequate qualifications.

2. Each Tribunal should have mixed personnel, and, when qualified personnel is available and can be detailed without injury to the respective military services, representation should be afforded to the United Nations of which they are nationals in such proportion as may be advisable.

3. Each Tribunal should have jurisdiction to try any enemy national who is charged with having committed an offence in violation of the laws and customs of war, subject, however, to the conditions contained in the recommendation of the Commission (Commission Document C.52(1), 22 [26] September 1944). The law to be applied by the Tribunals will be the laws of war, i.e., the international law to be found in treaties, in custom, and in the unwritten law of war.

4. For the trial of cases each Tribunal should consist of not less than five members.

5. The rules of procedure should be consistent with practices which are usual in civilised countries and should be framed by the Appointing Authority.

6. The prosecution of offenders before the Tribunals should in general be left to the individual United Nations concerned, but in cases where the latter cannot conveniently undertake the prosecution, the Convening authority may be requested by such nation to provide a suitable officer to prosecute upon the conditions recommended by the Commission in Doc. C.52(1).

7. The Tribunals should have power to oblige persons to give evidence and to produce documents; and also to obtain evidence from other sources.

8. Trial before an enemy court should not bar proceedings before an Inter-Allied Tribunal, but any penalty imposed by any enemy court in respect of the same offence should be taken into account by the Tribunal.

9. With regard to the question of “superior orders” the Commission desires to draw attention to what it has said in Doc. C.58.9

8 Transmitted to the Department by the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission in despatch 18475, October 9, 1944; received October 14.

9  Supra.

Document No. C.60, 6 October, 1944: Letter From the Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Hurst) to the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Eden) 740.00116 European War/10–944

[Document 887]

Document No. C.60, 6 October, 1944: Letter From the Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Hurst) to the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Eden)10

[London,] October 6, 1944.

Sir: I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the text of a draft convention which has been prepared by this Commission for the establishment of a United Nations War Crimes Court, together with an explanatory memorandum, (C.50(1) and C.5811 ).

There are also included the text of a recommendation for the establishment of supreme military commanders of mixed Military Tribunals for the trial of War Criminals, together with suggestions to accompany the recommendation (C.52(1) and C.5912 ).

In transmitting these documents I am asked to inform you that the Commission unanimously expressed the hope that you would be so good as to take the necessary steps to convene in the near future a diplomatic conference to consider, and if thought fit to conclude, a convention for the establishment of a United Nations War Crimes Court.

I have [etc.]

Cecil J. B. Hurst

10 Transmitted to the Department by the American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission in despatch 18475, October 9, 1944; received October 14.

11  Ante, pp. 1370 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 880] and 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885], respectively.

12  Ante, pp. 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875] and 1382 [Pg. 1382 includes portions of Doc. 885 and Doc. 886], respectively.

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./10–1344

[Document 888]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

No. 628
Ref: 150/27/44

His Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and has the honour to refer to His Majesty’s Embassy’s Aide-Mémoire of October 3rd, 1944, No. 152/154/44, in regard to the suggested extension of the terms of reference of the United Nations War Crimes Commission to include the investigation of war crimes committed by Germans against Italian nationals.

2. In that Aide-Mémoire His Majesty’s Embassy had the honour to state that Mr. Eden was of the opinion that this matter might usefully be discussed in the first instance before the Advisory Council for Italy, and that His Majesty’s Ambassador at Rome had been instructed to concert with his United States colleague in this connexion.

3. The Earl of Halifax is informed by His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs that Sir Noel Charles consulted Mr. Kirk who was without instructions from his Government but agreed to the problem being presented to the Advisory Council, at its meeting on October 6th, by Sir Noel Charles who would himself be presiding. Sir Noel Charles accordingly laid the problem before the Council on the lines agreed upon between His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom and the United States Government (Department of State note of June 3rd, 1944, 740.00116 European War 1939/1419), and proposed that the Allied Commission should act on behalf of the Italian Government in transmitting to the War Crimes Commission, through the Supreme Allied Commander Mediterranean and the Combined Chiefs of Staff, information relating to German crimes against Italian nationals. Sir Noel Charles reports that none of his colleagues on the Advisory Council made any comment on this proposal but all agreed to consult their Governments in order to be able to discuss the problem at a subsequent meeting of the Council.

Washington , October 13, 1944.

The Department of State to the British Embassy 740.00116 E.W./10–344

[Document 889]

The Department of State to the British Embassy

Memorandum

The Department has received the British Embassy’s aide-mémoire of October 3, 1944 (Ref. 152/153/44) regarding a letter received by the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs from the Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission concerning the problem of obtaining information from Italian sources in respect to war crimes committed by Italians. Mr. Eden’s suggestion is noted that the Allied Commission in Italy would be the appropriate body to assist the War Crimes Commission in this matter. His suggestion is also noted that the matter be raised in the Advisory Council for Italy simultaneously with the question of the War Crimes Commission’s competence for dealing with German crimes against Italians.

The Department agrees that the matter should be discussed by the Advisory Council. It is informed that the representatives on the Council have in fact been invited by the British representative thereon to ascertain the views of their respective governments so that the question can be discussed at the Council’s next meeting on October 20.

This Department and the War and Navy Departments also agree with Mr. Eden’s suggestion put forward in the British aide-mémoire that the Allied Commission in Italy would be the appropriate body to assist in the matter and that if the War Crimes Commission’s requirements in particular cases were communicated to the Allied Commission either through the Combined Chiefs of Staff and the Supreme Allied Commander Mediterranean or through the British Government and the British Resident Minister Central Mediterranean, the Allied Commission could doubtless insure the Italian Government’s compliance with the War Crimes Commission’s requirements.

Mr. Kirk, the United States representative on the Council, is being instructed along the lines indicated above.14

Washington , October 17, 1944.

14 Telegram 292, October 16, 1944, 10 p.m., not printed.

The Department of State to the British Embassy 740.00116 E.W./10–344

[Document 890]

The Department of State to the British Embassy

Memorandum

The Department has received the British Embassy’s aide-mémoire of October 3, 1944 (Ref. 152/154/44) concerning the question of extending the terms of reference of the United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes to include German war crimes against Italians, as proposed in the British Embassy’s note no. 153 of March 15, 1944 and agreed to by the Department of State’s note of June 3, 1944. The suggestion is noted that the agency acting for the Italian Government in this matter might be the Allied Commission in Italy. The suggestion is also noted that the whole matter might in the first instance be laid before the Advisory Council for Italy for discussion, thereby giving the Greek, Yugoslav, and French authorities and the Soviet Government an opportunity to express their views on the proposal.

The Department agrees that the matter should be laid before the Advisory Council. It is informed that the question has in fact been placed on the agenda of the meeting of the Advisory Council to be held on October 20.

This Department and the War and Navy Departments likewise concur in the suggestion that the Allied Commission in Italy should act for the Italian Government in the matter of the German war crimes against Italians and that evidence thereof should be communicated to the War Crimes Commission through the Supreme Chiefs of Staff by the Supreme Allied Commander Mediterranean, as suggested in the Embassy’s aide-mémoire.

Mr. Kirk, the United States representative on the Advisory Council, is being instructed to this effect so that he may act in concert with Sir Noel Charles, his British colleague.15

Washington , October 17, 1944.

15 Telegram 292, October 16, 1944, 10 p.m., not printed.

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./10–1944

[Document 891]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

No. 18576 London, October 19, 1944.
[Received October 24.]

Sir: I have the honor to submit herewith some further commentaries on the Draft Convention for the Establishment of a United Nations War Crimes Court (Commission Document 50(1) 30 September 1944), forwarded by Dispatch No. 18334.16

Preamble: The first paragraph of the Preamble relates to the jurisdiction of the Court. Its jurisdiction is only over war crimes committed by the enemy. The second paragraph recognises that the trial and punishment of most such crimes will be by national courts, either military or civilian. The fourth paragraph indicates that the jurisdiction of the Court can be exercised only upon the request or application of one or more United Nations Governments. Such a request or application is a prerequisite.

Article 1: 1. This article is the principal jurisdictional article of the Convention. While it was recognised that war crimes properly so called do not include all offences against the laws and customs of war, it was decided to retain the phrase “offence against the laws and customs of war” because any exact definition of war crimes would require the Court, as a jurisdictional matter, to decide in each case whether or not it was an offence against the laws and customs of war properly to be designated a “war crime”. In the drafting committee it was generally recognised that the prosecutors before the Court would bring only cases of serious offences before it which would clearly be “war crimes”, and that they would not bring before it minor offences or offences such as that of sabotage or spying.

2. The phrase “irrespective of rank or position” is intended to include any arch-criminal however high in rank if he is charged with an offence against the laws and customs of war, such as where an illegal order is traceable directly to him, and has been carried out by the commission of war crimes at lower levels.

3. Under this paragraph it is possible to conceive that a national of a United Nation could be subject to the jurisdiction of the Court, if, acting for the enemy, he committed a war crime against another United Nation. Because of this fact, this provision was carefully considered before its adoption. However, it was felt that the broad definition was necessary in order to cover all the principal classes of offenders it is designed to cover, and that it would be better to have a provision which was too broad rather than one too narrow. The fourth paragraph of the Preamble should be considered in connection with this paragraph. Presumably such a case would be referred to the Court only after consultation with the Government of which the accused was a national.

Article 2:

c. The number of judges to be elected was left to the Conference, because it was felt that when the Conference met there would be more information than at present concerning how many judges would be needed.

Article 10: Considerable discussion took place in the committee (II) on the question whether the draft convention should contain detailed rules of procedure. The problem was complicated because of the many different countries represented and the varying ideas of procedure with which those representatives were familiar in their own countries. Earlier drafts of the convention contained certain suggested rules of procedure but there was great difficulty in obtaining agreement on details. However, it was generally agreed that it would be better to let the Court set its own rules of procedure under a rule-making power, and to modify them as might become advisable under the actual experience of the Court itself. Accordingly, Article 10, as it now stands, was drafted in its present sense.

Article 11:

2. This paragraph was inserted primarily at the request of the Belgian Government which felt that, for constitutional reasons, it needed to have such a prosecuting officer. Other continental European countries strongly supported its request.

Article 15: The rights of the accused as set forth in this article have been substantially increased over and above those which appear in previous drafts. It is generally believed that the protections given accused persons will inure only to the benefit of innocent persons and will not preclude appropriate punishment of any person guilty of the commission of a war crime.

Article 17:

2. This provision was included because it is notorious that courts in such cases are not likely to impose an adequate penalty. It follows the precedent set in Article 228 of the Versailles Treaty.17

Article 18: The provisions of this article, with the exception of paragraph (c) are derived from Article 38 of the Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice.18 Paragraph (c) is taken from the Preamble of the 4th Hague Convention of 1907 respecting the laws and customs of war on land.19

Article 20: It was assumed that judges of the caliber who will sit on this Court will not adjudge cruel or unusual penalties. However, banishment was considered to be a “lesser punishment” and not one of a cruel or unusual nature.

This Draft Convention has been the subject of the most careful attention by Committee II of the Commission over a long period of time. It has been through several preliminary drafts. I indorse it entirely and hope that you will see fit to encourage the British Foreign Office not only to take immediate steps to convene the conference proposed in Commission Document 60, forwarded by Dispatch No. 18475,20 but to urge that it not only consider but conclude a convention for the establishment of such a Court.

Respectfully,

Herbert Pell

16 Despatch not printed; for text of Document No. C.50(1), see p. 1370 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 880].

17  Foreign Relations, The Paris Peace Conference, 1919, vol. xiii, p. 376.

18  Foreign Relations, 1920, vol. i, p. 17.

19  Ibid., 1907, pt. 2, p. 1204.

20 Despatch not printed; for text of Document No. C.60, see p. 1383 [Pg. 1383 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887].

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax) 740.00116 EW/10–1344

[Document 892]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the British Ambassador and has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of his note no. 628 of October 13, 1944 (Ref. 150/27/44) in which it is stated that Sir Noel Charles laid the problem of German war crimes against Italians before the Advisory Council for Italy on October 6, 1944.

The Department had in fact been informed to this effect by Mr. Kirk who stated that the other representatives on the Council had been invited by Sir Noel Charles to ascertain the views of their governments so that the matter of war crimes both against and by Italians could be discussed by the Council at its meeting on October 20, 1944. As stated in the Department’s memoranda of October 17, 1944, Mr. Kirk has been informed that the Department and the War and Navy Departments concur in the suggestions put forward in the British Embassy’s aide-mémoires of October 3, 1944.

Washington , October 26, 1944.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00116 E.W./10–3044

[Document 893]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom have had under consideration the proposal made by the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Papers C.50(1) and C.58) that a Convention should be concluded for the establishment of a United Nations War Crimes Court. In submitting this proposal, the War Crimes Commission expressed the hope that His Majesty’s Government would take the necessary steps to convene in the near future a diplomatic conference to consider and, if thought fit, conclude a Convention for the establishment of a United Nations War Crimes Court.

2. The views of His Majesty’s Government on this proposal are as follows:

His Majesty’s Government are strongly opposed to this suggestion. The negotiation and entry into operation of such a convention would take a very long time even supposing that no difficulties arose as to ratification by participating Governments. Moreover, the Soviet Union would have to be brought in from the beginning, and it is not a member of the Commission. The proposal is in any event inconsistent with the Moscow declaration and appears to be quite unnecessary. Even if an International Convention could be negotiated, there would be great difficulties about finding suitable personnel for the Court, agreeing to procedure and defining rules, evidence, et cetera. It appears from Paragraph 3 of the recommendation in favour of the establishment of inter-Allied Military Tribunals, that the War Crimes Commission recognises that the establishment of a United Nations War Crimes Court would lead to delay.

3. Mr. Eden hopes that the views of the United States Government on this matter do not differ substantially from the views of His Majesty’s Government as outlined above, and is of the opinion that, if both His Majesty’s Government and the United States Government are opposed to the institution of such a court, it would be futile to convoke the proposed conference. If therefore the United States Government agrees with these views, Mr. Eden would propose to communicate them to the Governments represented on the War Crimes Commission and to inform the Commission accordingly. In that case, Mr. Eden hopes that the United States Government would be prepared to take parallel action.

4. His Majesty’s Government have also had under consideration the recommendations (Papers C.52(1) and C.59) of the War Crimes Commission for the establishment of Mixed Military Tribunals for the trial of War Criminals.

5. The present view of His Majesty’s Government is that they would wish to try by British military courts persons accused of having committed war crimes against British Subjects or in British territory. There may well, however, be a number of cases where the establishment of mixed tribunals would be useful, for it appears that some of the United Nations might find themselves unable for reasons of constitutional law and procedure to try, in their own courts, persons accused of having committed war crimes. There may also be cases where a person is accused of having committed war crimes against the nationals of several of the United Nations.

6. If therefore there is a general desire for the establishment of Mixed Military Tribunals to deal with cases which for one reason or another could not be tried in national courts, His Majesty’s Government would be prepared to agree and to cooperate in establishing them. The question of how this should be done would, however, require further consideration, but, in the opinion of His Majesty’s Government, it seems unlikely that such Tribunals would be required before the occupation of Germany; in which case they could be set up either by joint action of the three Commanders-in-Chief (if the U. S. S. R. agree to this suggestion), or by action by two or one of them, as might be convenient. The Commanders-in-Chief would act in consequence of the agreement between the Allied Governments concerned and in virtue of their powers as military commanders. Questions of procedure et cetera, could be settled by the Commanders-in-Chief when establishing the Tribunals.

7. If the United States Government agrees with the views of His Majesty’s Government as expressed above, Mr. Eden would propose to communicate them to the Governments represented on the War Crimes Commission and to inform the Commission accordingly. In that event, Mr. Eden hopes that the United States Government would be prepared to take parallel action and to concert with His Majesty’s Government as to the arrangements to be made for establishing the Mixed Military Tribunals.

Washington , October 30, 1944.

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./11–244

[Document 894]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

No. 18981 London, November 2, 1944.
[Received November 9.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that the Minutes of the meeting of the 17th of October, which went forward on the 24th,21 contained the formal statements of several members on the report of Committee III, of the War Crimes Commission, on the question whether the preparation and launching of the present war can be considered a war crime. This question was also discussed at the end of the 35th meeting of the Commission, the Minutes of which went forward on the 17th of October.21

Many members felt that this matter was of such importance that they would prefer to await specific instructions from their Governments. For this reason it was decided that the discussion would be adjourned for six weeks. That is to say until November 28, when it will be taken up again and voted on.

Lord Wright spoke with great vigor for the minority report, which did not, I think, command a majority of the Commission, although it received a good deal of verbal support.

Colonel Hodgson was on the Committee which prepared the report and agrees with the majority. Unless otherwise instructed I shall support his contention with my vote.

Respectfully,

Herbert Pell

21 Not printed.

21 Not printed.

The Secretary of War (Stimson) and the Secretary of the Navy (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./11–1144

[Document 895]

The Secretary of War (Stimson) and the Secretary of the Navy (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State

Washington, November 11, 1944.

Dear Mr. Secretary: We are pleased to inform you that our two Departments have joined in setting up a national office for the preparation and prosecution of war crimes cases, along the same general line as that of the national offices which have been established by others of the United Nations.23 The mission of this office will be to collect evidence of cruelties, atrocities, and acts of oppression against members of the United States armed forces or other Americans, including the people of any dependency of the United States, such as the Philippines; examination of such evidence; arranging for the apprehension and prompt trial of persons against whom a prima facie case is made out, and for the execution of any sentences which may be imposed.

The above will not affect the handling of matters of policy regarding war crimes. These will continue to be handled as heretofore.

It is hoped that this action will meet with your concurrence. Your views and comments on the matter would be appreciated.24

Sincerely yours,

Henry L. Stimson
James Forrestal

23 For list of National Offices established by others of the United Nations, see History of the United Nations War Crimes Commission, p. 121.

24 The Department’s concurrence was conveyed in memoranda to the War and Navy Departments, dated November 7, 1944.

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/11–2444

[Document 896]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Secretary of State

No. 2 London, November 24, 1944.
[Received December 6.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that at the meeting of Committee No. II, of the War Crimes Commission, held yesterday, Thursday November 23, Sir Cecil Hurst, the Chairman of the Commission and Commissioner for the United Kingdom, said that the British Government had taken the initiative to give a directive to the Military High Command, instructing them to receive our list of war criminals.

Respectfully,

Herbert Pell

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00116 EW/11–244: Telegram

[Document 897]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 25, 1944—8 p.m.

9920. For Pell. Reference your despatch dated November 2 (Embassy’s no. 18981) referring to this Government question whether acts committed for purpose of preparing and launching war can be considered war crimes and within scope of Commission’s work.

Since despatch not received until November 14, it is impossible to send you instructions in time for Commission’s meeting on November 29. Further time will be necessary to give question careful and adequate consideration. You are accordingly requested to state to Commission that this Government is not now prepared to express an opinion on the matter, and that you therefore are not prepared to vote on the question at this time. Further instructions will be sent as soon as possible.

Stettinius

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./11–2744: Telegram

[Document 898]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kennan) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, November 27, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 9:15 p.m.]

4524. The British Ambassador has given me a copy of a note dated November 17 which he has written to the Soviet Foreign Office expressing the hope that the Soviet Government will see no objection to the British proposal to enlarge the competency of the United Nations War Crimes Commission in order to permit it to deal with German war crimes in Italy.

The last word received here was contained in Kirk’s 52, November 17, 6 p.m. to Moscow25 which stated that the Soviet representative on the ACC had suggested that the British proposal should be submitted through diplomatic channels. If the Department has taken any action in pursuance to this suggestion, I would appreciate being informed.

This Embassy does not receive reports about the activities of the War Crimes Commission. In view of the special interest taken by the Soviet Government in war crimes it would be useful if we could receive periodic summaries of the activities of the London group.

Sent to Department as 4524; repeated to Rome as 25; and to London as 271.

Kennan

25 Telegram 747, November 17, 1944, from the American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy, not printed.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00116 E.W./11–2844

[Document 899]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

Ref: 152/221/44

The United States and British political officers at Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force have reported to the State Department and the Foreign Office that the First United States Army have captured a member of the S.S. Deathshead Division who is believed to have information about the persons responsible for German atrocities at a concentration camp at Lublin and at other camps. These political officers have requested a decision of policy regarding the method of handling such prisoners of war and in particular whether representatives of other Governments such as the Soviet and Polish Governments should be given access to prisoners in question through a local Court of Enquiry or through the United Nations War Crimes Commission.

2. The view of the Foreign Office is that Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force should be asked to ensure that this prisoner is properly identified and all pertinent information about him carefully recorded. Special care should be taken to see that he does not escape or is not inadvertently released and he should if necessary be segregated from the other prisoners. He should be fully examined by the Anglo-American Supreme Court and full records of the results of the investigation should be kept at Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force for communication through the usual channels to the National Offices (sic) Allied Governments. There is, in the view of the Foreign Office, no reason why the United Nations War Crimes Commission should be associated with the examination which is primarily a matter for the Allied Military authorities acting in conjunction with the National Offices (sic) of Allied Governments concerned.

3. The Foreign Office would see no objection to officers of Allied Governments represented upon the War Crimes Commission being allowed to conduct an examination themselves in cases where evidence is likely to be forthcoming of crimes against their own nationals, or on their territory, provided United States or British officers are present in order to see that no improper means are employed. In the present case the Foreign Office consider it would be appropriate that the Polish military authorities should be given an opportunity of interrogating the prisoner.

4. To the Foreign Office it seems that the Soviet Government are in a different position since they are not represented upon the United Nations War Crimes Commission and have followed their own independent procedure in dealing with war crimes. The grant of facilities to the Soviet authorities to examine prisoners of war in British or American hands would also raise the question of reciprocal facilities for the examination by representatives of the Western Allies of prisoners of war captured by the Russians. The Soviet authorities might claim an interest in the present case, since Lublin was liberated by the Russian armies and the atrocities committed at the Majdamek Concentration Camp there have already been investigated by an extraordinary Commission set up jointly by the Soviet Government and the Polish National Committee. Nevertheless for reasons referred to above the Foreign Office consider it would be preferable not to raise the question of separate interrogation by the Soviet authorities but to confine action to communicating to the Russians at a later stage any information produced by Anglo-United States investigations which seemed likely to be of interest to them.

5. The Foreign Office would be glad to learn the views of the Department of State in regard to the despatch of instructions on the foregoing lines to the United States and British Political Officers at Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force.

Washington , November 28, 1944.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./11–3044: Telegram

[Document 900]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 30, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received November 30—12:07 p.m.]

10575. Personal for the Secretary. When I was in Washington I discussed within the Department, with McCloy26 in the War Department, with Francis Biddle27 in the Department of Justice and the President problems relating to war crimes.

Since returning here I have talked with Mr. Herbert Pell who represents us on United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes. He tells me that the situation in that Commission at the present time makes it necessary that he go home to report.

I believe it would be wise to call him back in order that we may coordinate our policies in this field and particularly as there are decisions pending here about which you should be promptly and completely informed.28

Winant

26 John J. McCloy, Assistant Secretary of War.

27 Attorney General.

28 Mr. Pell’s travel authorization to the United States and return was transmitted by the Department’s telegram No. 10102, December 2, 1944, 3 p.m. (740.00116 EW/11–3044).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00116 EW/11–2944: Telegram

[Document 901]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 2, 1944—1 p.m.

10093. Question referred to in your despatch no. 1898128a considered by this Department and the War Department to be one having important implications. Your 10541, November 29, 7 p.m.29 It may be impossible to send Pell instructions before December 6. We would prefer to have vote on matter postponed by Commission beyond December 6 for substantial length of time if possible.30 Matter is being actively considered by interested Departments here in connection with other related questions. Please repeat to Pell.

Stettinius

28a Dated November 2, p. 1391 [Pg. 1391 includes portions of Doc. 893 and Doc. 894].

29 Not printed; it reported that the vote referred to in Department’s telegram 9920, November 25, to London, had been deferred to December 6 (740.00116 EW/11–2944).

30 At the 41st meeting of the Commission, December 6, 1944, it was decided that “the subject would be adjourned until the members were ready to take it up again.” (740.00116 European War/12–1144)

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of British Commonwealth Affairs (Achilles) 740.00116 E.W./11–2844

[Document 902]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of British Commonwealth Affairs (Achilles)

[Washington,] December 2, 1944.

Participants: Mr. G. R. Ranken, British Embassy31

Mr. Bailey—SWP

Mr. Achilles—BC

Mr. Ranken called at our request in order that a preliminary reply to the Embassy’s Aide-Mémoire of November 29 [28] could be given him.

He was advised that the War Department was interested primarily in avoiding possible mistreatment of American prisoners in Germany should the German in question be tried or punished as a war criminal at this time, that it believed that the prisoner should be interrogated and the results of the interrogation filed for future use, that the interrogation should be exclusively Anglo-American but that the results of the interrogation might be communicated to other Governments should this eventually be found desirable. He was also advised that this Department felt strongly that the prisoner should not be brought to the United States.

He was advised that the War Department was advising SHAEF of the views of the two Departments.

Mr. Ranken’s attention was also called to the stipulation in the Moscow Declaration concerning war crimes to the effect that war criminals would be returned to the scene of their crimes to face justice and that it might accordingly be necessary, should interrogation reveal that the prisoner had been guilty of war crimes within the territorial limits of USSR, to turn him over to the Soviet authorities.

31 G. R. Ranken, Third Secretary of the British Embassy.

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of British Commonwealth Affairs (Achilles) 740.00116 E.W./11–2844

[Document 903]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of British Commonwealth Affairs (Achilles)

[Washington,] December 6, 1944.

Mr. Ranken telephoned this afternoon, with reference to our conversation of December 2, to say that the Embassy had now been advised that the British Political Adviser at SHAEF had advised the Soviet Embassy in Paris of the circumstances of the case and was awaiting an indication of the views of the Soviet Government. I said that this would of course complicate the matter considerably.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 740.00116 EW/11–2744: Telegram

[Document 904]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, December 7, 1944—2 p.m.

2798. Your 4524, November 27, 5 p.m. Question of extending terms of reference of War Crimes Commission to include German war crimes in Italy, was raised by British with this Government last spring. We concurred in their proposal, and in suggestion that it be discussed by Advisory Council for Italy but we have not ourselves taken any other action.

Pell, American representative on War Crimes Commission, London, is being instructed to forward minutes of meetings and other pertinent documents direct to Moscow if copies are available.

Stettinius

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Legal Adviser (Hackworth) 740.00116 E.W./12–744

[Document 905]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

[Washington,] December 7, 1944.

Mr. Pell called today32 and discussed with me for possibly an hour the work of the War Crimes Commission. He thought that it was for the United States to take the lead promptly in these matters, otherwise such countries as Greece, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia would gravitate toward the Soviet Union. He discussed the situation regarding the Gestapo and other German organizations, also the situation with respect to minority groups. He stated that France would treat a member of the Gestapo as a criminal and seemed to think that we should do likewise. He said that Lord Wright was interested in the Jews in Germany. Mr. Pell thought there might be some difficulty in dealing with prewar crimes in Germany but that certainly war crimes against minority groups in that country should be dealt with. He suggested that recommendations to SHAEF to have the courts ready to get hold of members of the Gestapo should be issued without delay. He stated that the Commission desired to have representatives attached to our military forces in Europe to collect evidence in the wake of military operations. He also stated that recommendations from the Commission regarding the establishment of an international court and military tribunals had been sent forward in October and that he had received no instructions.

I told him that the whole situation was being considered by this Department and the War and Navy Departments; that it was somewhat involved and that it had to be thought through and worked out carefully in order that we might not be accused of taking illegal and strong-armed methods such as those for which we are now condemning the Axis powers. I said that we had had conferences with officials of those Departments and I expected to have one within the next day or two. He inquired whether he might sit in on this conference to which I replied that the discussions would be along technical lines and that I doubted whether he would be interested.

I said repeatedly that we were all of one mind as to the desirability of dealing with the different types of atrocities, but that the possible method of procedure remained to be determined and that these were the things that made it desirable to proceed with caution. I said that views such as those voiced by him regarding criminality of members of secret and other organizations in Germany had been voiced in other quarters; that it should be remembered, however, that if the work of the War Crimes Commission and others having to do with the general subject was to be above reproach, it would be necessary to be sure of our ground before undertaking to reach conclusions; that conclusions had not been reached, but that he would be properly instructed as soon as they are reached. At every stage of our discussion I impressed upon him the confidential nature of the whole subject and finally said that if any word were dropped as to any phase of the matter, which is wholly within the exploratory field, it might give rise to speculation and inquiries of an embarrassing nature which neither he nor I would wish. He professed to understand thoroughly and stated that he was glad to have had this talk and would see me again after a week’s visit in New York.

Green H. Hackworth

32 See telegram 10575, November 30, 5 p.m., from London, p. 1395 [Pg. 1395 includes portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900].

The Chargé in China (Atcheson) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 P.W./12–944

[Document 906]

The Chargé in China (Atcheson) to the Secretary of State

No. 3213 Chungking, December 9, 1944.
[Received December 28.]

Sir: I have the honor to refer to the Embassy’s despatch No. 3091, October 24, 1944,33 in regard to the Far Eastern and Pacific Sub-commission of the United Nations War Crimes Commission, and to report that an organizing meeting of the Sub-commission was held at Chungking on November 28, 1944. Copies of the minutes of the meeting have not yet been received; there is accordingly enclosed a brief memorandum describing the action taken, together with copies of pertinent documents which were distributed to the representatives at the meeting.34

It will be noted that Dr. Wang Chung-hui was elected Chairman of the Sub-commission; that Dr. P. H. Chang, Counselor of the Executive Yuan, was elected Secretary General; that the British, Dutch and American representatives were designated to form a Committee on Financial Arrangements; and that the question of the date on which the war is considered to have begun in China, raised by the Dutch and the Australians, is being referred to the Commission in London.35

Respectfully yours,

George Atcheson, Jr.

33 Not printed.

34 Enclosures not printed.

35 For further information regarding the organization, composition, and functioning of the Sub-Commission, see History of the United Nations War Crimes Commission, pp. 129–131.

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth) 740.00116 E.W./12–1144

[Document 907]

The American Representative on the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Pell) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

New York, December 11, 1944.
[Received December 12.]

Dear Mr. Hackworth: I understand from our conversation the other day that the State Department approves of,

1. The idea of the Military Court being established for the trial of war prisoners.

2. That I can go ahead and demand the consideration of crimes committed in Germany against German nationals on account of race, religion or political influence, provided these offences took place after the beginning of the war, as war crimes to be punished as such.

3. That the Department approves of an expansion of the secretariat and of the machinery of the Commission in London.

I also understand that the War Department will cooperate closely with the Commission and will keep in touch with me, and I presume that, provided I send copies of all correspondence to you, I may deal directly with them especially on matters of urgent detail.

I shall be in Washington on Monday, the 18th.

I am,

Yours most sincerely,

Herbert Pell

The Legal Adviser (Hackworth) to the American Representative on the United Nations War Grimes Commission (Pell) 740.00116 EW/12–1144

[Document 908]

The Legal Adviser (Hackworth) to the American Representative on the United Nations War Grimes Commission (Pell)

Washington, December 12, 1944.

Dear Mr. Pell: I am in receipt of your letter of December 11 in which you state that you understand from our conversation the other day that the Department approves of certain propositions stated in numbered paragraphs in your letter.

I thought that it was made clear in our conversation that the whole matter relating to war crimes was under consideration by the interested agencies of this Government and that nothing definite and final could be said at this time regarding any phase of the subject on which you have asked for instructions. I think that we must proceed on this understanding and keep in mind the point that in as much as decisions have not been reached on the subjects we discussed, our conversation was merely exploratory and confidential. You would not, therefore, be privileged to act on any impressions that you may have gained from our conversations. You will be given instructions on the various pending questions as soon as that is possible.

I do not recall any discussion of the subject matter covered in the last paragraph of your letter. Certainly I have no authority to speak for any other Department.

I shall be glad to see you when you return on Monday, the 18th.36

Sincerely yours,

[File copy not signed]

36 No record has been found in Department files of a discussion on that date.

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./12–1244

[Document 909]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

No. 718

His Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and has the honour to refer to Mr. Hull’s note 740.00116 E.W./8–1944 of the 4th October last concerning a letter addressed by the Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission to His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs regarding German crimes against Germans and other nationals in Germany.

2. Lord Halifax has the honour to transmit herewith a copy of a letter dated November 9, 1944, which Mr. Eden addressed to the Chairman of the Commission setting out the views of His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom on this question, together with a copy of a letter which the Lord Chancellor addressed to the Chairman of the Commission on the 23rd August last. The Lord Chancellor’s letter was written after the War Cabinet had considered various aspects of the procedure for investigating war crimes to which the Lord Chancellor had drawn their attention.

3. Before writing to Sir Cecil Hurst on the 9th November, Mr. Eden gave full consideration to the views of the Department of State set forth in the second and third paragraphs of Mr. Hull’s note under reference. He agrees that the formula proposed in the third paragraph of Lord Halifax’s note No. 525 of the 19th August last was too broad in scope, but feels on the other hand that the Department of State’s suggestion that any crimes committed in Germany against non-enemy nationals are within the jurisdiction of the United Nations War Crimes Commission, may go too far. Mr. Eden is advised that while crimes committed against Allied nationals in Germany are certainly within the Commission’s field, there would not seem to be any foundation for Allied jurisdiction to try as war crimes, offences committed against neutral nationals or stateless persons in enemy territory. In the circumstances Mr. Eden confined himself in his letter to the Chairman of the Commission to making it clear that in the view of His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom crimes committed against Allied nationals in Germany were within the Commission’s terms of reference, and he trusts that the Department of State will feel that this meets the point they had in mind.37

4. With regard to the point dealt with in the fourth and subsequent paragraphs of Mr. Hull’s note, Mr. Eden fully shares the view of the Department of State as to the necessity that some means should be found for dealing with German crimes against non-Allied nationals which are outside the jurisdiction of the United Nations War Crimes Commission. It was thought best not to enter into any detailed discussion of this question with the Chairman of the Commission, but it will be observed that the latter has been assured that His Majesty’s Government sincerely hope that those who have been responsible for these atrocities may one day receive the punishment which their actions deserve.

5. Mr. Eden is devoting further study to this question in accordance with the Department of State’s suggestions and hopes to be able to inform them of his conclusions in due course.

Washington , 12 December, 1944.

[Enclosure 1]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Eden) to the Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Hurst)

C.15766/14/62 [London,] 9 November, 1944.

The views of the War Cabinet on your letter of the 31st May were communicated to your Commission in the letter from the Lord Chancellor to yourself as Chairman on the 23rd August, 1944. The fourth paragraph of that letter dealt with the suggestion put forward by the Commission as to atrocities committed on racial, political or religious grounds in enemy territory. In that letter after stating the view then held, the Lord Chancellor went on to say that His Majesty’s Government would give further consideration to this question. I am therefore writing to let you know that His Majesty’s Government adhere to the views as stated in that letter. The majority of these atrocities will have been committed against enemy nationals; if committed against Allied nationals they are within your Commission’s terms of reference already. I think it is clear from the letter that there was no intention to exclude atrocities on these grounds in enemy territory if they in fact came within the category of war crimes, but you were clearly raising the wider issue. His Majesty’s Government do not—as was stated in the letter—wish to preclude the Commission from collecting any evidence which they feel would be of value in relation to the general extermination policy which has undoubtedly been carried out in occupied territory in circumstances which constitute war crimes.

Apart from other considerations His Majesty’s Government feel that the progress of the war has made the war criminal question one of some urgency, and it would be a mistake for the Commission to undertake this additional and heavy burden. It is unnecessary to say that His Majesty’s Government sincerely hope that those who have been responsible for these artocities may one day have the punishment which their actions deserve.

Anthony Eden

[Enclosure 2]

The British Lord Chancellor (Simon) to the Chairman of the United Nations War Crimes Commission (Hurst)

C.15766/14/62 23 August 1944.

My Dear Hurst: I promised at the interview you had on the 28th July with me and the Attorney General to write you a letter which was to convey some of the suggestions which the War Cabinet has authorised us to make with the object of promoting the work of the Commission on War Crimes over which you preside. The observations in this letter are communicated to you as Chairman of the Commission, and, as you will see, are to a large extent in line with the recommendations adopted by the Commission on 16th May, and forwarded by you to the Foreign Secretary in your letter of 24th May. You have also by your letter of 31st May to the Foreign Secretary taken a broad view of the duties of the Commission in another matter on which the War Cabinet authorised us to make a suggestion to you.

His Majesty’s Government are in agreement with the Commission that the mere establishment of a list of persons presumed to be guilty of war crimes by building up and preparing complete cases and dossiers containing the proof of their guilt cannot in itself complete the work to be done by the Commission. It was, indeed, never intended that this should be the limit of the Commission’s work; you will notice in the statement made in the House of Lords on 7th October, 1942, when the functions of the Commission were generally described, that the Commission was to report from time to time to the Governments cases in which war crimes appear to have been committed against nationals of the United Nations, “naming and identifying wherever possible the persons responsible”. In the view of His Majesty’s Government the purpose to be served by the Commission is intended to include an account, in such detail as is possible, of specific war atrocities, even though it is not possible, in all cases, to identify the individual perpetrators or the units involved.

Secondly, we note the suggestion that all persons who have held responsible positions in the occupied countries, especially lists of enemy personnel in authority in each occupied district, including gauleiters, governors, chiefs of the S.S., chiefs of the Gestapo, etc., with particulars as complete as possible regarding their own identity and of the more important crimes committed in the areas where they were in authority, should be compiled by the Allied Governments and that such persons (at any rate members of the S.S. or Gestapo) should be detained as soon as this is possible. This, of course, is primarily a matter which falls within the task of the Governments themselves and of the Allied commanders, but we can well understand that such lists might be of great value to the Commission in the discharge of its work, and, so far as His Majesty’s Government is concerned, we believe that the course proposed would be thoroughly approved.

Thirdly, in your letter of the 31st May you refer to a category of enemy atrocities which does not fall within the definition of war crimes, namely, atrocities committed on racial, political or religious grounds in enemy territory. This would open a very wide field. No doubt you have in mind particularly the atrocities committed against the Jews. I assume there is no doubt that the massacres which have occurred in occupied territories would come within the category of war crimes and there would be no question as to their being within the Commission’s terms of reference. No doubt they are part of a policy which the Nazi Government have adopted from the outset, and I can fully understand the Commission wishing to receive and consider and report on evidence which threw light on what one might describe as the extermination policy. I think I can probably express the view of His Majesty’s Government by saying that it would not desire the Commission to place any unnecessary restriction on the evidence which may be tendered to it on this general subject. I feel I should warn you, however, that the question of acts of this kind committed in enemy territory raises serious difficulties and it would probably be better that the Commission should not concern itself with these until the matter has been fully considered in the light of your recent recommendations. His Majesty’s Government do attach very great importance to the investigation which they feel sure is proceeding of the massacre committed in the occupied territories and the identification of those responsible.

To sum up: if I may state in broad terms the position as I see it, I would say that I trust that the Commission will not feel narrowly confined to the work of identifying individual criminals. It will not, I am sure, forget that in order to bring home guilt to an individual enemy who is charged with having perpetrated a specified crime, it is necessary to show that the man accused is rightly held responsible for it, and, to that extent, identification may often be most important. But, on the other hand, the report of the United Nations War Crimes Commission ought certainly to take a wider scope, for it is by means of this report that the extent and character of well authenticated atrocities will be largely judged, and the difficult and responsible task of the Commission is to bring these matters home in their general aspect as well as to collect evidence of the crime of an identified individual. When the Commission are able to address themselves to what has happened in the Far East, it may be found that identification of individuals is even more difficult than in the West. It will, however, be of the greatest importance for there to be a reliable and authoritative report on the atrocities.

You may, therefore, assume that the wider treatment on the subject which the Commission has suggested to His Majesty’s Government is the treatment which His Majesty’s Government would approve.

Yours sincerely,

Simon

37 The Secretary of State in his reply of January 10, 1945, stated: “The Department, together with other interested agencies now has under consideration the question mentioned in paragraph 3 of the Ambassador’s note.” (740.00116 E.W./12–1244)

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth) 740.00116 E.W./12–1344

[Document 910]

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

Washington, December 13, 1944.

Dear Mr. Hackworth: I am writing with reference to this Embassy’s note No. 628 of the 13th October last to which the Department of State replied in their note No. 740.00116 E.W./10–1344,39 regarding the proposal that the Allied Commission in Italy should act on behalf of the Italian Government in transmitting to the War Crimes Commission information relating to German crimes in Italy.

2. His Majesty’s Ambassador at Moscow has now reported under date of December 10th that the Soviet Government state that as they have nothing to do with the War Crimes Commission they do not find it possible to agree that measures for the investigation of war crimes shall be undertaken on their behalf by the Allied Commission in Italy.

3. In the meantime the Foreign Office had on December 6th addressed a message to His Majesty’s Ambassador at Rome to the following effect: “The Soviet Government recently suggested that ‘requirements for handing over of war criminals’ should be among the questions to be discussed in the near future by the European Advisory Commission. Although these discussions will be primarily concerned with arrangements in Germany, particularly in the post-surrender period, they may provide us with an opportunity of influencing the Soviet Government’s attitude towards the international handling of the question of war crimes. We accordingly propose to see how these discussions develop before pursuing the question of Italian war crimes and German crimes against Italians through the diplomatic channel. We are however still anxious that progress should be made in dealing with the latter question, and if an opportunity arises for broaching it directly in the European Advisory Commission, we propose to do so.”

Yours sincerely,

Paul Gore-Booth

39 Dated October 26, p. 1389 [Pg. 1389 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893].

The Department of State to the British Embassy 740.00116 European War/12–744

[Document 911]

The Department of State to the British Embassy

Memorandum

The Department of State refers to an aide-mémoire dated November 28, 1944, Reference: 152/221/44, from the British Embassy concerning the interrogation of a captured member of the S.S. Deathshead Division who was taken into custody in France.

The American Government is of the opinion that until information received from the prisoner has been evaluated, no interrogation should be made except by British and American officers under the direction of the Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Forces. The prisoner was captured by the First American Army and it is believed to be in the best interests of the United States not to permit interrogation of him at this time by Polish or Soviet officers.

A message has been dispatched to Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Forces, requesting interrogation of this prisoner within the theater in accordance with the above decision.

Washington , December 18, 1944.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00116 E.W./12–2644

[Document 912]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

In the view of His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom a very unsatisfactory situation is developing within the United Nations War Crimes Commission with regard to the proposal of the Commission recommending the creation of a United Nations War Crimes Court and other recommendations made by the Commission. Some members of the Commission appear to hold the view that the Commission’s recommendations are being ignored by His Majesty’s Government and seem disposed to draw the conclusion that His Majesty’s Government do not wish to pursue war criminals too diligently.

2. His Majesty’s Government feel that it is essential to dispel this illusion and propose therefore to address a communication to the Chairman of the War Crimes Commission explaining the position of His Majesty’s Government as to the various recommendations made by the Commission. The general object of this communication would be to assure the Commission of the determination of His Majesty’s Government to carry out the policy as regards punishment of war criminals which has been so often proclaimed by Allied leaders and of their willingness to take any practicable steps in their power to assist the Commission in its work.

3. It is not, however, proposed to despatch this communication until the end of the present month, in the hope that by then His Majesty’s Government may be in possession of the views of the United States Government as to the matter dealt with in this Embassy’s aide-mémoire to the Department of State dated 30th October last. It would be very satisfactory if His Majesty’s Government were in a position to say that they understand that the United States Government share their views as set out in that aide-mémoire as to the proposals in question but should this not be possible it is proposed to inform the Commission of the provisional views of His Majesty’s Government and to add that they are still in consultation with the United States Government on this subject.40

Washington , 26 December 1944.

40 In a memorandum of January 2, 1945, the Department informed the British Embassy that the questions raised in the aide-mémoire of October 30 were being actively studied by the interested agencies of this Government and that it was hoped in the near future to give the Embassy this Government’s views on the opinions expressed in it (740.00116 E.W./12–2644).

The Legal Adviser (Hackworth) to the First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth) 740.00116 E.W./12–1344

[Document 913]

The Legal Adviser (Hackworth) to the First Secretary of the British Embassy (Gore-Booth)

Washington, December 27, 1944.

Dear Mr. Gore-Booth: I thank you for your letter of December 13, 1944 informing us of the Soviet Government’s statement that it does not find it possible to agree that measures for the investigation of war crimes be undertaken on behalf of the United Nations War Crimes Commission by the Allied Commission in Italy.

I assume that this statement refers to war crimes committed both by and against Italians which were discussed in the Embassy’s aide-mémoires of October 3 (Ref. 152/153/44 and 152/154/44).

The Department had understood that steps were being taken by the Foreign Office to have the problem of the first named category discussed by the European Advisory Commission.

Acting upon this assumption, the Department suggested to Mr. Kirk41 that the British proposal regarding Italian war crimes might be held temporarily in abeyance in the discussions of the Advisory Council for Italy. Mr. Kirk has advised the Department42 that at its meeting of December 15 the Council agreed to postpone discussion of the British proposal regarding Italian war crimes although, pending receipt of instructions, the question will still be kept on the agenda.

It appears from the message quoted in your letter that the Foreign Office proposes to broach the question of German crimes against Italians in the European Advisory Commission.

I am wondering therefore whether the Department is correct in its understanding that the Foreign Office is taking steps to have the question of both categories of war crimes discussed by the European Advisory Commission.

Sincerely yours,

Green H. Hackworth

41 Telegram 614, December 14, 1944, 6 p.m., to Rome, not printed.

42 Telegram. 979, December 15, 1944, 5 p.m., from Rome, not printed.

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Bathurst) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth) 740.00116 EW/12–2744

[Document 914]

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Bathurst) to the Legal Adviser (Hackworth)

Washington, 27 December 1944.

Dear Mr. Hackworth: With reference to the enclosed aide-mémoire on the subject of the War Crimes draft directive to theatre commanders, you may be interested to know that the Foreign Office have informed this Embassy that, as they have a direct interest in the investigation of war crimes committed against British subjects in Far Eastern territories liberated from the Japanese, they will wish to consider what arrangements of their own, if any, it may be necessary to make to this end to supplement the organizations which they hope will be established by each theatre headquarters in the Far East, to whom it is assumed the proposed directive will also be issued.

We have been instructed to ascertain whether any instructions apart from those contemplated in the draft directive have already been issued, for instance, to General MacArthur or to Admiral Nimitz regarding investigation of Japanese war crimes against United States citizens and what arrangements, if any, have been made or are contemplated for this purpose in liberated territory in the Philippines. These arrangements would be of particular relevance to the plans of His Majesty’s Government for British territory such as North Borneo which also falls within the South West Pacific Command.

This information is being sought through the medium of the representatives of the British Chiefs of Staff in Washington, but I thought you would like to know of the United Kingdom Government’s interest in these matters.

Yours sincerely,

M. E. Bathurst

[Enclosure]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

The draft directive formulated by the Combined Chiefs of Staff (C.C.S. 705) regarding the obligations of theatre commanders in relation to war crimes has now been considered by the British Chiefs of Staff in consultation with the War Office and the Foreign Office and the amendments thereto proposed by the British Chiefs of Staff are embodied in Combined Chiefs of Staff paper 705/1 of 17th December 1944.

2. It will be seen that the British Chiefs of Staff consider it undesirable that the United Nations War Crimes Commission should be put in the position of issuing instructions to theatre commanders and that accordingly an amendment of paragraph 12 of the draft directive has been proposed. In this connection His Majesty’s Government have now received from the War Crimes Commission the latter’s first and second lists of war criminals (German and Italian respectively) and are considering what action should now be taken in regard to these lists which will doubtless be communicated to the United States Government through their representative on the War Crimes Commission.43

3. Among various other amendments to the draft directive, the British Chiefs of Staff have recommended that each theatre commander should be instructed by the Combined Chiefs of Staff to establish a suitable organization to investigate war crimes and track down offenders. His Majesty’s Government attach particular importance to the very early establishment of such organizations and the British Embassy would be grateful for whatever action the Department of State may be able to take by way of supporting this recommendation with the United States Chiefs of Staff with a view to the early issue of appropriate instructions to theatre commanders by the Combined Chiefs of Staff.

Washington, 27 December, 1944.

43 The first and second lists of war criminals were transmitted to the Department by the American Representative on the Commission in despatches No. 5, December 9, 1944, and No. 9, December 18, 1944; the lists are no longer attached to the despatches in the Department files.

Representations to neutral governments against the granting of asylum to persons guilty of war crimesRepresentations to neutral governments against the granting of asylum to persons guilty of war crimes1

1 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 460–468.

[915] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, August 23, 1944—midnight.

740.00116 European War/8–2344: Telegram

[916] The Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington , August 24, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./8–2444

[917] The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, August 26, 1944—3 p.m. [Received 5:15 p.m.]

740.00116 EW/8–2644: Telegram

[918] The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, August 30, 1944—6 p.m. [Received 7:35 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./8–3044: Telegram

[919] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, August 30, 1944—7 p.m. [Received August 31—1:57 a.m.]

740.00116 EW/8–3044: Telegram

[920] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, September 1, 1944—11 p.m. [Received September 2—noon.]

740.00116 E.W./9–144: Telegram

[921] The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, September 3, 1944—5 p.m. [Received September 3—4:55 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./9–344: Telegram

[922] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, September 4, 1944—10 p.m.

740.00116 E.W./9–444: Telegram

[923] The Soviet Ambassador (Gromyko) to the Secretary of State

Washington, September 4, 1944.

740.00110 E.W./9–444

[924] The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, September 6, 1944—4 p.m. [Received September 6—3:58 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./9–644: Telegram

[925] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, September 6, 1944—8 p.m. [Received September 7—8:44 a.m.]

740.00116 E.W./9–644: Telegram

[926] The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, September 7, 1944—6 p.m. [Received 6:05 p.m.]

740.00116 EW/9–744: Telegram

[927] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb)

Washington, September 8, 1944—10 a.m.

740.00116 E.W./8–3044: Telegram

[928] The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

San Sebastian, September 8, 1944—noon. [Received 5:15 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./9–844: Telegram

[929] The President of Haiti (Lescot) to President Roosevelt

Port-au-Prince, September 9, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./9–944

[930] The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, September 11, 1944—9 p.m. [Received 11:50 p.m.]

852.79662/9–1144: Telegram

[931] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Washington , 12 September, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./9–1244

[932] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb)

Washington, September 14, 1944—8 p.m.

740.00116 E.W./8–3044: Telegram

[933] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ireland (Gray)

Washington, September 16, 1944—11 a.m.

740.00116 E.W./9–1644: Telegram

[934] The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, September 18, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 9:15 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./9–1844: Telegram

[935] The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, September 18, 1944—7 p.m. [Received September 19—12:55 a.m.]

740.00116 E.W./9–1844: Telegram

[936] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ireland (Gray)

Washington, September 19, 1944—4 p.m.

740.00116 E.W./9–1844: Telegram

[937] The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, September 21, 1944—3 p.m. [Received 5:36 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./9–2144: Telegram

[938] The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, September 26, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 6:33 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./9–2644: Telegram

[939] The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, September 26, 1944—6 p.m. [Received 6:04 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./9–2644: Telegram

[940] Statement by the Secretary of State Released to the Press on September 28, 1944

September 28, 1944

740.00116 E.W./9–2844

[941] The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, September 29, 1944—9 a.m. [Received 7:26 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./9–2944: Telegram

[942] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 29, 1944—8 p.m. [Received September 29—7:40 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./9–2944: Telegram

[943] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 30, 1944—4 p.m. [Received September 30—12:38 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./9–3044: Telegram

[944] The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, September 30, 1944—8 p.m. [Received September 30—7:45 p.m.]

740.00116 European War/9–3044: Telegram

[945] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, October 4, 1944—5 p.m.

740.00116 E.W./9–2944: Telegram

[946] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Murray)

[Washington,] October 5, 1944.

740.00116 EW/10–544

[947] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb)

Washington, October 7, 1944—4 p.m.

740.00116 EW/9–3044: Telegram

[948] The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, October 9, 1944—7 p.m. [Received 7:40 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./10–944: Telegram

[949] The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, October 9, 1944—8 p.m. [Received October 9—4:10 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./10–944: Telegram

[950] The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, October 10, 1944—6 p.m. [Received October 11—8:58 p.m.]

740.00116 EW/10–1044: Telegram

[951] The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, October 11, 1944—6 p.m. [Received October 11—4:07 p.m.]

740.00116 European War/10–1144: Telegram

[952] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ireland (Gray)

Washington, October 14, 1944—5 p.m.

740.00116 E.W./10–1044: Telegram

[953] President Roosevelt to the President of Haiti (Lescot)

Washington, October 16, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./9–944

[954] The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, October 18, 1944—4 p.m. [Received 6:48 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./10–1844: Telegram

[955] The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, October 18, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 9:02 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./10–1844: Telegram

[956] The Secretary of State to the Arnbassador in Ireland (Gray)

Washington, October 19, 1944—8 p.m.

740.00116 EW/10–1044: Telegram

[957] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 19, 1944—midnight.

740.00116 E.W./10–1044: Telegram

[958] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 21, 1944—1 p.m. [Received 1:52 p.m.]

740.00116 E.W./10–2144: Telegram

[959] The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, October 24, 1944—6 p.m. [Received 7:45 p.m.]

740.00116 EW/10–2444: Telegram

[960] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , October 30, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./10–3044

[961] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] November 2, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./11–244

[962] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

Washington , November 8, 1944.

740.00116 EW/9–1244

[963] The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, November 10, 1944—6 p.m. [Received November 11—4:12 a.m.]

740.00116 EW/11–1044: Telegram

[964] The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, November 14, 1944—10 a.m. [Received 8:30 p.m.]

740.00116 EW/11–1444: Telegram

[965] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 14, 1944. [Received November 14—10:12 p.m.]

740.00116 EW/11–1444: Telegram

[966] The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, November 14, 1944—7 p.m. [Received November 14—6:23 p.m.]

740.00116 EW/11–1444: Telegram

[967] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Ireland (Gray)

Washington, November 15, 1944—9 p.m.

740.00116 EW/11–1544: Telegram

[968] The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, November 16, 1944—3 p.m. [Received 5:25 p.m.]

740.00116 EW/11–1644: Telegram

[969] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, December 1, 1944—8 p.m.

740.00116 EW/10–644: Telegram

[970] The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, December 4, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 5:48 p.m.]

740.00116 EW/12–444: Telegram

[971] The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, December 6, 1944—9 p.m. [Received December 7—1:42 p.m.]

740.00116 European War/12–644: Telegram

[972] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Washington , December 11, 1944.

740.00116 EW/12–1144

[973] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

Washington , December 27, 1944.

740.00116 E.W./12–1144

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 740.00116 European War/8–2344: Telegram

[Document 915]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)2

Washington, August 23, 1944—midnight.

2905. On July 31, 1943, you transmitted to the Swiss Government under instructions the text of the President’s press statement of the preceding day in regard to war criminals.3 In that statement the President declared that he found it difficult to believe that any neutral country would give asylum to or extend protection to any such persons and that this Government would regard the action of a neutral government in affording asylum to Axis leaders or their tools as inconsistent with the principles for which the United Nations are fighting.

The Swiss Government’s reply reported in your 5063 of August 18, 1943,4 expressed the belief that the American Government’s purpose was not to question the right of asylum as such.

The assumption of the Swiss Government was correct. Throughout the course of its history the United States has been a haven for the politically oppressed from all parts of Europe. Of this the Federal Council is undoubtedly aware. The Swiss reply did not however correctly state the real purpose of the President’s statement of July 30, 1943, which was of course to appeal to neutral countries to decline to admit to their countries Axis leaders and their criminal henchmen.

As the President pointed out in his statement of July 30, 1943, it is the intention of this Government that the successful close of the war shall include provisions for the surrender to the United Nations of war criminals. If the Government of Switzerland declines to admit to Swiss territory persons in that category, obviously no problem would be presented as between Switzerland and the United Nations.

Please discuss this matter informally with the appropriate Swiss authorities and inquire whether they are prepared to give assurance that the Swiss authorities will decline to admit the Axis leaders and their tools to Swiss territory. It need hardly be added that such persons would doubtless be regarded in every sense by the Swiss authorities as undesirable aliens whose admission to Swiss territory would be not in the interest of Switzerland even if such persons were not wanted for eventual trial by the United Nations.

We desire that you discuss this whole matter fully and frankly with the appropriate Swiss authorities. You are authorized in your discretion to leave with them an aide-mémorie in the sense of this telegram. In discussing this matter with the Swiss authorities you should make it plain to them that the wheels of justice are turning rapidly and that Switzerland may at any minute be faced with the necessity of reaching a decision on this question. You should therefore urge strongly upon them that they give you the assurance desired at this time and in so doing draw to their attention the following considerations.

As you know the United States has in its armed forces a total of nearly twelve million persons, almost nine percent of the entire population of this country. Over 200,000 United States merchant seamen are sailing thousands of American vessels transporting implements of war to all the theaters of action. Tens of millions of American civilians are doing important war production work. The war has touched practically every individual in the United States. The American people know that a small group of persons in the Axis countries played the leading role in plunging the world into this ghastly war. The American people would not understand the extension of asylum or protection in neutral countries to any of the persons whom they hold responsible for the war. Steadily mounting casualty lists are intensifying the feeling of the American people that adequate measures must be taken to hold to strict accountability the Axis leaders and their lackeys for their crimes against civilization. It is not my wish that you should make any threats to the Swiss Government: I do feel, however, that you would be lacking in candor if you concealed from the Swiss authorities our conviction that American-Swiss relations would be adversely affected for many years to come if Switzerland were to admit to her borders any one of the outstanding Axis leaders or their vassals.

Our views on this matter are, we feel confident, shared by the other members of the United Nations, and the nations associated with them, and, we have no doubt, by large sections of public opinion in neutral countries.

Please press for an early reply and keep me fully informed of your discussions.

For your own strictly confidential information we have not discussed this approach with the British and Soviet authorities but are sending them a paraphrase of this telegram for their secret information. We shall probably also send paraphrases to other members of the United Nations.

Hull

2 Similar telegrams, August 23, 7 p.m., to Portugal as No. 2317, to Spain as No. 2345, and to Sweden as No. 1688.

3 See telegram 644, July 30, 1943, to Ankara, and footnote 5, Foreign Relations,. 1943, vol. i, p. 461.

4  Ibid., p. 466.

The Department of State to the British Embassy 740.00116 E.W./8–2444

[Document 916]

The Department of State to the British Embassy 5

Memorandum

On or about July 31, 1943 the British, Soviet and United States representatives in a number of neutral states made representations to the governments to which they were accredited requesting that Axis leaders and their henchmen not be admitted into those countries.6

In view of the rapid progress of Allied forces in France, the United States Government deemed it advisable to telegraph urgently to the American Minister at Bern on August 23, 1944,7 to make renewed representations to the Swiss Government concerning this matter. A paraphrase of the Secretary of State’s instruction to the Minister at Bern is attached for the confidential information of the British Government.

Occasion was also taken to send substantially similar instructions to the American Ambassadors in Madrid and Lisbon and the American Minister in Stockholm.8 It is not the present intention of the United States Government to give any publicity to this matter but the substance of the instructions to the American Minister at Bern is also being communicated in confidence to the Soviet Government and may likewise be communicated in confidence to the governments of other United Nations.

Washington , August 24, 1944.

5 The same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date, to the Soviet Embassy.

6 See Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, pp. 460–463, passim.

7 No. 2905, supra.

8 See footnote 2, p. 1410 [Pg. 1410 is part of Doc. 915].

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/8–2644: Telegram

[Document 917]

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, August 26, 1944—3 p.m.
[Received 5:15 p.m.]

2639. In a conversation with Sampayo9 yesterday the British Ambassador10 with whom I had previously discussed the matter took the occasion to sound him out on the Portuguese attitude as regards asylum for war criminals. Campbell raised the question largely by analogy couching his warning in terms of what would happen to Switzerland if that country permitted such persons to seek haven there. Switzerland would have about 40 nations “barking at her gates” and demanding that these persons be given up.

Sampayo did not give any indication of what the Portuguese Government position on this matter would be, confining himself to the comment that it was very difficult to obtain permission to reside in Portugal, all applicants being closely scrutinized in advance. He said that a transit visa was moderately easy to get but this implied that the applicant would be moving on with the least possible delay.

The international police we know independently considers that aside from air travel we have means of preventing the escape of war criminals through our frontier controls.

It is my intention to explore this whole subject with Salazar11 in the interview which I have requested as I have some reservation about his attitude in the light of his efforts to establish Portugal’s humanitarian record during this war. Another consideration is the absence of the capital penalty in this country which is applied to the extent that notwithstanding the existence of a treaty with Spain regarding deserters Portugal has returned no deserters without assurances that they would not be executed.

Norweb

9 L. Teixeira de Sampaio, Secretary General, Portuguese Foreign Office.

10 Sir Ronald Hugh Campbell.

11 Antonio de Oliveira Salazar, Portuguese Prime Minister, Provisional Minister of War and of Foreign Affairs.

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./8–3044: Telegram

[Document 918]

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, August 30, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received 7:35 p.m.]

2677. I took the opportunity afforded by my conversation yesterday with Salazar to speak to him about the matter presented in the Department’s 2317 of August 23, 7 p.m.12 In discussion of this subject Salazar was … as unresponsive … as I have ever seen him (my British colleague had already in a somewhat offhand fashion spoken about “war criminals” with Sampayo.13 ReEmbs 263 [2639] of August 26, 3 p.m.).

1. Salazar wanted to know our definition of war criminals (is there not, he asked, a multilateral convention defining them?). I observed that the public statements and policies of the American and British Governments are clear on this point.

2. Salazar continued that “war criminals” should be handled on a juridical” basis (he has asked what about [garbled group]). He was silent upon my observation that juridical forms could not very well be applied to war criminals granted asylum in a neutral country and that there are other considerations such as public opinion which had to be taken into account.

My impression is that Salazar will be inclined to refuse to open the door to fugitive enemy personages who knock; but may be expected to apply his own standards to those who may crash or sneak through the window.

This question of war criminals came at the end of our discussion and in no way affected the main purpose of my visit.

Norweb

12 See footnote 2, p. 1410 [Pg. 1410 is part of Doc. 915].

13 In his telegram 2703, September 1, 1944, 5 p.m., the Ambassador reported that the British Ambassador had now received instructions to convey an appropriate warning to the Portuguese against the granting of asylum to war criminals (740.00116 EW/9–144).

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/8–3044: Telegram

[Document 919]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, August 30, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received August 31—1:57 a.m.]

3389. This afternoon I saw Foreign Minister Gunther at my request to discuss with him subject matter of Department’s 1688, August 23, 7 p.m.15 Mr. Boheman16 was also present and I went into the matter thoroughly.

Obvious deduction from Mr. Gunther’s immediate reaction is that this question is one which has already received careful study by the Foreign Office and the Swedish Government. Mr. Gunther stated that this question had been on agenda for discussion at Cabinet meeting last Friday but that owing to pressure of other business it had not been reached. He said that it would be taken up at the meeting this Friday and that he personally believed that the Government’s decision would be to issue a declaration that Sweden would not give asylum to war criminals. I found no disposition on the part either of the Foreign Minister or Mr. Boheman to argue the case or any indication that they were not in entire agreement with our views. Mr. Gunther pointed out, however, that Sweden will be presented, particularly in the case of persons coming from Norway, with very real difficulties as hundreds of Norwegians are now able to enter Sweden unobserved, it being impossible to patrol so extensive a frontier. It must be taken for granted that war criminals will likewise take advantage of the same opportunities. It is possible that such an individual might be in Sweden several weeks before he is discovered. Boheman also said that it is probable that some criminal refugees from Germany may be landed in this country by plane or paraehute unknown to the authorities. In the informal discussion which followed I admitted that it would be impossible to prevent all cases of that kind but that I hoped the Swedish Government would not then in any case accept such a situation as a fait accompli but would take immediate steps to detain the person and said in this connection that the Allies would undoubtedly expect that any such individuals be delivered if required. Such cases would in all probability be criminals of a minor character and not the outstanding Axis leaders or their principal vassals. Of this latter category Mr. Gunther left no doubt in my mind that the Swedish Government will not give them asylum. He is also aware that the problem may arise at any moment and that the policy is therefore one for urgent determination. Mr. Gunther himself said that public opinion in this country not to speak of the Government is entirely hostile to any reception of war criminals and he added that no prominent Axis or quisling who would fall into this category could expect to remain alive for a day if he came to Sweden and attempted to move around in the normal way. Although Mr. Gunther said that he was speaking as I was informally and could not make any official statement until after the Government had made its decision, his reaction and the statements he made were so entirely satisfactory that I have no reasonable doubt that he was expressing a view which has already been determined upon in the Government. I thanked him and said that I was confident that this informal response would be appreciated by my Government. He promised to send for me as soon as the Government has determined its official action. (See my 3312, August 26, 1 p.m.).17

Johnson

15 See footnote 2, p. 1410 [Pg. 1410 is part of Doc. 915].

16 B. C. Boheman, Secretary General, Swedish Foreign Office.

17 Not printed.

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–144: Telegram

[Document 920]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, September 1, 1944—11 p.m.
[Received September 2—noon.]

5751. I read all the pertinent portions of your 2905 August 23 to Mr. Pilet18 and inquired whether he was prepared to give assurances that Axis leaders and their criminal henchmen would be refused admittance to Switzerland. In reply Mr. Pilet assured me that the Federal Council would be most prudent (French “sage”). They had fully in mind the “exterior” as well as the “interior” repercussions that might arise should such persons be granted asylum. As examples he mentioned Hitler, Himmler,19 Mussolini, Laval,20 De Brinon21 and other members of Laval Cabinet. Mr. Pilet denied rumors that Laval had sought permission to come to Switzerland. Members of armed forces of Reich including SS seeking refuge would be interned. Members of Gestapo, a foreign police, would not be admitted. There might be difficulty in deciding cases of prominent German army officers. In principle refuge would be continued for women and children. Mr. Pilet also stated that each case would be carefully considered and decided on basis of its effect on security and in light of best interests of Switzerland.

Harrison

18 Marcel Pilet-Golaz, Chief of the Swiss Federal Political Department.

19 Heinrich Himmler, Reich Leader of the SS and of the State Police.

20 Pierre Laval, Prime Minister, and Minister for Foreign Affairs and for Interior of the Vichy Government.

21 Fernand de Brinon, Secretary of State of the Vichy Government.

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–344: Telegram

[Document 921]

The Minister in Sweden (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Stockholm, September 3, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received September 3—4:55 p.m.]

3461. My 3389, August 30, 7 p.m. Boheman has informed me that all Mr. Gunther said to me on August 30 is now officially confirmed. The Minister of the Interior will make the formal announcement in a speech which may be forthcoming at any moment.22

He will declare in words to this effect: That Sweden will not give asylum to war refugees of any category who have been guilty of acts or crimes which are an affront to the conscience of humanity.

The Ministers of Interior and Justice are collaborating in drawing up directives and instructions to implement this decision, which will be given to the police, customs, immigration, army, navy, frontier guards and all authorities whose duty it will be to enforce the policy.

Johnson

22 Formal announcement made on September 5.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) 740.00116 E.W./9–444: Telegram

[Document 922]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, September 4, 1944—10 p.m.

2451. Dept’s A–176, April 7, 1944.23 Washington and New York papers today give prominent display to de Cardenas’24 denial that Spain has become haven for Allies’ enemies. Although Ambassador did not specifically identify source of charge, his statement is regarded by newspapers as reply to last week’s Moscow broadcast urging Spanish people to oust Franco Government and accusing Spain of harboring Axis fugitives. News stories also suggest that Ambassador’s language was broad enough to cover an advance denial of asylum for Hitler and other leading Nazis who may try to flee when Germany falls.

Text of Ambassador’s statement follows: “Some days ago the American press carried the story that an appeal had been made to Spanish people exhorting them to oust regime of Generalissimo Franco25 and making several charges against his Government.

“The Spanish Embassy, speaking in the name of the Spanish Government, wants to state that none of those accusations is true.

“Spain has not been turned into a haven for French Fascists, only a very small number of German custom officers, unable to reach Germany, have arrived in Spain, and they have been interned at once in concentration camp of Miranda de Ebro.

“No one has ever contemplated to provide a hiding place in Spain for enemies of Allied countries.

“The six German ships which arrived at Pasajes were immediately interned.

“The government of Spain wishes to stress once more the fact that the Spanish regime has nothing in common with National Socialism, which is condemned by the Church, while Spain’s own regime is essentially based on Christian principles.”

Hull

23 Not printed.

24 Juan Francisco de Cárdenas, Spanish Ambassador in the United States.

25 Gen. Francisco Franco, Spanish Chief of State.

The Soviet Ambassador (Gromyko) to the Secretary of State 740.00110 E.W./9–444

[Document 923]

The Soviet Ambassador (Gromyko) to the Secretary of State

[Translation]

Washington, September 4, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: The Soviet Government has taken note of the memorandum sent to the Embassy on August 24, 1944, by the Department of State,26 and also of the enclosed paraphrase of your telegram sent to the American Minister in Bern, in which you give him instructions regarding the necessity of making representations to the Swiss Government on the question of the non-admission into neutral countries of the leaders of the Axis Powers and their adherents.

I am happy to inform you that the Soviet Government shares the views of the Government of the United States of America on this question.

Sincerely yours,

[For the] Ambassador
[Signature illegible]

26 See footnote 5, p. 1412 [Pg. 1412 includes portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, and Doc. 917].

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–644: Telegram

[Document 924]

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, September 6, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received September 6—3:58 p.m.]

2755. ReEmbs 2703, September 1, 5 p.m.27 In conversation with Sampayo yesterday I again made reference to the question of asylum for war criminals. Sampayo stated that note had been taken of our position in this respect. He added that there was no pending request before the Portuguese Government on the subject.

Norweb

27 Not printed.

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–644: Telegram

[Document 925]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, September 6, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received September 7—8:44 a.m.]

5883. Reference my 5751, September 1. Mr. Pilet told me yesterday that he had received an inquiry on behalf of Mussolini as to whether permission could be accorded Mrs. Mussolini to come to Switzerland. Mr. Pilet said he did not see that there could be any objection and that he proposed to give request favorable consideration.

Harrison

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/9–744: Telegram

[Document 926]

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, September 7, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received 6:05 p.m.]

2787. ReEmbs 2755, September 6, 4 p.m. The report has been current for the past few days and will not down that Von Papen28 and possibly other prominent Nazis (Ribbentrop,29 Funk,30 Curtius,31 Frau Goering32 ) have arrived in Lisbon. The most persistent is as regards Von Papen and he is rumored to have come in order to arrange asylum for top Germans in the Portuguese colonies. I am endeavoring to obtain from the Foreign Office a confirmation or a denial of these reports.

Sent Department; repeated to London as 428, to Madrid as 192.

Norweb

28 Franz von Papen, former German Ambassador to Turkey.

29 Joachim von Ribbentrop, Reich Minister for Foreign Affairs.

30 Walter Funk, Reich Minister for Economic Affairs.

31 Presumably Julius Curtius, German Minister for Foreign Affairs, from March 31, 1930, to October 6, 1931.

32 Wife of Reich Marshal Hermann Goering, Minister for Air and Reich Conservator of Forests.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) 740.00116 E.W./8–3044: Telegram

[Document 927]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb)33

Washington, September 8, 1944—10 a.m.

2457. Salazar’s statements concerning war criminals as reported in your 2677, August 30, 6 p.m., do not constitute satisfactory assurances from our point of view. Please renew your efforts to secure such assurances in whatever manner you deem best advised. You should stress the point that, regardless of juridical considerations, complications between Portugal and the United Nations will not arise if war criminals are not granted asylum in Portugal.

The Swedish Government has given us official assurances that it will not grant asylum to war criminals, has publicly announced that policy (which we understand includes deportation of war criminals who may slip into Sweden) and is drafting detailed directives and instructions to its officials who will be responsible for giving effect to that policy. The Swiss have informed us that they will be most “prudent” about granting asylum to such persons. We have instructed the Legation at Bern34 to make further representations with a view to securing more specific assurances, particularly to the effect that war criminals who may succeed in entering Switzerland illegally or clandestinely will be promptly deported. These representations are being based on the ground that the complications which the Swiss Government would wish to avoid through denying admission to war criminals would arise should war criminals who succeeded in entering the country without the permission of its Government be permitted to remain there. You should attempt to secure similar assurances from the Portuguese after, but only after, you have succeeded in obtaining more satisfactory assurances that the Portuguese Government would deny admission to such persons.

Hull

33 Similar telegram to Spain as No. 2503, September 9, 6 p.m.

34 Telegram 3101, September 8, 1944, 10 a.m., not printed.

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–844: Telegram

[Document 928]

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

San Sebastian, September 8, 1944—noon.
[Received 5:15 p.m.]

SS24. The following is a full text of the portion of the Ambassador’s memorandum of the conversation he had this morning with the Foreign Minister35 which concerned the subject of Spanish asylum for Axis war criminals: “I said I had received from Washington a copy of the statement which Ambassador Cardenas had given to the press and which had been published prominently in leading American newspapers. I was glad the statement had been made. I liked it and thought it would do much good. I was particularly pleased by the sentence in it declaring that Spain had no thought of harboring Axis leaders. I assumed it conformed with the assurances lately given by Sweden. The Minister expressed pleasure. He had told Cardenas that the American people were a democratic people and a people which believed in fair play and that he should keep them informed about the true policy and attitude of Spain. The Minister had himself directed the issuance of the statement and he could assure me that the Government here backed all the points made in it. Spain, like Sweden, would not provide asylum for Axis leaders.”

Repeated to Madrid.

Hayes

35 Jose Felix Lequerica, Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs from August 11, 1944.

The President of Haiti (Lescot) to President Roosevelt 740.00116 E.W./9–944

[Document 929]

The President of Haiti (Lescot) to President Roosevelt 36

[Translation]

Port-au-Prince, September 9, 1944.

My Dear President and Great Friend: Guided only by the wish to see just punishment meted out to those who have launched the appalling cataclysm which descended several years ago on our planet, I take the liberty following your solemn warning to neutral countries, with respect to the application of the right of asylum to war criminals, to send the enclosed Mémoire, which is strictly confidential.

It contains, as you will see in reading it, a suggestion that we felt we could make to all the United Nations, although our position in the world conflict is less than modest.

However, supported by the conviction that in such a case there can be no discrimination between Nations because of their greatness or smallness,—especially as it seems to us that the organization of the post-war world should be based on the equality of rights of all States,—I do not hesitate to submit this suggestion to the head of that great American Nation which, through its undeniable power in all fields, has assured and continues to assure the enjoyment of liberty and independence for the Western Hemisphere.

We shall never be able, indeed, sufficiently to express our gratitude to the Great Democracy, of which You assure the glorious destinies, for the protection that it gives us. For we never fail to think of the fate which would have been ours, in thinking of that of the peoples enslaved by Nazi Germany.

I have asked our Ambassador in Washington to transmit this confidential Mémoire to the Department of State.37

The Government of the United States of America can take whatever account it deems fit of our confidential suggestion, which we think is justified by the view that humanity will be spared the horrors of armed conflict in the future, in the measure in which exemplary punishment is inflicted on the instigators of war.

Permit me to take this opportunity to renew to you, my dear President and Great Friend, the expression of my highest consideration and unfailing friendship.

E. Lescot

[Enclosure—Translation]

Mémoire

Just as the great Allied powers are preparing to strike the last blow at Nazism, as Germany is being driven to battle on its own territory, as the madmen of this abhorred régime are mustering all their remaining strength to increase still further the number of the infamous crimes with which the civilized world charges them, the Honorable the President of the United States of America, His Excellency Mr. Franklin D. Roosevelt, felt that he should renew his warning to neutral countries that the war criminals should not be able to find asylum on their territories.

The Haitian Government, in complete support of the position taken by the head of the great American Democracy, finds that under the circumstances the scope of this solemn warning should be extended, by giving it the form of a general decision which all the United Nations could adopt.

The Haitian Government realizes, of course, that on military matters its voice is less than weak, although it did not hesitate a single moment to side with the great Republic of the United States since the traitorous attack of December 1941, with all the obligations which its attitude entailed. It was absolutely decided to send its sons to any battlefield to defend liberty which was dangerously threatened in its firmest foundations. Only circumstances did not require this contribution which it was ready to undertake.

However, it feels that it can make its voice heard on moral matters, since one of the war aims of the United Nations is to abolish the discrimination between large and small States.

It feels this all the more as the present step that it is taking seems to it to be founded on logic and common sense.

Our Government thus takes the liberty of suggesting, in the hope of general adherence, that the United Nations, by a joint declaration, decide by common consent that no neutral country will have the right to grant sanctuary to war criminals who, under the cover of an anti-Christian ideology, have committed acts which make one shudder and which will always be a disgrace to humanity.

Such a decision may seem contrary to the most positive rules of Public International Law. It may appear to conflict with the right of sovereignty and independence as it was set forth by the American Institute of International Law in its “Declaration of the rights and duties of Nations”, proclaimed at its January 6, 1916 session … Our Government feels, however, that the recognized rights of neutral Nations unequivocally impose moral obligations toward all the United Nations which have fought and are still fighting for the safeguard of civilization.

Therefore, the United Nations should make a joint agreement courteously to request the surrender of all the war criminals recognized by the courts, which will have been set up by the great democratic powers, from any neutral country, on the territory of which they have sought sanctuary. They should also agree that in case of a refusal from some neutral country, they should use force in order to inflict an exemplary punishment on those who thought that they could act as barbarians without hindrance.

The example of the impunity enjoyed by the last Emperor of Germany,38 after the first World War of 1914–1918, is sufficiently remembered by all to make one wish to avoid its repetition.

Not to punish severely the criminals of this war would be to encourage barbarism. It would invite other acts of aggression in the indeterminable future. To allow such assassins to find a safe sanctuary wherever it may be, would be to wrong the memory of those who sacrificed their lives to rid Christendom of an evil brood.

And, it would, above all, expose the coming generations to death in a future war which one may well imagine will be much more murderous than the present struggle. It would be risking the failure of one of the aims of the United Nations: the suppression of the aggressor complex of certain nations.

E. Lescot
Port-au-Prince , September 9, 1944.

36 Received from the White House in the Office of the Secretary of State on September 20.

37 The Haitian Ambassador handed a copy of the mémoire to the Secretary of State on September 14.

38 Wilhelm II.

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State 852.79662/9–1144: Telegram

[Document 930]

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, September 11, 1944—9 p.m.
[Received 11:50 p.m.]

3111. In the course of my interview with General Franco this morning I requested among other things the cessation of the Lufthansa service between Spain and Germany.39 Franco replied that he and the Foreign Minister had been discussing this matter the previous hour and that they were to continue the discussion this afternoon and that he expected that ways and means would be found to comply with my request. I also pressed him about the exclusion of war criminals from Spanish territory. He attempted to pass the matter off by saying that according to his best knowledge no Axis leaders contemplated seeking refuge in Spain; certainly none had arrived to date and he imagined that they would be killed off by suicide or assassination or force of arms before they could ever get away from Germany. I countered with the information contained in the Department’s 2503 of September 9, 6 p.m.,40 regarding the steps being taken by Sweden and impressed upon Franco that a public clarification of Spain’s position would be the best and most practical guarantee against future very embarrassing demands of Spain by the Allies. He agreed also to study this matter jointly with the Foreign Minister.

Repeated to Lisbon and Tangier by courier.

Hayes

39 See vol. iv, pp. 444 ff.

40 See footnote 33, p. 1419 [Pg. 1419 includes portions of Doc. 927 and Doc. 928].

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–1244

[Document 931]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

No. 574

His Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and has the honour to refer to the Department of State’s confidential memorandum of August 24th, 1944 on the subject of the refusal of asylum in neutral countries to Axis leaders and their accomplices.

2. His Majesty’s Ambassador has the honour to state that the substance of the Department’s memorandum and its enclosure was duly communicated to the Foreign Office who immediately issued instructions to His Majesty’s Representatives at Berne, Lisbon, Madrid and Stockholm to support their United States colleagues’ representations to the governments to which they were accredited. When informing this Embassy of the issue of these instructions, the Foreign Office added that urgent consideration was being given by His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom to the question of the early issue of a joint public Anglo-American-Soviet declaration warning neutral countries against giving asylum to war criminals.

3. His Majesty’s Government have not failed to recall that the views of the three Governments were made known to the world in connexion with the action taken by them vis-à-vis neutral Governments in July 1943 and the declaration made on July 30th 1943 by the President of the United States. These expressions of view were, however, made more particularly in connexion with developments in Italy, and His Majesty’s Government now consider that a stage of the war has been reached when it is opportune and indeed essential that it should be made clear to all neutral countries in an authoritative pronouncement at the highest level that they are expected to refuse asylum to all those Nazi leaders, war criminals and their accomplices in other countries whom it is the Allies’ intention to bring to justice. His Majesty’s Government therefore propose that a joint declaration should be issued by the three major Allies at a very early date, and have prepared a draft of such a declaration of which a copy is enclosed for the consideration of the United States Government. His Majesty’s Government consider that this course is preferable to another joint approach through diplomatic channels to neutral countries, such as was made with regard to Italian war criminals in July 1943, since it solves the difficulty that the Soviet Government are not represented with the majority of the neutral Governments, avoids giving the latter any opportunity to retort with legal arguments and secures the maximum authority and publicity for the statement.

4. The Earl of Halifax, whilst communicating the enclosed draft declaration to Mr. Cordell Hull, is instructed by His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to ask that he may be informed speedily of the views of the United States Government on this matter, and has the honour to add that a similar and simultaneous approach is being made to the Soviet Government.

Washington , 12 September, 1944.

[Enclosure]

Draft Declaration

The Governments of the United Kingdom, the United States and the U.S.S.R.

1. Conscious of the responsibility which rests upon them for restoring through the victory of the United Nations the rule of justice throughout the world;

2. Believing that the due punishment of war crimes and offences is an essential step to that end;

3. Recalling the grievous suffering caused to great numbers of innocent people by reason of the present war and by crimes against law and humanity committed during the course of it by the leaders of enemy nations, their subordinates and also by their accomplices in other countries;

4. Being resolved that the persons responsible for causing that suffering shall not escape retribution wherever they may be; and believing that no neutral countries would wish to afford them assistance in so doing;

5. Considering that, after the victory of the United Nations, the neutral countries also will have their contribution to make towards the restoration of the rule of justice throughout the world and are no less concerned than the parties to the present declaration to secure that war criminals should not escape justice and that war crimes should be punished;

6. Call upon all neutral countries to refuse asylum to persons fleeing from the consequences of their crimes, whose object, or probable object, in seeking asylum is to avoid falling into the hands of the United Nations or who seek it in consequence or in anticipation of defeat of their country or of its occupation by the Forces of the United Nations;

7. And declare that they will regard any shelter, assistance and protection given such persons as a violation of the principles for which they are fighting.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) 740.00116 E.W./8–3044: Telegram

[Document 932]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb)

Washington, September 14, 1944—8 p.m.

2518. ReDeptel 2457, September 8, 10 a.m. The question of asylum to war criminals was discussed September 11 with Mr. Bianchi41 who had been advised of your conversation with Dr. Salazar. Mr. Bianchi expressed doubt that his Government would permit admission of war criminals but stated that he would urge it to make a public statement to this effect. He stated that Dr. Salazar had in mind the concrete problem of what specific categories of persons we wished excluded. We cited to him the words of the Swedish Government’s announcement referring to persons “who by their actions have defied the conscience of the civilized world or betrayed their own countries” and the fact that a member of the Swiss Federal Council had cited Hitler, Himmler, Mussolini, Laval and members of his cabinet, and members of the Gestapo, as examples of persons who would not be admitted to Switzerland. We emphasized to him that no complications with the United Nations would arise if such persons were refused admission or, if they succeeded in entering without permission, they were deported or made available for justice.

We advised him of the attitudes indicated by other neutral governments, of which you have been advised, and of the further assurance which has been given to Ambassador Hayes by the Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs that Spain would not provide asylum for Axis leaders.

Hull

41 Joao Antonio de Bianchi, Portuguese Ambassador in the United States.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ireland (Gray) 740.00116 E.W./9–1644: Telegram

[Document 933]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ireland (Gray)

Washington, September 16, 1944—11 a.m.

175. On July 30, 1943, the President issued a press statement in regard to war criminals in which he declared that he found it difficult to believe that any neutral country would give asylum to or extend protection to any such persons, and that this Government would regard the action of a neutral Government in affording asylum to Axis leaders or their tools as inconsistent with the principles for which the United Nations are fighting.

The purpose of this Government was not to question the right of asylum as such, but was, of course, to appeal to neutral countries to decline to admit to their countries Axis leaders and their criminal henchmen. The President pointed out that it is the intention of this Government that the successful close of the war shall include provisions for the surrender to the United Nations of war criminals.

The wheels of justice are now turning rapidly and the Axis leaders and their tools will undoubtedly seek haven in any country where they think they may have any possibility of escaping justice. This Government has accordingly approached the Governments of Switzerland, Sweden, Portugal, Spain, and the Argentine, asking that they give assurance that they will decline to admit to their respective territories Axis leaders and their tools. Although the Nazi leaders may be less likely to seek refuge in Ireland than in the countries bordering Germany, the possibility that they will seek admission to Ireland or will land from plane or submarine without permission cannot be eliminated. Would you therefore approach the Irish authorities at once and ask their assurances in the sense of the foregoing. You are authorized in your discretion to leave with them an aide-mémoire in the sense of this telegram.

It is hardly necessary to emphasize to the Irish authorities that the American people would not understand the extension of asylum or protection to any of the persons whom they hold responsible for this war. We have already received favorable response from the Swedish, Spanish and Swiss Governments and are awaiting further word from the Portuguese and Argentine Governments. We have every confidence that the Irish Government will wish to give assurance that it will refuse to admit to Irish territory Axis leaders and their criminal henchmen, and that if any such person should reach Ireland he will be returned to his own country or made available for justice.

Please request an early reply. We are preparing a statement for the press which will indicate the attitudes of other neutral nations, and we of course wish to include Irish assurances in this announcement.

Hull

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–1844: Telegram

[Document 934]

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, September 18, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 9:15 p.m.]

148. Last night I received your No. 17542 and your circular telegram of September 1643 this morning, asking us to hold up action on Bretton Woods declaration until after consultation with London. In conformity with this line of action, I conferred this morning with Sir John Maffey44 regarding your 175, containing instructions as to German war criminals. He has not been advised of our proposed démarche to Irish Government on Nazi fugitives. His personal view was that in the interests of United Nations solidarity and Britain’s peculiar interests here it would be desirable to make joint representations. We [He?] unreservedly favored the proposal but asked for a brief period in which to consult this [his?] Government. I told him that I would inform you and recommend joint action if British Government was prepared to reach decision without undue delay. I also told him that I thought it probable that British Government had already been consulted and advised. Am therefore not communicating with External Affairs until hear further from you.

Gray

42  Supra.

43  Vol. ii, p. 231.

44 Sir John Maffey, British Representative in Ireland.

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–1844: Telegram

[Document 935]

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, September 18, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received September 19—12:55 a.m.]

2917. In anticipation of the departure for Portugal on leave of the Portuguese Ambassador at London, a plan now postponed by instructions of the Portuguese Foreign Office, the British Foreign Office, I am told by Campbell, spoke of war criminals to the Duke of Palmela45 who feels Portugal is lagging in this respect. The Department is aware that both Campbell and I have urged upon Salazar and Sampaio the importance of a public statement of policy such as that adopted in Sweden, Switzerland et cetera. While the Prime Minister will no doubt go a long way to spare Portugal the embarrassment which the unwanted arrival of fugitive enemy leaders would produce, Salazar is characteristically cautious of signing on the dotted line. (It would under the circumstances be counter-productive to use with him the arguments in the sixth paragraph of the Department’s 2317 of August 23, 7 p.m.)46

I am glad that the Department has spoken to Bianchi (ReDeptel 258 [2518] of September 14, 8 p.m.) and Downing Street to Palmela. I urge continuation of these efforts and offer the suggestion that the Brazilians might be asked to add their weight (if the present Brazilian situation permits).

Sent to Department, repeated to Madrid by courier; repeated to London as 445.

Norweb

45 Portuguese Ambassador in the United Kingdom.

46 See seventh paragraph of telegram 2905, August 23, midnight, to Bern, and footnote 2, p. 1410 [Pg. 1410 is part of Doc. 915].

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ireland (Gray) 740.00116 E.W./9–1844: Telegram

[Document 936]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ireland (Gray)

Washington, September 19, 1944—4 p.m.

179. Reurtel 148, September 18. When we approached other governments on this same subject a few weeks ago we acted alone, though later informing the British and Russians. We understand that the British in some cases at least have supported our request. Ireland was not included in the original list of countries approached. It is our thought here that the same procedure should be followed in the case of Ireland, that is, representations by the United States alone, supported later by the British if the British so desire. Since we wish to make a press statement at once please proceed with request and inform Maffey. We are informing London.47

Hull

47 Telegram 7632, September 19, 4 p.m., not printed.

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–2144: Telegram

[Document 937]

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, September 21, 1944—3 p.m.
[Received 5:36 p.m.]

151. ReDeptel 179, September 19, 175, September 16, and reLegtel 150, September 20.48 Pursuant to instructions, at 11 this morning I was received by the Irish Prime Minister49 and requested assurances that his Government would not harbor Axis war criminals. I had prepared as aide-mémoire a digest of your instructions. This I left with him after reading it to him and explaining that it was the essence of my instructions. His reply was that this involved a question of principle and that he must consider his answer. I said that we made it clear that we were not disputing the right of asylum. He said that he understood that. His manner was courteous but very bleak and sour. It was evident that he wished to give the answer no. A yes answer involves abandonment of the essence of his policy of neutrality which is his political ace. The question is whether his Cabinet would support him now in a new line. I think the betting odds are that he will say no but I venture no forecast.

After my conference with De Valera I called on Maffey. He told me that his Government had telegraphed him that they wished to participate in our representations and were wiring Halifax. He had tried to reach me pursuant to his instructions but failed as I had left the Legation. I gave him a copy of the aide-mémoire. He is informing his Government of my action and proposing that he make British representations in the sense of the aide-mémoire which is the digest of your instructions.

Despatch with full report and text of aide-mémoire goes by air courier tomorrow.50

Repeated to London as No. 49.

Gray

48 Telegram 150 not printed.

49 Eamon de Valera.

50 Not printed.

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–2644: Telegram

[Document 938]

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, September 26, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 6:33 p.m.]

154. ReLegtel 151.51 Following my conversation with Sir John Maffey on September 21 he called on Walshe, Secretary Irish External Affairs, and said that he wished to inform Irish Government that British Government associated themselves with the American request for assurances relative Axis criminals. If Mr. De Valera wished to see him he would be glad to call upon him. Maffey informs; me this morning that he has had no message from De Valera. He thinks it probable that the Irish Government is making inquiries from Portuguese with aim of framing identical reply. We have had no reply to our request for intimation of the line that De Valera will take.

Repeated to London as number 50.

Gray

51  Supra.

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–2644: Telegram

[Document 939]

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, September 26, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received 6:04 p.m.]

2988. ReEmbs 2917, September 18, 7 p.m. On seeing Sampayo yesterday, I took occasion to emphasize once more the subject of war criminals referring to the public action taken by Sweden in this respect. Sampayo took the attitude that we were, in his opinion, becoming unduly exercised about a matter which was largely hypothetical; that Portugal had no intention of placing herself in difficulties over such a question which in any event might not arise at all. He was able to give me no encouragement that any statement on the matter would be issued at this time.

Campbell also spoke to him earlier in the day on this and I am sure that Bianchi who has just arrived will also express the views as reflected from his talks in the Department.

Repeated to Madrid by courier.

Norweb

Statement by the Secretary of State Released to the Press on September 28, 1944 740.00116 E.W./9–2844

[Document 940]

Statement by the Secretary of State Released to the Press on September 28, 1944

September 28, 1944

On August 21, 1942,52 and again on July 30, 1943,53 President Roosevelt publicly denounced the crimes which the Axis powers, their leaders and criminal associates were committing against innocent people. In his statement of July 30, 1943, the President expressed incredulity that any neutral country would give asylum to or extend protection to such persons, and added that the Government of the United States “would regard the action by a neutral government in affording asylum to Axis leaders or their tools as inconsistent with the principles for which the United Nations were fighting”. He expressed the hope that no neutral government would permit its territory to be used as a place of refuge or otherwise assist such persons in any effort to escape their just deserts.

The governments of the neutral nations in Europe and Argentina were formally apprised of this statement.

The rapid progress of the armed forces of the United Nations in recent weeks led the Department of State late in August to call this matter again urgently to the attention of a number of neutral governments. This Government’s action had the support and approval of the British and Soviet Governments.

The neutral governments were reminded that it was the intention of this Government that the successful close of the war would include provision for the surrender to the United Nations of war criminals. They were advised that if they refused to admit Axis leaders and their henchmen and criminal subordinates to their territories problems between those governments and the United Nations could be avoided. It was pointed out that the neutral governments themselves would undoubtedly regard persons guilty of such crimes against civilization as thoroughly undesirable aliens whose admission to their territories would not be in the interest of the neutral governments even if such persons were not wanted for eventual trial by the United Nations. They were advised that the American people would not understand the extension of asylum or protection by neutral countries to any of the persons responsible for the war or for the many barbaric acts committed by the Axis leaders, and that relations between the United States and the neutral governments concerned would be adversely affected for years to come should the Axis leaders or their vassals find safety in those countries.

Some of the neutral governments had already been giving serious thought to this problem. The Swedish Government’s policy was publicly announced on September 5 in a declaration to the effect that Sweden’s frontiers would not be open to those who by their actions had defied the conscience of the civilized world or betrayed their own countries and that persons of this character who succeeded in slipping into Sweden would be promptly deported. It is understood that the Swedish Government has taken concrete steps to implement that policy.

No representations were made to the Turkish Government in view of its recent rupture of relations with Germany. The Turkish Government, nevertheless, announced on September 8 that Turkish frontier authorities had been instructed not to permit Axis nationals, either civil or military, to enter Turkey by land or by sea.

The Swiss Government has indicated that it is fully alive to the problems which would arise should Axis leaders find asylum in Switzerland.

A public statement has been made by the Spanish Ambassador in Washington denying that there was any basis for supposition that Axis leaders might find refuge in Spanish territory.55

No indication has yet been received of the views of certain other governments.

The Department is continuing to impress upon those governments whose policy has not yet been clearly stated the importance which it attaches to the taking of adequate measures to insure that Axis war criminals do not find asylum in their countries.

52 Department of State Bulletin, August 22, 1942, p. 709.

53  Ibid., July 31, 1943, p. 62.

55 Department of State Bulletin, February 11, 1945, p. 190.

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–2944: Telegram

[Document 941]

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, September 29, 1944—9 a.m.
[Received 7:26 p.m.]

3286. At my meeting with Lequerica yesterday morning, I again urged that his Government make some unequivocal statement of policy regarding the reception of fugitive Axis leaders whom we regard as war criminals. The Minister stated that he had discussed the question with Franco and that he could state that there is no present disposition to make any public statement beyond that already made by Cardenas. He added, however, that the Government has a definite policy, even though no overtures have yet been received from any Axis leader seeking asylum in Spain or are expected. As a neutral, Spain will abide strictly by the usages and precepts of International Law. Whereas the concept of war criminals is new and Spain has no means of determining who are war criminals under International Law, Lequerica believed that the principle will have been clarified or established before occasion arises for its application. Then if the Allied powers were formally to adjudge a given person to be a war criminal and that person should seek refuge in Spain, the Spanish Government would interpose no obstacle to delivering him to justice outside of Spain.

Hayes

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–2944: Telegram

[Document 942]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 29, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received September 29—7:40 p.m.]

8155. Afternoon press announced that Argentine Ambassador in London56 had delivered note to ForOf57 stating that in no case would Argentina extend asylum to war criminals. We asked ForOf for a copy of the Argentine Ambassador’s communication. It is in the form of a memorandum, dated September 25, and reads as follows: “Some publications in Great Britain and other countries appear to be endeavoring to show the possibility of Axis leaders seeking refuge in Argentina.

It is unacceptable that such comments should have been given credence in habitually well informed circles. To show the inconsistency of these statements it should suffice to point out the improbability of traversing an ocean dominated and controlled by the naval forces of the United Nations. Notwithstanding, the Argentine Embassy wishes to convey to His Majesty’s Government that the Argentine Government, ratifying previous declarations, has defined its position in this connection in the following terms:

Firstly, in no event will persons accused of war crimes be allowed in Argentine territory.

Secondly, neither will they be allowed to create capital deposits or acquire property of any kind.

The Argentine Government has the right to claim that these declarations shall be accepted as bona fide, as in justice this has been the case regarding the intentions of other countries which by their neutrality and geographical proximity would appear to be more easily accessible as places of refuge.

In reiterating these declarations the Argentine Government formulates a new and categorical affirmation of its position in the sphere of international politics, based on the self-determination of nations and on traditional bonds of friendship.

Finally, the Argentine Government reaffirms that, as hitherto, it will continue to offer loyally its collaboration and support to all measures seeking mutual respect and harmony.”

We were told at the ForOf that this memorandum was presented on September 26 and that a copy of it had been embodied in a telegram to the British Embassy at Washington, but that there had been, due to the great volume of work, delay in getting it cleared for transmission to Washington. We were told further that it was not known by Foreign Office whether this memorandum had been made public by the Argentine Government in whole or in part.58

Winant

56 Miguel Angel Cárcano.

57 Foreign Office.

58 Published in La Prensa, September 29, 1944.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./9–3044: Telegram

[Document 943]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 30, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received September 30—12:38 p.m.]

8187. ReEmbs 8155, September 29, 8 p.m. We talked with Nevile Butler59 this morning regarding the Argentine memorandum on war criminals; it was to Butler that the Argentine Ambassador, Carcano, handed the memorandum on September 26.

Butler told us that Carcano said on delivering the memorandum that he had felt for some time the need of a “positive statement” by his Government on the question of denying asylum for war criminals and that he had so informed his Government requesting at the same time that he be permitted to draft such a statement. The statement that he was giving Butler, Carcano explained, had been prepared by him and approved by his Government. He wanted to deliver it at this particular time because during the past few days the general question of withholding asylum for war criminals had been raised in Parliament and he understood, moreover, some time next week there would be discussed in the Lords a question put to the Government by Vansittart60 asking the Government what steps it had taken to prevent war criminals escaping to Argentina.

When handed the memorandum by Carcano, Butler said to us, he immediately turned over in his mind ways of avoiding the impression being given when this step had become publicly known that a “wedge” had been driven by the Argentines between United States and the British. With this in mind, Butler said, he at once suggested to Carcano that other governments, as for example members of the Pan American Union, be informed of Carcano’s visit and of the contents of the memorandum or that the Argentine Government consider promptly making the text of the memorandum public. Butler added that he did not know whether Carcano actually passed these suggestions on to his Government. In any event, as Butler pointed out, the text of the memorandum has now been made public by the Argentine Government.

Winant

59 Head of North American Department, British Foreign Office.

60 Robert Gilbert Vansittart, Baron Vansittart of Denham.

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/9–3044: Telegram

[Document 944]

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, September 30, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received September 30—7:45 p.m.]

3033. Portuguese Foreign Office late this afternoon presented a lengthy memorandum on position of Portuguese Government concerning granting of asylum to war criminals. Identical memorandum was presented to the British.

Memorandum states that Portuguese Government does not yet wish to make a public statement on war criminals question. Argument set forth this document takes the line that there is as yet no clear definition of a war criminal and points out that the possibility of injustice exists in confusing criminals whose acts are repugnant to all sentiments of justice with individuals whose only crime is to have taken part in governments which were considered legitimate.

Memorandum emphasizes the sovereign right of a state to decide itself on the question of asylum and proposes that entire question be settled by an international or multilateral decision and that an international jurisdiction be created whose competence for ruling on these matters be recognized by all states which adhere to the statute of its formation. Memorandum contains no commitment on behalf of the Portuguese Government to adhere to the proposed international body.

Unless Department instructs the Embassy to cable the full text, a translation of memorandum,61 which bears definite indications of having been drawn up by Salazar personally, will be transmitted by airmail pouch leaving Monday.

Norweb

61 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) 740.00116 E.W./9–2944: Telegram

[Document 945]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, October 4, 1944—5 p.m.

2701. Reurtel 3286, September 29, 9 a.m. Although we are gratified at Lequerica’s statement that the Spanish Government would interpose no obstacle to delivering war criminals to justice outside of Spain, we feel that he has, in his statement that Spain would abide strictly by the usages and the precepts of International Law, somewhat missed the point. In accordance with the precepts and usages of International Law any Government has the sovereign prerogative of denying admission to any one and of expelling any one who enters its territory without permission. Should Spain exercise this accepted and lawful sovereign prerogative with respect to any one who might be considered a war criminal no unfortunate repercussions need arise with the victorious United Nations.

Hull

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Murray) 740.00116 EW/10–544

[Document 946]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Murray)

[Washington,] October 5, 1944.

During a call from the Turkish Ambassador62 on October 5 he mentioned Mr. Hull’s statement of September 28th on war criminals and pointed out that this statement contained a paragraph to the effect that: “No representations were made to the Turkish Government in view of its recent rupture of relations with Germany. The Turkish Government, nevertheless, announced on Sept. 8 that Turkish frontiers authorities had been instructed not to permit Axis nationals, either civil or military, to enter Turkey by land or by sea.”

The Ambassador said that in spite of the facts of the case as set forth in Mr. Hull’s statement the stories printed in the American press and cabled to Turkey had stated or implied that Turkey received the same communication on this subject as had been sent to Sweden, Switzerland and Spain, all of which are neutral countries. The Ambassador added that since his Government had severed relations with Germany and was not in the same category as Sweden, Switzerland and Spain, his Government was naturally annoyed that the American press stories on this subject had misstated Turkey’s position and the facts with regard to Mr. Hull’s note.

I told the Ambassador I would be glad to look into this matter, and in doing so spoke to Mr. Hulen of the New York Times whose story, published in the issue of September 29, 1944, appeared to warrant the complaint made to me on the above subject by the Turkish Ambassador. Mr. Hulen seemed willing to admit that his story at least implied that Turkey was to be regarded as coming in the same category as Sweden, Switzerland and Spain, all neutral countries, and said he would be glad to do anything possible to clear up the misunderstanding.

I inquired of Mr. Hulen in this connection whether any New York Times representative was in Turkey or in a neighboring country who might undertake to convey direct to Turkish press officials the regrets of the New York Times for having conveyed an erroneous impression with regard to Turkey’s status. Mr. Hulen said he would look into the matter and would do whatever might be possible to remove any resentment that the Turks might feel over the way this story was handled.

62 Mehmet Münír Ertegün.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) 740.00116 EW/9–3044: Telegram

[Document 947]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb)

Washington, October 7, 1944—4 p.m.

2689. Your 3033, September 30, 8 p.m. In emphasizing the sovereign rights of a state to decide for itself the question of asylum Salazar has, we feel, largely missed the point. In accordance with the precepts and usages of International Law any government has the sovereign prerogative of denying admission to any one and of expelling any one who enters its territory without permission. Should Portugal exercise this accepted and lawful sovereign prerogative with respect to any one who might be considered a war criminal, no unfortunate repercussions would arise with the United Nations.

This point should be stressed with Salazar in future conversations you may have on the subject.

Hull

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./10–944: Telegram

[Document 948]

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, October 9, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received 7:40 p.m.]

164. At 12 noon today I called on Mr. De Valera at his request. He at once handed me the aide-mémoire which follows as separate telegram.63 He said he had put his reply to our request regarding Axis war criminals in this form to correspond to the form of our approach. He invited me to read it. After reading it, I said that I had no comment to make having been merely the agency for transmitting the request.

Maffey lunched with me and I gave him a copy of the memorandum. Our reaction is that the significant part of the reply is the last paragraph. Eire considers Germany and Japan as friendly states and has not denied entrance subsequent to the beginning of the war to Japanese representatives whose presence is injurious to the interests of United Nations. Furthermore two known German parachutists have landed here since 1940 and have not been returned to Germany.

Mr. De Valera’s reply gives us no assurances that the Axis powers would not be considered friendly powers if and when the question of returning Axis aliens landing without permission should arise. Also suppose Germany collapses as an organized nation to whom would a German national be returned? There is no suggestion of a promise to give him up to us. Taken as a whole, the reply seems to leave us much as we were.

We think the reply is intended to make us believe that it embodies acquiescence to our request while maintaining unimpaired position of neutrality for domestic political consumption. The Prime Minister was very bland and charming during interview.

Repeated to London as No. 54; 164 to Department.

Gray

63 No. 165, infra.

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./10–944: Telegram

[Document 949]

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, October 9, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received October 9—4:10 p.m.]

165. Aide-mémoire. 64

1. The Irish Government note that the right to grant asylum is not in question and they feel that the United States Government will understand that the Irish Government can give no assurance which would preclude them from exercising that right should justice, charity or the honor or interest of the nation so require.

2. The Irish Government wish, moreover, to point to the absence of a comprehensive international code applicable to the subject matter of the request of the United States Government and to the lack of a generally recognized court or procedure for the judicial determination of individual cases.

3. On the other hand, since the present war began it has been the uniform practice of the Irish Government to deny admission to all aliens whose presence would be at variance with the policy of neutrality, or detrimental to the interests of the Irish people, or inconsistent with the desire of the Irish people to avoid injury to the interests of friendly states, and that when such aliens land they are deported to their countries of origin as soon as possible. It is not intended to alter this practice.

Repeated to London.

Gray

64 See telegram 164, supra.

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/10–1044: Telegram

[Document 950]

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, October 10, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received October 11—8:58 p.m.]

168. Supplementing my 164.65 Further consideration of Mr. De Valera’s reply to our request for assurances as to the harboring of Axis war criminals confirms us in the view that we have received no assurances. We are told we must trust the Irish Government to act with reference to the dictates of justice and charity and to the nation’s honor and interests. Since there is no recognized international procedure for securing justice in these cases the Irish Government must be the judge of the cases that may come before it. There is, however, no doubt that the Irish Government hopes to have its answer accepted as satisfactory. Walshe of External Affairs has told me it is intended to mean ac[ceptance?]. He has told Maffey the same.

Last week in reply to a question in the Dail asking whether requests for assurances had been made to Eire and if so what had been the reply Mr. De Valera promised an answer within a week or two. It is probable that his reply to us has been framed with this in view. It is possible that he has had access to the Swiss answer which you pronounced satisfactory and has drawn his reply as closely as possible along its lines. If you announce his answer as satisfactory he will probably read the memorandum in the Dail and show how he has completely safeguarded Irish freedom of action. If you pronounce it unsatisfactory he will also read his reply and show how reasonable it is and how far it goes toward complying with our request. It is an adroit paper and he doubtless feels that we have stepped into a trap. If you should make no pronouncement about it for the time being I do not think it would prejudice our position here.

Gray

65 Dated October 9, p. 1437 [Pg. 1437 includes portions of Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948].

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/10–1144: Telegram

[Document 951]

The Ambassador in Portugal (Norweb) to the Secretary of State

Lisbon, October 11, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received October 11—4:07 p.m.]

3110. Sampaio told me today that in response to an urgent request from Campbell for a statement concerning war criminals which the British Government could use in replying to a Parliamentary question which would be put today, Dr. Salazar addressed to Campbell along the following lines: The Portuguese Government has already made clear its attitude from the juridical and political point of view concerning the question of giving asylum to war criminals. However, in order to avoid the possibility of any misunderstanding it wishes to state that it follows from the above that the Portuguese Government will not permit the use of the right of asylum to protect any persons from the proper demands of justice as established by competent national or international authorities.

The foregoing is not a direct quotation but is an approximation of what Sampaio told me.

Norweb

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ireland (Gray) 740.00116 E.W./10–1044: Telegram

[Document 952]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ireland (Gray)

Washington, October 14, 1944—5 p.m.

199. Your 165, October 9, 8 p.m. and your 168, October 10, 6 p.m. The Department’s interpretation of the Irish reply concerning asylum to war criminals is that the Irish Government takes a legalistic view of the matter and has not given the assurance desired. You are accordingly requested to leave an aide-mémoire with Walshe in the following sense:

(1) The American Government is completely at a loss to understand how the Irish Government can believe that “justice, charity, honor, or the interest of the nation” could require the admission of Axis war criminals into Ireland.

(2) It was thought that the Irish Government would itself feel that such persons would be regarded in every sense as undesirable aliens whose admission into Irish territory would not be in the interest of Ireland even if such persons were not wanted for eventual trial by the United Nations.

(3) If Ireland should, in connection with any one who might be considered a war criminal, exercise the accepted and lawful sovereign prerogatives of denying asylum, no unfortunate repercussions would arise with the United Nations.

It is for these reasons, among others, that we feel that Ireland should have no difficulty in giving us unequivocal assurances in the sense desired. You should also take occasion from time to time informally to express these ideas, particularly those in paragraphs 2 and 3 to members of the Irish Government.

Repeated to London.66 British Embassy in Washington informed that a telegram in the above sense was being forwarded.

Hull

66 As telegram 8500, October 14.

President Roosevelt to the President of Haiti (Lescot) 740.00116 E.W./9–944

[Document 953]

President Roosevelt to the President of Haiti (Lescot)

Washington, October 16, 1944.

My Dear Mr. President: I wish to thank you for your letter of September 9, 1944, with its attached “Mémoire”, and for the cordial sentiments which it expresses.

Your suggestion of a joint declaration by all the United Nations regarding asylum for war criminals in neutral countries is most interesting. I may say confidentially that we have been considering the desirability of a further public declaration on the subject, and I entirely subscribe to your view that size and power should be no bar to the indubitable right of each of the United Nations to be heard on this as on other matters of common concern. I am greatly pleased to have your suggestion and assure you that I shall give it careful and sympathetic consideration, since we are all agreed that justice must be meted out to all those who have shown such a gross disregard for humane and decent treatment of helpless people.

Permit me to express, Mr. President, my deep appreciation for your statement of the gratitude of the Haitian Government and people for the role my country has been able to play in the defense of Haiti from Nazi tyranny.

I take this opportunity again to extend to you, Mr. President, my warmest personal regards, and to assure you of my sincere friendship.

I am [etc.]

[ Franklin D. Roosevelt ]

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./10–1844: Telegram

[Document 954]

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, October 18, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received 6:48 p.m.]

177. Reference your 199, October 14. Whatever your decision with regard to British views, we would be apprehensive regarding paragraph 3 of your aide-mémoire. We think that this would be interpreted as a threat and exploited as such not only here but in America. De Valera would say this means that if we do not exercise our sovereignty to deny asylum we shall invite unfortunate repercussions from the United Nations. This may mean coercion. This interpretation would force opposition to rally to Government’s support. In America it would probably be represented as another attempt to bluff and intimidate Ireland.

It seems to us that your line of policy with the note regarding Axis missions should be followed here; namely, to establish for the record that a reasonable request for assurances has been refused and to express regret. This leaves De Valera where he least wants to be.

If the British prefer to read De Valera’s reply in the Commons without other comment than to observe that it would be detrimental to the interest of the Irish people to harbor Axis war criminals, it would seem not to conflict with our policy.

From appraisal of the local situation we should prefer for purely American ends to express no opinion as to the effect of Eire’s course on Irish interest but only to register dissatisfaction and regret. We would suggest the draft of such a memorandum which follows as my next numbered telegram.67 We think such a formula would represent the private views of a number of the opposition leaders and might gain open support for our position. Both threats and promises of reward excite instant opposition with Mr. De Valera.

Repeated to London as number 57.

Gray

67  Infra.

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./10–1844: Telegram

[Document 955]

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, October 18, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 9:02 p.m.]

178.68 “I am instructed by the Secretary of State to inform you that (1) The American Government has carefully studied the Irish Government’s aide-mémoire dated October 9, 194469 in reply to the request of the American Government for assurances as to Axis war criminals embodied in our aide-mémoire dated September 21, 1944;70 (2) The American Government notes that the Irish Government does not vouchsafe the assurances requested and regrets that the Irish Government does not choose to exercise its sovereignty in unequivocal and sympathetic cooperation with the United Nations in proclaiming denial of asylum to Axis war criminals responsible for the horrors that have shocked the civilized world.”

Repeated to London as No. 58.

Gray

68 See telegram 177, supra.

69 See telegram 165, October 9, from Dublin, p. 1438 [Pg. 1438 includes portions of Doc. 948 and Doc. 949].

70 See telegram 175, September 16, to Dublin, p. 1426 [Pg. 1426 includes portions of Doc. 932 and Doc. 933].

The Secretary of State to the Arnbassador in Ireland (Gray) 740.00116 EW/10–1044: Telegram

[Document 956]

The Secretary of State to the Arnbassador in Ireland (Gray)

Washington, October 19, 1944—8 p.m.

204. The British Embassy in Washington had already brought to the attention of the Department the views of the British Government prior to the despatch of our 199, October 14.

Despite the British view that no further approach should be made, we felt that the Irish Government should be made aware of our reaction to its reply and accordingly sent you our 199. Since, however, you have taken no action upon it, and since meanwhile the British have repeated their suggestion that the approach should not be made in written form we have agreed that the substance of our 199 should be presented by you orally and informally rather than by Aide-Mémoire. Accordingly, instead of making any further formal approach, you should from time to time as occasion may arise express orally to members of the Irish Government the views outlined in our 199. In view of British position we prefer this course to that suggested in your 177, October 18, 4 p.m. You may use your discretion as to emphasis and presentation. We want no publicity here or in London at this time. We do not care what Irish say.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.00116 E.W./10–1044: Telegram

[Document 957]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 19, 1944—midnight.

8692. Department’s 8500, October 14, to you.71 Since sending our 199 of October 14 to Dublin the British Embassy has requested that we make no further written approach to the Irish Government which might elicit another equivocal reply and also that we publish the Irish reply in order that the Foreign Office may be in a position to answer questions in Parliament concerning the Irish attitude toward asylum for war criminals.

We have met their wishes on the first point and instructed Gray (who meanwhile had suspended action on our 199) not to make a further démarche but merely to take occasion from time to time to mention the views indicated in our 199 to members of the Irish Government. As regards publicity, we have advised the Embassy that we feel definitely (repeat definitely) that it would be inadvisable for us to give any publicity to the Irish reply at this time (repeat at this time). If questioned here we expect merely to say that de Valera has expressed the intention of making an announcement at an early date and that we are awaiting his expression of the Irish Government’s position. We have requested that the Foreign Office take a similar line, particularly that it make no mention of this Government in this connection in replying to questions in Parliament.

Please emphasize to the Foreign Office the importance which we attach to the proper handling of this situation and please report immediately any statements made in Parliament.

Hull

71 See footnote 66, p. 1440 [Pg. 1440 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./10–2144: Telegram

[Document 958]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 21, 1944—1 p.m.
[Received 1:52 p.m.]

9035. ReDepts 8692, October 19, midnight. We have discussed question of Irish attitude on asylum for war criminals with the Foreign Office and have emphasized the importance attached to the proper handling of this question. We were told that every effort would be made to meet our wishes. We were told further that a question has already been formulated by a member of the House addressed to the Under Secretary of the Dominions Office asking whether any reply has been received from the Government of Eire to representations of the British Government on harboring of criminals of war. The question is to be put on Tuesday October 24.

Foreign Office says it will press Dominions Office to try to have this question withdrawn but as this is the third time that a question in this sense has been drawn up for presentation efforts of Dominions Office and Foreign Office might not be successful. If unsuccessful then Foreign Office will suggest to Dominions Office that the reply be as brief as possible limited, if possible, to “Yes Sir”. If pressed for details then an attempt will be made to meet the questioners by replying that De Valera has expressed his intention of making a further statement and that the Government is waiting for this statement.

Winant

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/10–2444: Telegram

[Document 959]

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, October 24, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received 7:45 p.m.]

181. On October 23 being confined to my room with a cold, I arranged by telephone with Walshe that he receive our Secretary, Aaron Brown, who would transmit to him certain views regarding the Irish Aide-Mémoire dated October 9 that you had instructed me to express to the Irish Government, We had prepared a digest of your instructions contained in your No. 199 and this Mr. Brown in effect memorized.

Mr. Walshe received Brown with friendliness but professed surprise that the Irish reply had not been considered satisfactory. He asked if he might take down what Brown had to say. Brown said that the Minister’s instructions had been to transmit the Department’s views orally but that if Mr. Walshe wished to record them stenographically he could raise no objection. A copy of Mr. Walshe’s notes was later given to Brown who approved them. This text is the subject of our telegram No. 182, October 24;72 60 to London.

Brown’s comprehensive report of the conversation which will be transmitted by the next courier73 discloses that Walshe had drafted the Irish reply after having obtained access to the Swiss reply. We reported in our No. 168, October 10, that this was likely to have been the case. Walshe said that if that were pronounced satisfactory he could not see why the Irish reply was not satisfactory. Brown said that he had not seen the Swiss reply nor had we been informed that it was satisfactory.

Walshe’s line in general was a profession of surprise that the Irish reply had been misunderstood, a display of hurt feelings and resentment at the “insults” which our views implied, and an attempt to appeal to the traditional friendship of Ireland for America. Walshe said that De Valera would “hit the ceiling” when he read paragraph 2 of our comment.

Walshe asked Brown how a war criminal should be defined and would Pétain be considered one. He said that if Pétain came to Ireland he would be honored as a soldier who had fought for his country. He said the French Minister had inquired about Pétain and expressed dissatisfaction with the Irish attitude. De la Forcade74 stuck by Pétain till Vichy dismissed him.

Walshe said that it was possible that his Government would wish to publish the aide-mémoires and asked what would be the attitude of the American Government. Brown said that he doubted that the American press and people would consider the Irish reply satisfactory if published; that, as far as he knew, the American Government did not contemplate asking the Irish Government either to publish or not to publish but that if the Irish Government decided to publish it was probable that the American Government would disclose its views on the Irish reply.

The interview closed with an exposition by Walshe of anti-German sentiment of the Irish Government and people. This is a new line and indicates Walshe’s personal hope of getting on the band wagon. He spent his summer vacation in 1940 with the German Minister at a sea coast hotel. They were intimate friends.

Repeated to London as Legation’s No. 181.

Gray

72 Not printed.

73 Despatch 986, not printed.

74 Xavier de la Forcade, French Minister in Ireland.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 740.00116 E.W./10–3044

[Document 960]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

In connexion with the United States Government’s desire that no publicity should be given to the Eire Government’s reply to the United States Government’s representations on the subject of the denial of asylum to War Criminals, His Majesty’s Embassy is instructed by the Foreign Office to inform the State Department that while His Majesty’s Government propose to take no action in the matter of publicity unless their hands are forced, they understand that the Eire Government is considering the early publication of its reply to the United States Government and if that occurs it is likely that His Majesty’s Government will be asked at once to make some statement in Parliament. In that event, the statement would, His Majesty’s Embassy is informed, take the form of an announcement of the terms of the Eire Government’s reply as it stands, with the comment that His Majesty’s Government for their part are certain that it would be detrimental to the interests of the Irish people that they should harbour Axis War Criminals.

In the absence of action on the part of the Eire Government, it is His Majesty’s Government’s intention if possible to continue to refrain from the issue of any public statement in London for the time being. The postponement of the Parliamentary Questions on this subject has been arranged, and the present position is that a question has been put down for answer in the House of Commons on November 14th “asking whether any reply has yet been received from the Government of Eire to the representations of His Majesty’s Government against the harbouring of War Criminals.”

Washington , October 30, 1944.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 740.00116 E.W./11–244

[Document 961]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] November 2, 1944.

Mr. Nunan, the Irish Counselor, called this afternoon at his request in the absence from Washington of the Irish Minister.

Mr. Nunan stated he very much regretted that there had been a misunderstanding relative to the recent Irish reply on the matter of asylum for war criminals. He wished to assure me that it was the intention of his Government to permit no circumstance to arise under which a Nazi might obtain asylum in Ireland. He stated he was unable to understand why we were not satisfied with the phrasing of the Irish note and he stated further that his Government was extremely anxious to make an arrangement which would be thoroughly satisfactory to us as the United States was Eire’s foremost friend.

I suggested that when the Minister returned from Chicago, I would be delighted to have a thorough discussion with him, and the Counselor felt this was an excellent suggestion. On leaving he asked me what he might say to the press and I suggested that he state that we had discussed merely routine matters and had had a satisfactory meeting.

E[dward] S[tettinius]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax) 740.00116 EW/9–1244

[Document 962]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the Ambassador of Great Britain and has the honor to refer to Lord Halifax’s note of September 12, 1944 proposing a tripartite declaration warning neutral countries against giving asylum to war criminals.

The Government of the United States agrees that the issuance of such a statement would be desirable. It believes further that consideration should be given to requesting the other United Nations, once the declaration has been issued, to indicate their agreement with or adherence to the position stated. It believes that the adoption by all of the United Nations of a uniform position on this matter would carry considerable moral weight with the neutral countries.

The Government of the United States finds the draft declaration enclosed with Lord Halifax’s note generally satisfactory but may wish to suggest slight changes in wording. Information would be appreciated as to the response of the Soviet Government to the corresponding approach made to it.

Washington , November 8, 1944.

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/11–1044: Telegram

[Document 963]

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, November 10, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received November 11—4:12 a.m.]

196. On November 9 in Dail Mr. De Valera was urged to reply to questions regarding Irish answer to American request for denial of asylum to Axis war criminals. He refused to reply pleading reasons of state and suggested that he was not free to give text of his answer without the consent of others, implying that we did not wish publication. It is probable that the true reason for his embarrassed reticence was that he did not wish to disclose our dissatisfaction with his reply.

Some Cabinet members are spreading report that we are satisfied with reply. I have corrected this impression in confidence when appropriate occasion offered. It is probably advisable to let Irish Government suppress the facts till it suits your convenience to make announcement. But you might instruct me to notify De Valera that we had no wish to cause him embarrassment and that he was at liberty to publish the full record at his convenience.

Gray

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/11–1444: Telegram

[Document 964]

The Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

Bern, November 14, 1944—10 a.m.
[Received 8:30 p.m.]

7522. Since receipt of your 3101, September 8,75 I have discussed question of asylum to war criminals on several occasions with Mr. Pilet and have pressed him for more specific assurances. During our last discussion he informed me that he had arranged for a question to be addressed to Federal Council by a member of Parliament on September 29 last, to which he would reply stating position of the Council. He has now furnished me confidentially with text of reply which will, he says, undoubtedly be approved at an early session of the Council.76

Text of proposed reply in translation as follows:

“In accordance with a long series of precedents which are to the honor of Switzerland, Federal Council intends to exercise unquestioned right of sovereign state to give asylum to fugitives whom it considers worthy thereof. It does not, however, feel disposed—even in cases involving risk of death—to authorize without examination refuge on Swiss territory to all those who may request it as the number of fugitives therein has already reached disturbing proportions. It is obvious in particular that asylum could not be granted either to persons who have displayed an unfriendly attitude towards Switzerland or who have committed acts contrary to the laws of war or whose past gives evidence of conceptions incompatible with fundamental traditions of law and humanity.”

Harrison

75 See telegram 2457, September 8, 10 a.m., to Lisbon, and footnote 34, p. 1419 [Pg. 1419 includes portions of Doc. 927 and Doc. 928].

76 Released to the press on November 15.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/11–1444: Telegram

[Document 965]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Gallman) to the Secretary of State

London, November 14, 1944.
[Received November 14—10:12 p.m.]

9955. The Under-Secretary for the Dominions in reply to a question in the House of Commons this morning said that the Government of Eire had informed the British Government that their attitude toward the harboring of war criminals was as follows:

“They state that in their view the right to grant asylum is now in question and they can give no assurances which will preclude them from exercising that right of justice, charity or honor which the interests of the nation so require. They also refer to the absence of a comprehensive international code applicable to the matter and to the lack of any recognized court or procedure for the judicial determination of individual cases. They go on to say on the other hand that it has been the uniform practice of Eire to deny admission to all aliens whose presence would be at variance with the policy of neutrality or detrimental to the interests of the Irish or to the interests of the desire of the Irish people to avoid injury to the interests of friendly states and that such aliens if they land would be deported to their countries of origin as soon as possible. The United Kingdom Government”, added Mr. Emrys-Evans, “wished to make it clear in the words used by the Eire Government that it would be detrimental to the interests of the Irish people were war criminals to be harbored in Ireland.”

Gallman

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/11–1444: Telegram

[Document 966]

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, November 14, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received November 14—6:23 p.m.]

198. External Affairs called us on telephone this afternoon and proposed printing both American and Irish aide-mémoires regarding Axis war criminals in view of statement of British Government in the House of Commons this morning. I said that our communication expressing dissatisfaction with Irish reply formed part of the record and I believed it should also be printed or at least the statement that the American Government has expressed the view that the requested assurances had not been given. I said that the memorandum of Brown’s conversation with Walshe which Walshe had made and Brown had approved had become part of the record and would probably be published by you if the complete record were published. Walshe requested time to consult De Valera and later telephoned saying that they would not publish anything until their Legation had arranged with Department what if anything should be published and when. I said that the plan of an agreed release published at the same time seemed the best plan and that we would recommend it.

Repeated to London as Legation’s number 62.

Gray

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Ireland (Gray) 740.00116 EW/11–1544: Telegram

[Document 967]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Ireland (Gray)

Washington, November 15, 1944—9 p.m.

223. Following the statement in the British House of Commons yesterday concerning Ireland’s attitude on war criminals we received a number of press inquiries regarding our representations to Ireland. In response to these inquiries we replied as follows: “The United States Government made the same representations to the Irish Government that it made to other governments some time ago in regard to refuge for war criminals. These representations were described in Secretary Hull’s statement of September 28 last. A reply has been received from the Irish Government. If it is to be made public it would have to be given out by that Government. Certain other countries have already expressed themselves publicly as you know.

“We were glad to have the assurances in the Irish reply but it did not go as far as we would have liked in all particulars.”

This morning the Irish Legation in Washington inquired whether we had any objection to the Irish Government’s publishing its reply to our representations and we replied that we had no objection.

Stettinius

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/11–1644: Telegram

[Document 968]

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, November 16, 1944—3 p.m.
[Received 5:25 p.m.]

200. Your No. 223, November 15 just decoded at 12 hours. Half hour earlier Walshe, External Affairs, read me over telephone the same text and said that in view of your acquiescence his Government would print tomorrow text of Irish reply without further reference to American view of it. I said that this was all right with us here, that my objection to publication of less than the full record as he at first proposed on November 14, reference my 198, was of course based on my duty to safeguard our position pending instructions from Department. He said that he of course understood that I could not do less.

On November 14, censor released for publication text of Government’s statement in Commons with paraphrase of Irish reply and somewhat blunt comment at end. The general Irish reaction appeared to approve the reply as something very clever and the suggested threat at end appears not to have been generally noticed. Today the government organ on front page prints under headline “Glad of Assurances United States Statement” your press release. On inside page it prints editorials from Telegraph and London Star criticizing Irish reply as evasion and stating that it is not an answer.

This strategy appears to aim at impressing Irish readers that United States is on the whole pleased with reply and bidding for popular support by inciting resentment against Britain for the attitude of the London press.

Repeated to London as our No. 63.

Gray

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) 740.00116 EW/10–644: Telegram

[Document 969]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, December 1, 1944—8 p.m.

3146. We appreciate the efforts you have made and the progress you have achieved toward securing satisfactory assurances on the question of asylum for Axis war criminals. We are not, yet however, satisfied that the Spanish Government will in practice not shelter such persons and fear that Spain may be either the permanent or temporary destination of many German war criminals who take to flight. We would regard as completely satisfactory only the adoption and implementation by Spain, in the exercise of its sovereign rights, of a national policy which would deny legal admission to any Axis war criminal and provide for the deportation of any such person who might succeed in entering the country illegally. Sweden has adopted such a policy and Turkey is refusing admission to all Axis nationals.

We leave to your discretion the best means of obtaining or approximating this objective with respect to Spain.

Similar instructions are being sent to Lisbon, Bern and Dublin.78

Stettinius

78 Telegrams 3077, December 1, 8 p.m., 3942, November 20, 11 p.m., and 231, December 1, 8 p.m., respectively; none printed.

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/12–444: Telegram

[Document 970]

The Minister in Ireland (Gray) to the Secretary of State

Dublin, December 4, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 5:48 p.m.]

214. Reurtel 231, December l.79 Appreciate your cable. Now that the record has been established, whether war criminals come here or not, we think your line of handling the matter the best that could be taken. Releasing Irish aide-mémoire reply to American press without further comment than expressing the wish that the assurances had gone farther was most effective here. More than anything External Affairs is apprehensive of unfavorable American press. Eventual possible publication of further representations made to continental neutrals will, we think, have more weight here than direct representations to Eire Government which might be susceptible of interpretation as threats and exploited for local political ends. Whatever Brennan may be instructed to tell you, we place no confidence in any verbal assurances as to De Valera’s intentions. We believe that if he felt it to be his immediate political advantage he would make a point of emphasizing his independence by granting asylum and stand pat on his unequivocal reply.

Gray

79 See footnote 78, supra.

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 European War/12–644: Telegram

[Document 971]

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, December 6, 1944—9 p.m.
[Received December 7—1:42 p.m.]

3964. Your 3146, December 1, 8 p.m. While I shall gladly return to the charge in an attempt to obtain an even more precise public undertaking from the Spanish Government regarding denial of legal admission into Spain of Axis war criminals, it seems to me that one of the most, if not the most practical step in this regard would be to stop the Lufthansa service between Spain and Germany. Department may wish to bring this matter to the attention of the Combined Chiefs of Staff in connection with their consideration of the proposition referred to in the Department’s 3087, November 23, 7 p.m.80

Hayes

80  Vol. iv, p. 454.

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State 740.00116 EW/12–1144

[Document 972]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

No. 716
Ref: 152/238/44

His Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and has the honour to refer again to his note of the 12th September last, proposing a tri-partite declaration warning neutral countries against giving asylum to war criminals, to which Mr. Hull replied in a note dated the 8th November indicating the general concurrence of the United States Government and suggesting that the other United Nations should be invited to adhere to such a declaration.

His Majesty’s Ambassador at Moscow has been unable to obtain the views of the Soviet Government, and has now pointed out that the Soviet Government have however just declined to issue a declaration regarding the treatment of the leaders of the Slovakian revolt on the ground that their attitude is universally known, and that since the issue of the 1943 Moscow Declaration81 they have shown themselves unwilling to agree to further declarations about war criminals. Sir A. Clark Kerr comments that the flow of press articles on the subject never stops and it is one on which the Soviet Government certainly hold very decided views and he can only suppose therefore that they consider that they have made their position perfectly clear in the Moscow Declaration (which stated inter alia that war criminals would be pursued to the uttermost ends of the earth) and regard the issue of further Declarations covering much the same ground as redundant.

In the view of His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom, as more or less satisfactory assurances have been received from all the neutral nations (except for the case of Eire), the case for issuing the proposed tri-partite declaration appears to have lost much of its force. If the United States Government should upon reconsideration be disposed to agree in this view, His Majesty’s Government for their part would be content not to pursue the matter any further. Lord Halifax would therefore be grateful to learn whether the United States Government concurs.

Washington , December 11, 1944.

81  Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. i, p. 768.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax) 740.00116 E.W./12–1144

[Document 973]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the British Ambassador and has the honor to refer to his note no. 716 (Ref. 152/238/44) of December 11, 1944, regarding the proposed tripartite declaration warning neutral countries against giving asylum to war criminals.

The Ambassador notes that the views of the Soviet Government on this matter have not been ascertainable, that it is thought likely the Soviet Government would consider such a declaration as redundant, and that in as much as more or less satisfactory assurances have been received from the neutral nations, the case for issuing the proposed tripartite declaration appears to have lost much of its force. The Ambassador inquires whether the United States Government would be disposed to agree that the matter should not be pursued any further.

The United States Government now holds the view, as expressed in the Department’s note of November 8, 1944, that the idea of a tripartite declaration might well be set aside eventually in favor of a general United Nations’ declaration. The United States Government agrees, however, that the whole matter might be left in abeyance for the time being.

In regard to the last paragraph of the Ambassador’s note under reference, the United States Government does not share the view that more or less satisfactory assurances have been received from all of the neutral nations. In this connection it may be added that the Chiefs of the American Missions in the countries concerned have been advised that this Government would regard as completely satisfactory only the adoption and implementation, in the exercise of their sovereign rights, of a national policy which would deny legal admission to any Axis war criminal and provide for the deportation of any such person who succeeded in entering the country illegally. The Chiefs of Missions were instructed to be guided by this view in any further conversations they might have with officials of the countries concerned, without, however, making any further formal approach in the matter for the time being.

Washington , December 27, 1944.

Successful Anglo-American effort to effect Soviet participation in the work of the London Political Warfare Coordinating CommitteeSuccessful Anglo-American effort to effect Soviet participation in the work of the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee

[974] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 3, 1944—7 p.m. [Received January 3—5:25 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/32513: Telegram

[975] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 14, 1944—midnight.

740.0011 LCC/13a: Telegram

[976] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 27, 1944—8 p.m. [Received January 27—5:13 p.m.]

740.0011 LCC/13: Telegram

[977] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 28, 1944—11 p.m.

740.0011 LCC/13: Telegram

[978] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, February 12, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 5:45 p.m.]

740.0011 LCC/15: Telegram

[979] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 14, 1944—2 p.m.

740.0011 LCC/15: Telegram

[980] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, February 15, 1944—4 p.m. [Received 12 p.m.]

740.0011 LCC/16: Telegram

[981] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, March 21, 1944—midnight. [Received March 22—11 a.m.]

740.0011 LCC/21: Telegram

[982] Minutes of the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee

[London, April 5, 1944.]

740.0011 LCC/23

[983] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, May 1, 1944—3 p.m.

740.0011 LCC/23: Telegram

[984] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, June 1, 1944—6 p.m. [Received June 2—12:30 a.m.]

740.0011 LCC/26: Telegram

[985] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, June 15, 1944—6 p.m.

740.0011 LCC/26: Telegram

[986] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, June 22, 1944—10 p.m. [Received June 23—7:34 a.m.]

740.0011 LCC/29: Telegram

[987] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, July 5, 1944—11 a.m. [Received 2:09 p.m.]

740.0011 LCC/7–544: Telegram

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/32513: Telegram

[Document 974]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 3, 1944—7 p.m.
[Received January 3—5:25 p.m.]

25. Please refer to paragraph (A) of the Embassy’s 7847 of November 11, 8 p.m.1 This has been the subject of extended correspondence between Carroll and Sherwood, OWI.2 We have now received the following communication from Sir Orme Sargent:3 “You will remember that at the meeting of the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee4 on the eleventh November last, we considered a memorandum by the Political Warfare Executive5 suggesting greater cooperation between the Political Warfare Executive and the Office of War Information and the Russians on propaganda matters as well as a fuller exchange of material for broadcasts, et cetera. The Political Warfare Executive suggested, further, that the Russians might participate in appropriate directive discussions in the capacity of observers. Both you7 and Carroll felt that these proposals raised a question of policy and it was agreed that the Office of War Information should refer the matter to the United States Government.

I would be most grateful to know whether the State Department has yet considered the proposal, because, although the Political Warfare Executive’s suggestions were designed in the first place to forestall a Russian request for full participation in the work of the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee, the advantages in other directions of roping the Russians in seem to us to be of the greatest importance. Unless for instance the Russians take the same line as you and we do in Eastern and South-east Europe, political warfare in those parts is practically impossible, for it is what Russia says that really counts.

A particular case in point is Bulgaria and I wonder whether, quite independent of any decision on the general issues raised in the Political Warfare Executive memorandum, we should not make an approach to the Russians for greater cooperation. A short time ago there was an undoubted crisis in Bulgaria8 which we were quite unable to exploit because of our lack of Bulgarian intelligence. The Russians, however, are still in diplomatic relations with Bulgaria and if we had had access to Russian intelligence about Bulgaria, the position might have been quite different. Again although in our political warfare we exploited the recent bombings of Sofia by the United States Army Air Force, the Russians more or less ignored them, and thereby half the psychological value of these operations was lost. The bombing of Bulgarian targets will continue and with possible developments in Turkey, it is surely most important to secure Russian cooperation in exploiting the situation.

What I have in mind, therefore, is that the Political Warfare Executive and the Office of War Information should jointly instruct their representatives in Moscow to approach their Russian opposite numbers with the suggestion of mutual exchange of material regarding Bulgaria, and the proposal that all three parties should work out either here or in Moscow a line of propaganda as near identical as possible, having due regard to the fact that whereas Great Britain and the United States are at war with Bulgaria, the Soviet Government are not.”

Winant

1 Not printed. Paragraph A concerned the memorandum by the British Political Warfare Executive referred to below. A copy of this memorandum (not printed) is filed under 740.0011 European War 1939/32513.

2  Wallace Carroll, in London as the representative of the Office of War Information (OWI), and Robert E. Sherwood, Director of Overseas Operations, OWI.

. The Office of War Information was established by Executive Order of June 13, 1942, as successor to the Office of the Coordinator of Information. The Coordinator’s Office was renamed the Office of Strategic Services, and placed under the jurisdiction of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

3 Deputy Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in the British Foreign Office and Chairman of the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee.

4 This committee was formed in the late summer of 1943 to produce maximum Anglo-American coordination in the field of psychological warfare. It was established with representatives from the British Foreign Office (Sargent), the Political Warfare Executive (Sir Robert Bruce Lockhart, Deputy Chairman), the British Chiefs of Staff (General Sir Hastings L. Ismay), the Department of State (Howard Bucknell, Jr., Counselor of Embassy at London), the Office of War Information (Carroll), and the United States Chiefs of Staff (Adm. Harold R. Stark). Representatives from other agencies participated at a later date.

5 Shortly after the outbreak of war in 1939, the British Government coordinated the activities of the Ministry of Information, the Political Intelligence Department of the Foreign Office, and the British Broadcasting Corporation with the creation of the Political Warfare Executive. PWE was made up of representatives from the War Office, the Admiralty, the Foreign Office, and the Ministry of Information.

7 Howard Bucknell, Jr., Counselor of Embassy.

8 Sir Orme Sargent’s reference could relate to two series of events. On August 28, 1943, Boris III, Tsar of Bulgaria, died under mysterious circumstances in Sofia immediately after an unsatisfactory interview with Chancellor Hitler. Simeon II, the Tsar’s 6–year-old son, ascended the throne two days later. A series of Cabinet crises ensued marked by an increasing rapprochement with Germany. In mid-November and early December, Sofia suffered devastating air attacks which produced a marked tone of appeasement in the Bulgarian press and in the public statements of Bulgarian political figures.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.0011 LCC/13a: Telegram

[Document 975]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)9

Washington, January 14, 1944—midnight.

378. For the Ambassador and Bucknell. The Department has been considering carefully the British proposal constituting the first item on the agenda of the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee’s meeting of Thursday, November 11, referred to again in your No. 25, January 3, 7 p.m. This was to the effect that the Committee should initiate an approach to the Russians inviting them to a limited form of cooperation in the formulation of political warfare directives. This proposal was referred to the American and British Governments for a policy decision.

1. We approve the proposal in principle.

2. In view of the existence of the London Propaganda Coordinating Committee consisting of representatives of the Department of State, Foreign Office, Combined Chiefs of Staff, OWI and PWE it is desirable for the Russian Government to be represented and to dovetail its political warfare activity directed to Europe with that of OWI and PWE. However, since this Committee now is empowered to make only emergency decisions it is felt that its authority should be broadened to include the drafting of joint Anglo-Russian-American political warfare propaganda plans to be carried out by OWI, PWE and the appropriate Russian agencies. Such plans would be subject to the approval of higher authority.

3. We are prepared to instruct the American Ambassador at Moscow10 to approach the Russian Government with the suggestion that it designate a representative on the London Committee and would welcome assurances that the British Government will instruct Clark Kerr11 to make a simultaneous and parallel approach. We do not approve an approach at Moscow by the OWI and PWE.

4. You may inform the Chairman of the Committee of this Government’s decisions.

Hull

9 Attached to the file copy of this telegram is a memorandum dated January 14, 1944, from Michael J. McDermott, Chief of the Division of Current Information, to H. Freeman Matthews, Chief of the Division of European Affairs, and James C. Dunn, Adviser on Political Relations, stating: “This has been approved by the Secretary and by the President after conversations between Mr. Robert Sherwood and myself.”

10 W. Averell Harriman.

11 Sir Archibald Clark Kerr, British Ambassador in the Soviet Union.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 LCC/13: Telegram

[Document 976]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 27, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received January 27—5:13 p.m.]

729. At a meeting of the American members of the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee today there was some discussion of the Department’s 378, January 14, midnight, the substance of which has been communicated to Sir Orme Sargent. There developed some doubt as to whether the Department’s reference to the drafting of joint Anglo, American, Russian political warfare plans subject to higher authority means that the enlarged Committee will take part in the preparation of weekly propaganda directives or whether they will from time to time meet to evolve an over-all propaganda policy plan which will remain in effect if approved by higher authority until changed by the Committee and which will be binding upon OWI, PWE and the appropriate Russian agencies in the preparation of the weekly directives. The Department’s views on this point as soon as possible will be appreciated.

Winant

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.0011 LCC/13: Telegram

[Document 977]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 28, 1944—11 p.m.

711. Embassy’s 729, January 27, 8 p.m. Department’s idea is that at this stage the enlarged Committee will evolve over-all propaganda policy plans. These plans will remain in effect, if approved by higher authority, until changed by the Committee. They will govern the preparation of the weekly directives and be binding upon the OWI, PWE and appropriate Russian agencies unless or until modified.

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 LCC/15: Telegram

[Document 978]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, February 12, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 5:45 p.m.]

1209. We have today received the following communication from Sir Orme Sargent (this refers to the Department’s 378, January 14, midnight): “Thank you for your letter of the eighteenth January about the proposals which were made some time ago for a greater measure of collaboration between the Political Warfare Executive, Office of War Information and the Russians on propaganda matters and the exchange of material for broadcasts, etc.

2. We are very glad to learn that the State Department share our view about the desirability of roping the Russians into Anglo-American propaganda work in Europe. The form which the State Department propose Russian participation should take is two-fold.

First, they propose that the Russians should be invited to participate in the work of the LPC as full members. As you know we had rather hesitated to take this plunge but on further reflection and after consulting our Ambassador in Moscow on his way through London we have decided that this is the right course.

Secondly, the State Department propose that the authority of LPC should be extended to include the drafting of joint Anglo-Russian-American political warfare propaganda plans. We have studied his [this] suggestion carefully, but we feel that this extension of LPC’s work has practical objections which outweigh any of the advantages. The position at present is that joint Anglo-American plans and directives are drawn up, subject to approval by higher authority, by representatives of the Office of War Information and the Political Warfare Executive in London, acting in an executive capacity. The LPC, which sits at irregular intervals only comes into the picture when an emergency arises. Its present membership is not designed to perform the detailed drafting work required for the preparation of weekly political warfare directives. This work would therefore have to continue to be performed as at present, and the State Department’s proposal would merely add an extra cog to the present machinery whereby directives are prepared.

3. If, however, the Russians are invited to participate in the work of LPC as at present constituted, the mission which they would have to send to London for this purpose could easily include personnel whose job it would be to draw up and agree directives with their opposite numbers in the Political Warfare Executive and Office of War Information. We would, of course, welcome the proposal that these directives when agreed between the three executive bodies, subject of course when necessary to the approval of higher authority, should be mandatory.

4. It is possible that the Russians will not feel able to send a mission to London with the necessary executive authority. This, however, should not preclude us from extending the invitation. If the Russians decline the invitation on the grounds that they have not the personnel to spare or for some other reason, then we should put forward as an alternative our original proposal, namely that arrangements should be made for exchanging directives and broadcasting material.

5. When making these proposals to the Russians, I think we shall have to make clear the nature of the work which their executive mission in London and their representatives on LPC will be required to do. The work of the LPC and of the Office of War Information and Political Warfare Executive in occupied Europe is not concerned with ‘information and news.’ Its work is is to use this material in the pursuit of political and operational objectives. The head of the Russian mission therefore must be someone who has the necessary operational background.

[6.] There is one further point. The Russians will undoubtedly want to discuss covert as well as overt propaganda in Europe. At present this is not dealt with by LPC principally because, although British covert propaganda is dealt with by the Political Warfare Executive, American covert propaganda is dealt with not by OWI but by OSS.12 It may be necessary, therefore, if the Russians agree to participate in our work, to set up a special subcommittee of LPC, on which OSS is represented.

7. To sum up, therefore, we suggest that the following be the lines of our approach to the Russians:—(1) full membership of LPC (2) despatch of an executive mission to London with full powers to participate with their opposite number in OWI and PWE in the preparation of joint Anglo-Russian-American political warfare directives, or failing this (3) if the Russians feel unable to go as far as this, arrangements for the exchange either in London or Moscow of directives and propaganda material (4) emphasis to be laid on the need for sending to London personnel with operational background.

8. I shall be grateful to learn as soon as possible the State Department’s views on these proposals. If they agree, we will then send the necessary instructions to His Majesty’s Ambassador at Moscow.

9. There is just one last point to which I think I ought to draw your attention. Our political warfare work is so concerned with operational matters that I have felt bound to consult the British Chiefs of Staff before sending you this letter. I presume that the State Department will also clear their end with the American Chiefs of Staff.”

Paragraph 3 in numbered paragraph 2 of Sir Orme Sargent’s communication indicates that the British still interpret the Departments proposal to include the drafting of weekly directives in spite of the fact that Sir Orme was informed orally as the result of the Department’s 711, January 28, 11 p.m., that the Department’s idea was that the enlarged Committee will at this stage only work out overall propaganda policy plans.

Winant

12 Office of Strategic Services.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.0011 LCC/15: Telegram

[Document 979]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, February 14, 1944—2 p.m.

1120. We are in complete accord with the suggested British line of approach to the Russians set forth in paragraph 7 of your 1209, February 12, 5 p.m.

We do not agree with your interpretation of paragraph 3 in numbered paragraph 2 of Sargent’s communication. It appears to us that Sir Orme is not proposing that the LPC assume the weekly directive function but is merely confirming the present practice whereby the weekly directive is drafted by the PWE and OWI in London and then submitted for final decision to the Overseas Planning Board in Washington and presumably to the appropriate branches of the British Government.

Stettinius

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 LCC/16: Telegram

[Document 980]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, February 15, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received 12 p.m.]

1264. Sir Orme Sargent states that instructions along the lines of paragraph 7 of his letter of February 11 are being sent to the British Ambassador, Moscow. He assumed that the American Ambassador will receive similar instructions from the Department13 (this refers to the Department’s 1120, February 14, 2 p.m.).

Winant

13 On February 16, 1944, the Department notified Ambassador Winant in telegram 1176, 8 p.m., as follows: “Harriman instructed.” (740.0011 LCC/16) Ambassador Harriman’s instructions were sent in telegram 312, February 16, to Moscow (740.0011 LCC/16a).

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 LCC/21: Telegram

[Document 981]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, March 21, 1944—midnight.
[Received March 22—11 a.m.]

961. Department’s 312, February 16, 4 p.m.14 In conversation with Vyshinski15 on March 21st I referred to the participation of the Soviet Government on the London Propaganda Committee concerning which I had written to Molotov16 on February 26 and inquired whether the Foreign Office had made any decision in the premises. Vyshinski stated that the subject was complicated in substance and in its technical aspects. However, he indicated that a reply to my note would be sent to the Embassy in the near future.

Harriman

14 See footnote 13, above.

15 Andrey Yanuaryevich Vyshinsky, First Deputy People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union.

16 Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov, People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union.

Minutes of the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee 740.0011 LCC/23

[Document 982]

Minutes of the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee 17

[Extracts]

[London, April 5, 1944.]

Machinery for the Issue of Emergency Propaganda Directives Relating to the South-East Asia Area

L.P.C. (44) 5.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The conclusions of the Committee were as follows:

(a) That the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee should be known as the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee (Europe), (short title L.P.C.(E)), or as the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee (Asia), (short title L.P.C.(A)), according to the nature of the business to be transacted.

(b) That in the event the Soviet Government accepting the invitation to join the L.P.C., their representatives should become members of the L.P.C. (E).

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Invitation to the Russians to Join L.P.C.

Questions were raised in the course of the meeting of the Committee as to whether action had yet been taken by the Soviet Government in response to the outstanding invitation to join the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee. It developed that no answer had been received.

It was pointed out that, because of the future development of operations in the European Theater, Russian participation would be increasingly necessary to ensure at least a minimum coordination of Russian and Anglo-American propaganda directives, particularly in relation to such emergencies as might arise.

The invitation has now been outstanding for a considerable time, and it was felt that the Russians should be urged to expedite their reply.

The conclusion of the Committee was as follows:

(a) That Sir Orme Sargent and Mr. Howard Bucknell should be invited respectively to draw the attention of the Foreign Office and the State Department to the importance which the Committee attached to an early reply being obtained from the Soviet Government to the invitation to join the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17 Transmitted to the Department by the Counselor of Embassy in the United Kingdom (Bucknell) in his despatch 14, 940, April 8, 1944; received April 17. Mr. Bucknell noted that the London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee attached importance to an early reply from the Soviet Union concerning participation in the work of the Committee.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.0011 LCC/23: Telegram

[Document 983]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, May 1, 1944—3 p.m.

3484. For Bucknell, reference Embassy’s despatch No. 14, 940, April 8, 1944.18 We have concluded that it would be unwise to press the Soviet Government further with regard to membership on the London Propaganda Coordinating Committee. In commenting upon Ambassador Harriman’s several inquiries regarding the Soviet Government’s attitude towards the parallel American and British invitations to join the Committee, the Soviet authorities have indicated that they regard the situation as very complex, requiring much study and fraught with many obstacles. We are of the opinion that we have done as much as we reasonably should in extending the invitation. The door is open to the Soviet Government whenever it wishes to avail itself of the Committee’s facilities.

Hull

18 Not printed, but see footnote 17, p. 1462 [Pg. 1462 is part of Doc. 982].

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 LCC/26: Telegram

[Document 984]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, June 1, 1944—6 p.m.
[Received June 2—12:30 a.m.]

1966. Reference Embassy’s 1397, April 22, 3 p.m.19 The Embassy has received a note from Molotov dated May 31, reading paraphrase as follows: “The Government of the USSR has familiarized itself carefully with the material made available to it which characterizes the work carried on in London by the American Office of War Information and the British Committee for Political Warfare and also the London Political Committee for Coordinating American and British efforts in propaganda matters directed to enemy countries and countries occupied by the enemy. The Soviet Government shares the opinion of the Government of the USA concerning the desirability and importance of coordinating the activities of the USA, Great Britain and the USSR in this field especially in view of the forthcoming events in Europe and it is prepared to take part in the work of the London Political Committee on an equal basis with the Government of the USA and Great Britain. In this connection it is understood that the political committee’s competence will include the working out of the directives to be agreed upon in the coordination or propaganda to be effected by means of radio transmissions by radio stations of the American OWI, the BBC and the All Union Radio Committee in the enemy languages and languages of enemy occupied countries as well as by means of leaflets which will be disseminated in those countries.”

Sent to the Department, repeated to London.

Harriman

19 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) 740.0011 LCC/26: Telegram

[Document 985]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman)

Washington, June 15, 1944—6 p.m.

1495. Your 1966 June 1, 6 p.m. British Foreign Office has suggested a clarification of possible misconceptions on the part of Soviet authorities of the functions of the LPC in connection with the recent Russian reply agreeing to participation therein. Department and OWI have agreed to the joint presentation by the American and British Embassies in Moscow of this clarifying message, a clear copy of which will be given to you by your British colleague.

The proposed message welcomes decision of the Soviet Government to participate in the work of the LPC but states doubt whether Soviet Government understands that representation on LPC will not be sufficient in order to enable full Russian participation in the psychological warfare program. It is pointed out that the LPC meets only occasionally and then upon the request of OWI and PWE. Complete and continuous Soviet cooperation will only be possible if the Russians participate in the regular PWE-OWI meetings where the current directives are prepared. Hope is expressed that the Soviet Government will appoint a representative not only for LPC but also for equal participation in the directive meetings. After a discussion of the technical organization of OWI and PWE including the composition of LPC it is pointed out that the subjects mentioned in the last sentence of the note from Molotov are handled at the directive meetings and not by LPC.

You are instructed to participate in the joint approach to the Soviet Government on this subject.

Hull

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 LCC/29: Telegram

[Document 986]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, June 22, 1944—10 p.m.
[Received June 23—7:34 a.m.]

2236. Department’s 1495, June 15, 6 p.m. The British Ambassador has telegraphed the British Foreign Office that the functions of the LPC had already been explained to a Soviet official subsequent to the receipt of the Soviet reply agreeing to participation therein. The Ambassador stated that he preferred not to raise the question with the Soviets again until he has received a reply to his letter to Molotov of June 1 in which he had requested the names of the proposed members of the LPC and the nomination of some Soviet official in Moscow with whom the appropriate member of the British Embassy could deal. In view of the foregoing neither the British nor ourselves are taking any further action here at this time.

Harriman

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 LCC/7–544: Telegram

[Document 987]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, July 5, 1944—11 a.m.
[Received 2:09 p.m.]

2423. Embassy’s 2236, June 22, 10 p.m. The Foreign Office states in a note dated July 1 that the following delegation to the London Committee on Political Propaganda has been appointed by the Soviet Government: Chairman of the Delegation, A. A. Sobolev, Counselor of the Soviet Embassy in Great Britain, G. F. Saksin, Counselor of the Soviet Embassy in Great Britain, and Major General A. V. Vasilev, Deputy Head of the Soviet military mission in London.

The Foreign Office also states that a special “Bureau of Propaganda for Enemy and Enemy-occupied Countries” has been organized in the Sovinformburo headed by S. A. Lozovski who may be approached in regard to all pertinent questions.

Sent Department repeated London as 125.

Harriman

Establishment of the State-War-Navy Coordinating CommitteeEstablishment of the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee1

1 For a narrative account of the activities of this Committee, see article entitled “The State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee”, by Harold W. Moseley, Col. Charles W. McCarthy, and Comdr. Alvin F. Richardson, Department of State Bulletin, November 11, 1945, p. 745.

[988] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy (Forrestal)

Washington, November 29, 1944.

890.00/11–2944

[989] The Secretaries of War (Stimson) and the Navy (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State

Washington, 1 December 1944.

890.00/12–144

[990] Minutes of First Meeting of State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee Held in Room 300, State Department Building, on Tuesday, 19 December, 1944, at 11:30 a.m.

Washington, December 19, 1944, 11:30 a.m.

Lot 52 M 45

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy (Forrestal) 890.00/11–2944

[Document 988]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy (Forrestal)

Washington, November 29, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I have been discussing informally with representatives of the War and Navy Departments the matter of improving existing methods of obtaining for the State Department advice on politico-military matters and of coordinating the views of the three departments on matters in which all have a common interest, particularly those involving foreign policy and relations with foreign nations. By a letter to you dated 16 November 19442 I suggested to you the formation of a committee of representatives of the three departments to deal with problems relating to the Far East. At a meeting with the Assistant Secretary of War3 and the Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Air4 on 20 November it was generally agreed that it might be desirable to expand this proposal to provide for a committee which might deal with a much wider range of interdepartmental problems and serve as a convenient channel of interdepartmental communication.

Accordingly, I suggest the formation of a committee to be composed of representatives of the Secretary of State, the Secretary of War, and the Secretary of the Navy, charged with the duty of formulating recommendations to the Secretary of State on questions having both military and political aspects and of coordinating the views of the three Departments in matters of interdepartmental interest. In view of the fact that much of the work of the proposed committee will deal with foreign policy, it is assumed that the representative of the State Department should serve as Chairman of the committee.

If the committee is formed, I propose to designate Mr. James C. Dunn, Director of the Office of European Affairs, as the State Department representative. I hope the Secretary of War and the Secretary of the Navy will each designate a ranking member of his own office as his representative. Each member of the committee, of course, should be free to designate an alternate or alternates to act for him in his absence. Appropriate panels or sub-committees of the committee could be formed to deal with particular problems. For example, in dealing with matters relating to the Far East, Mr. Dunn would probably plan to associate with him a high officer of the Department of State having special knowledge of affairs in that area. Doubtless the representatives of the Secretary of War and the Secretary of the Navy will find occasions on which similar assistance will be desirable.

As I visualize the proposed committee, it should have a secretariat composed of at least one competent and experienced representative of each department and it should be authorized to call upon the three departments for such technical advice and assistance as may from time to time be required. The Secretariat would be charged with the proper disposition of communications requesting the views of the War Department and the Navy Department on politico-military questions and arranging with the committee members for reference of such inquiries, in appropriate cases, for the comments of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. After the formation of the committee, inquiries for military advice would be directed by the State Department to the Secretary of War and the Secretary of the Navy jointly, rather than making such inquiries as a matter of direct communication with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

If the committee is formed I hope that for a period at least, it will plan regular meetings, making arrangements, however, for informal clearances through the Secretariat of matters not requiring decision at formal meetings.

If you concur in the foregoing proposal, I shall be glad to learn from you whom you may wish to assign to the committee. As soon as representatives of the War and Navy Departments have been thus assigned, Mr. Dunn will be designated as the representative of the State Department. I hope that the committee can begin to function at an early date.

I am sending a letter, similar in form to this, to the Secretary of War.

Sincerely yours,

E. R. Stettinius, Jr.

2 Not printed.

3 John J. McCloy.

4 Artemus L. Gates.

The Secretaries of War (Stimson) and the Navy (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State 890.00/12–144

[Document 989]

The Secretaries of War (Stimson) and the Navy (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State

Washington, 1 December 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I have your letter of 29 November on the subject of improving existing methods of obtaining advice for the State Department on politico-military matters. We are in hearty agreement with the proposal which you make and believe that it should be carried into effect promptly. We have respectively designated the Assistant Secretary of War and the Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Air as the War Department and Navy Department representatives upon the proposed committee. We believe that the effectiveness of the committee will be largely dependent upon the effectiveness of its secretariat and we propose to designate officers whom we deem peculiarly qualified for the work of the proposed committee.

Both the War Department and the Navy Department will make arrangements for placing at the disposal of the committee and its secretariat the advice and assistance of specialists and advisers as occasion may arise for this. Through the Office of the Chief of Staff and the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations, staff studies can be undertaken as the committee may desire. Contact with the Joint Chiefs of Staff will be arranged through the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, and the Chief of Naval Operations. The Secretariat of the proposed committee of course should maintain constant informal contact with the secretariat and other appropriate agencies of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Both the War Department and Navy Department will promptly undertake studies of the existing organization in these departments to make certain that all liaison activities between the State Department, on the one hand, and the War and Navy Departments, on the other, are brought to the attention of the committee for its exercise of general guidance and supervision of such activities.

We believe that the secretariat should be appointed as soon as possible so that its members may participate in the development of the procedures to be followed by the committee and in formulating its program. The operations of the committee should, of course, be kept as simple as possible and the representatives of the War and Navy Departments engaged in the work of the committee will be instructed to work to this end.

Sincerely yours,

Henry L. Stimson
James Forrestal

Minutes of First Meeting of State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee Held in Room 300, State Department Building, on Tuesday, 19 December, 1944, at 11:30 a.m. Lot 52 M 45

[Document 990]

Minutes of First Meeting of State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee Held in Room 300, State Department Building, on Tuesday, 19 December, 1944, at 11:30 a.m.

Washington, December 19, 1944, 11:30 a.m.

Members Present Mr. James C. Dunn (Chairman)

Mr. John J. McCloy

Mr. Artemus L. Gates

Others Present Admiral Russell Willson5

Major General John H. Hilldring6

Mr. John D. Hickerson7

Colonel R. Ammi Cutter8

Secretariat Mr. Fletcher Warren9

Mr. Harold W. Moseley10

Colonel Wallace E. Whitson11

Colonel Charles W. McCarthy12

Mr. Keith Kane13

1. Organization.

It was agreed that the name of the Committee should be “The State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee.”

In discussing the question of a charter for the Committee, it was agreed that for the time being, at least, nothing other than the letters between the Secretary of State and the Secretaries of War and Navy would be necessary. Copies of the letters are attached herewith.14

The functions of the Committee were then discussed in a general way and it was agreed that for the present the Committee would confine itself to the consideration of questions having politico-military implications, and that it would advise and make recommendations for the approval of the Secretaries of State, War and Navy. It was further agreed that in exercising general guidance and supervision over liaison activities between the State Department and the War and Navy Departments, the Committee would confine itself to those channels of liaison dealing with matters within its sphere of interest.

The Committee agreed that notification of its organization to other departments and agencies would not be necessary at present but directed the secretariat to prepare drafts of letters or memoranda to be circulated within the three departments, for consideration at the next regular meeting.

The Committee agreed to defer action on the question of a formal charter for the secretariat but directed the Secretary to prepare a draft memorandum of its functions for approval at the next regular meeting.

2. Permanent Quarters and Place of Meeting.

The Committee agreed that the permanent quarters of the secretariat and place of meeting of the Committee should be in the State Department Building, if possible. In the event that space cannot be made available in the State Department suitable quarters for the secretariat will be provided in a building nearby. During the temporary absence of Mr. Dunn, who was called away, it was tentatively agreed that the Committee would meet each Friday at 10:30.

3. Personnel.

The secretariat suggested that the question of clerical help and other office personnel be cleared informally by the members of the Committee.

4. Procedure.

The Committee agreed to defer discussion on methods of procedure until the next regular meeting.15

5 Navy Department.

6 Director, Civil Affairs Division, War Department Special Staff.

7 Deputy Director, Office of European Affairs, Department of State.

8 Assistant Executive Officer to Assistant Secretary of War.

9 Executive Assistant to Assistant Secretary of State.

10 Special Assistant to Director of Office of European Affairs, Department of State.

11 War Department.

12 War Department.

13 Special Assistant to Secretary of the Navy.

14  Letters of November 29 and December 1, supra.

The authority of the Committee was ultimately defined and formalized in a memorandum of October 16, 1945, signed by Secretary of State James F. Byrnes, Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson, and Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal; for text, see Department of State Bulletin, November 11, 1945, p. 747.

15 December 22, 1944, at which time lengthy consideration was given to methods of conducting business with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and other agencies and it was agreed that the most direct and expeditious method possible should be adopted.

Policy of the United States with respect to diplomatic and consular property of enemy governments and the property of enemy diplomatic and consular personnel in liberated areasPolicy of the United States with respect to diplomatic and consular property of enemy governments and the property of enemy diplomatic and consular personnel in liberated areas

[991] The United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Murphy), to the Secretary of State

Algiers, October 22, 1943—4 p.m. [Received November 17—8 a.m.]

701.6200/35: Airgram

[992] The American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, December 28, 1943—6 p.m. [Received December 29—5:18 a.m.]

701.0065/25: Telegram

[993] The Secretary of State to the American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Wilson)

Washington, January 14, 1944—8 p.m.

701.0065/25: Telegram

[994] The Secretary of State to the American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Wilson)

Washington, February 1, 1944—3 p.m.

702.6251R/70: Airgram

[995] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Stimson)

Washington, March 10, 1944.

701.0065/28a

[996] The Secretary of War (Stimson) to the Secretary of State

Washington, March 20, 1944.

701.0065/29

[997] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 25, 1944—4 p.m.

840.414/7b: Telegram

[998] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

Washington, April 4, 1944.

701.0065/29a

[999] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, May 3, 1944. [Received May 11.]

740.00119 EAC/177

[1000] The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, June 15, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 7:05 p.m.]

702.0000/1: Telegram

[1001] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Naples (Brandt)

Washington, June 22, 1944—9 p.m.

865.021/36a: Telegram

[1002] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Stimson)

Washington, June 29, 1944.

Lot 52 M64

[1003] The Secretary of State to the American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Wilson)

Washington, July 6, 1944—9 p.m.

702.0000/1: Telegram

[1004] The Consul at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, July 12, 1944—10 a.m. [Received 11:59 a.m.]

702.6265/7–1244: Telegram

[1005] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 17, 1944. [Received July 24.]

740.00119 EAC/7–1744

[1006] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Naples (Brandt)

Washington, July 22, 1944—8 p.m.

702.6265/7–1244: Telegram

[1007] The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Rome, July 24, 1944—2 p.m. [Received July 24—11:26 a.m.]

840.414/7–2444: Telegram

[1008] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 5, 1944. [Received September 8.]

740.00110 E.A.C./9–544

[1009] Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] 26 September, 1944.

Lot 52 M64

[1010] Memorandum by the Legal Adviser (Hackworth) to the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger)

[Washington,] October 17, 1944.

740.00119 EAC/9–544

[1011] The Acting Secretary of State to Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy

Washington, November 22, 1944.

Lot 52 M64

[1012] Memorandum by the American Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Winant)

November 23, 1944

740.00119 EAC/12–144

[1013] Extract Reprinted From the “Handbook for Military Government in Germany Prior to Defeat or Surrender”, Issued by the Office of the Chief of Staff, SHAEF, December 1944

December 1944

The United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Murphy), to the Secretary of State 701.6200/35: Airgram

[Document 991]

The United States Political Adviser, Allied Force Headquarters (Murphy), to the Secretary of State

Algiers, October 22, 1943—4 p.m.
[Received November 17—8 a.m.]

A–78. On August 31, 1943, a communication1 was addressed to the Chief of the Military Government Section,2 Allied Force Headquarters, pointing out that the treatment of American Foreign Service establishments in Germany and Japan might depend upon the way in which German and Japanese diplomatic and consular establishments are safeguarded in European countries that may be occupied by Allied forces. It was suggested specifically that orders should be issued to field commanders that when, during the course of operations on the European continent, Allied troops occupy places where German and Japanese embassies, legations and consulates are located, the premises of such embassies, legations and consulates, as well as the private residences of the members of their staffs,3 should be placed under military guard, the contents of such premises left intact, and such premises, except under extreme military necessity, should not be requisitioned and occupied by Allied troops, until the further disposition of such premises and their contents could be passed on by the Department.

I am now informed by the Chief of the Military Government Section that the following directive on the subject has been issued by the Chief, General Staff, 15 Army Group:

secret

Subject: Enemy Embassies, Legations and Consulates HQ. 15 Army Group C.M.F.

A.C. of S., G–2, Fifth Army

G.S.I.(b), Eighth Army 15 AG/1401/6/G(Ib)

1. The Allied foreign service establishments in Germany may depend to some extent on the treatment accorded to German establishments in countries occupied by our forces.

2. Steps should be taken therefore to ensure that premises occupied by German embassies, legations or consulates, or by their staffs as private residences, are preserved from wanton damage, and that the contents, apart from material of value for operations and intelligence, are preserved intact in the premises.

3. Such premises should not be requisitioned for military occupants and they should be placed under guard until such time as arrangements can be made for the disposal of their contents by the Department of State and the Foreign Office.

[A. A. Ricardson]
Major General Chief of the General Staff, 15 Army Group

AG 336.01—X 1st Ind. EBH/MFG/jrr

Headquarters Fifth Army, A.P.O. #464, U.S. Army, 13 October 1943

To: Commanders of all Units, Fifth Army.

1. For compliance with requirements of basic letter.

2. Units having territorial responsibility where consulates are located will be responsible for placing the required guard over such establishments and for notifying this Headquarters, through channels, of the action taken.

3. AMG4 will have the responsibility for coordinating with the State Department and Foreign Office for the disposal of the contents of the establishments, except for documents and other intelligence material which will be handled by the G–2 Section, Fifth Army.

By command of Lieutenant General Clark:

M. F. Grant5
M. G. Grant [sic]
Colonel, A.G.D., Adjutant General

Distribution:

“D”

166–13–105

I am not informed as to the Department’s policy in respect to the protection of enemy diplomatic and consular establishments in countries that are or may be occupied by Allied forces, and would welcome detailed instructions on this subject for guidance in dealing with such questions if and when they arise.

Murphy

1 Not printed.

2 Col. Julius C. Holmes was appointed to this position on June 18, 1943; he was promoted to Brigadier General on July 4.

3 On April 19, 1943, the Secretary of State had sent a formal protest to the Swiss Government for transmission to the German Government concerning the occupation by German authorities during September 1942 of the private residences of three former clerks of the Embassy at Paris. Each of these persons was an American national. (124.513/1817)

4 Allied Military Government.

5 Col. Melville F. Grant.

The American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Wilson) to the Secretary of State 701.0065/25: Telegram

[Document 992]

The American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, December 28, 1943—6 p.m.
[Received December 29—5:18 a.m.]

271. HQAF6 have submitted for comment a draft outlining measures to be observed by Allied intelligence personnel in treatment of diplomatic and consular personnel and premises in Rome. Substance of this draft transmitted herewith for Department’s comment and instructions.

Begin substance of draft: A. Axis and satellite powers.

1. Diplomatic and consular officials of Germany, Japan, Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria and Finland should be detained. While treatment should be courteous necessary measures should be taken to prevent escape. AFHQ should be informed immediately of their apprehension and will then issue instructions for their disposal.

2. Embassy and Legation premises belonging to Germany, Japan, Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria and Finland should not be searched or entered unless there is strong reason to believe (note: Office of British Resident Minister7 recommends substitution of word “proof” for words “strong reason to believe”) that diplomatic privilege is being abused. Abuse of diplomatic privilege would include such actions as hostile acts committed from Embassy or Legation premises, the use of W/T8 transmitters, the storing of war material other than the recognized mission armor, or the laying of explosive charge.

3. Consular premises belonging to Germany, Japan, Hungary, Bulgaria and Finland should be entered and searched and all papers impounded.

4. Private residences of German, Japanese, Hungarian, Rumanian, Bulgarian and Finnish diplomatic and consular officials should be entered and searched and any papers likely to be of interest impounded. Other effects should not be removed and such residences should not be requisitioned or inhabited but should be sealed and left until taken over by the protecting powers.

5. In case of Embassy and Legation premises and private residences of officials of Embassy Legations and consular staffs every effort should be made to protect them from wanton damage. If other considerations permit, guards should be provided for them until they are taken over by the protecting power.

6. In the case of Finland the action indicated in the above subparagraphs should be undertaken by British rather than American troops as no state of war exists between the USA and Finland.

B. Countries overrun by Axis.

1. In the case of Vichy France or the puppet Danish government it is held that the diplomatic privilege is not operative. Official should be accorded treatment indicated in sub-paragraph (A) 1 and all premises may be searched and requisitioned.

C. Neutral countries.

Representative of neutral countries enjoy full diplomatic and consular privileges and should always be treated with greatest courtesy. Premises either official or personal belonging to officials of neutral countries should not be entered unless there is strong reason to believe (note: Office of British Resident Minister recommends substitution of word “proof” for words “strong reason to believe”) that an abuse of privilege has taken place. End of substance of draft.

With inspection of the above indicated substitutions the office of the British Resident Minister has expressed concurrence in substance of above draft.

Wilson

6 Allied Force Headquarters.

7 Harold Macmillan, British Resident Minister, Allied Force Headquarters.

8 Wireless Telegraphy.

The Secretary of State to the American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Wilson) 701.0065/25: Telegram

[Document 993]

The Secretary of State to the American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Wilson)

Washington, January 14, 1944—8 p.m.

137. For L’Heureux.9 Department’s comments on AFHQ draft contained in your 271, December 28, 6 p.m., follow:

A. Axis and satellite powers.

A1. Department concurs. It is understood, however, that all Axis and satellite diplomatic missions, with the exception of Finland, have already withdrawn from Rome and established themselves in Brescia or Venice. Our forces will probably find no officials of these countries in Rome except possibly some consular officers left behind as custodians. The Finnish Government has thus far refused to recognize the so-called Italian Socialist Republic Government10 and has instructed its mission to remain in Rome to await the return of the Italian King.11

A2. Department concurs if the substitution recommended by the British Resident Minister is adopted.

A3. Department cannot concur. It is considered desirable to respect the consular premises of enemy nations unless there is good reason for search such as indicated in paragraph 2 above. United States consular premises in Rome have not been violated and generally speaking the immunity of our consular premises in enemy and enemy-occupied territories of Europe has been respected. In any event, it will be found that the consular offices of enemy countries in Rome in most cases form part of the premises of the diplomatic mission and, consequently, could not be violated without violating the immunity of the mission itself.

A4. Department does not concur. While it is recognized that the diplomatic and consular officials of enemy powers in third countries have no rights to immunity, vis-à-vis the occupying powers, it is contrary to practice and not desirable to enter and search the private residences of enemy diplomatic and consular officials. In any event, the private residence of the Ambassador or principal diplomatic officer of the enemy country, if separate from the chancery, should under no circumstances be violated. It is almost certain, however, that the enemy officials in Rome will have turned over their countries’ interests, including their residences and personal effects, to the representatives of the protecting power before the arrival of Allied forces in the capital. Under no circumstances, of course, should premises be entered and searched once they have passed into the custody of the protecting power.

A5. Department concurs.

A6. Department concurs.

B. Countries overrun by the Axis.

B1. Department concurs with respect to proposed treatment of Vichy officials. As indicated above, if French premises are already in the custody of the protecting power, that arrangement should not be disturbed. If the premises are not already in the custody of the protecting power, provisional steps should be taken to safeguard the fundamental diplomatic character of the premises pending instructions from the interested Governments.

With respect to Denmark, Department does not consider that the Danish representative is an appropriate example of the representation of a “puppet” government. The Danish Government has been suppressed and Denmark is occupied by the Germans. The Danish Minister in Rome, Mr. Otto Wadsted, is believed to have pro-Allied sympathies and would probably renounce, if given the opportunity, his relationship with any Danish administration under German occupation as have done his colleagues in Washington12 and London.13

C. Neutral countries.

Department concurs in this Section if recommendations of British Resident Minister are adopted.

Hull

9 Hervé Joseph L’Heureux, Administrative Officer, Civil Affairs Section, Allied Force Headquarters.

10 The neo-fascist Italian Social Republic was formed in northern Italy after the German invasion in mid-September 1943 and the rescue of Mussolini from the Gran Sasso on September 12.

11 Victor Emmanuel III.

12 For correspondence relative to the recall by the Danish Government of the Minister to the United States, Henrik de Kauffmann, in April 1941, his refusal to accept recall on the ground that the Danish Government was acting under duress, and his continued recognition toy the United States as Danish Minister, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. ii, pp. 47 ff.

13 Count Eduard Reventlow.

The Secretary of State to the American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Wilson) 702.6251R/70: Airgram

[Document 994]

The Secretary of State to the American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Wilson)

Washington, February 1, 1944—3 p.m.

A–59. [For Murphy.] You’re A–55 September 18,14 A–78 October 22 and 2007 November 1515 and Department’s 78 December 7.16

One. For your information and guidance the United States Government has accorded to the following categories of property the treatment indicated below:

(A) Diplomatic and Consular Property of Enemy Governments.

I. Property of this category includes such property in the United States of enemy governments as was employed by them in connection with their former diplomatic and consular representation in the United States, including diplomatic and consular premises and their furnishings, archives, vehicles, bank balances normally maintained in connection with diplomatic or consular representation, et cetera. This category does not include the following types of property: investments assets of institutions of a commercial character owned or controlled by enemy governments (such as bank accounts in the United States of central banks of enemy states); et cetera.

II. Treatment accorded such property in the United States has been as follows: Generally, the departing diplomatic and consular personnel of an enemy state transfer to a representative of the protecting Power the custody of the property. Property not so delivered into the custody of a representative of the protecting Power is turned over to him by the United States Government. After accepting custody of the property, the representative of the protecting Power usually seals the premises, archives, et cetera, with the seal of his office or otherwise signifies that the property has been placed under his protection. The United States Government has consistently respected the seal of the protecting Power. Bank balances normally maintained in connection with diplomatic or consular representation are similarly considered to be in the custody of the protecting Power. This does not, however, prevent them from being blocked or otherwise immobilized pursuant to war-time or other pertinent legislation of the United States.

(B) Property of Enemy Diplomatic and Consular Personnel.

I. Property of this category includes such property, real or personal, as may be left in the United States by former diplomatic or consular personnel (whether officers, clerks, or miscellaneous employees) of enemy states, including residences, household furniture and effects, personal effects, vehicles, and reasonable bank balances. This category does not include property in the nature of investments.

II. Treatment accorded property in the United States such as residences, furniture, and effects has been as follows: Generally, the departing diplomatic and consular personnel of an enemy state transfer to a representative of the protecting Power or to a private agent of their choice the custody of the property. Property not so treated is turned over to a representative of the protecting Power by the United States Government, which respects such property whether under the protection of the protecting Power or of a private agent. Reasonable bank balances are accorded similar treatment. However, like bank balances of enemy governments, they may be blocked or otherwise immobilized pursuant to war-time or other pertinent legislation of the United States. Vehicles are also accorded similar treatment. Departing enemy personnel have not been permitted to take with them personally-owned automobiles. However, the United States Government has freely permitted representatives of the protecting Powers to sell such automobiles, to apply the proceeds from such sales to the liquidation of personal obligations of the departing personnel, and to deposit any remainder in blocked bank accounts. The United States Government reserves the right to sequester property of the present category (covered by paragraph One (B) I and II) that would serve an important purpose in the prosecution of the war. In that event, the following procedure would be observed: (a) A complete inventory would be taken;

(b) A representative of the protecting Power would be given a copy of the inventory and an opportunity to verify the inventory;

(c) Proper measures would be taken to assure the preservation of the sequestered property;

(d) At the termination of the sequestration, a representative of the protecting Power would again be given an opportunity to verify the inventory. So far, no property in the United States of the present category has been sequestered.

Two. The United States Government would like to see diplomatic and consular property of the categories described above respected, whether in the territory of the opposing belligerents or in the territory of third Powers. At the same time, it reserves the right to consider further the extent to which it may wish to modify its course of action with respect to diplomatic and consular property of enemy states and that of their diplomatic and consular personnel (a) in specific retaliation for failure on the part of enemy states to observe reciprocally a similar standard of conduct with respect to diplomatic and consular property of the United States and that of American diplomatic and consular personnel; or (b) in situations where the premises or property, allegedly diplomatic in character, are found to be otherwise.

Three. The Department hopes that, pursuant to the policy indicated above, the German consular property (money, gold, and other valuables) in the custody of the Finance Officer of the Allied Forces in North Africa, or an equivalent credit, may eventually be delivered into the custody of the Spanish representative at Algiers17 in charge of German interests there, as were the premises and furnishings of the former German Consulate General at Algiers and property of the former German Consul General18 and Vice Consul there.19 However, pending the receipt of further instructions informing you that the German Government has made a satisfactory reply to the representations of the United States Government with respect to the maltreatment of diplomatic and consular property of the United States at Vichy and Tunis, respectively, and that of American diplomatic and consular personnel formerly at those places and at Paris, the transfer of custody to the Spanish representative should be deferred. Meanwhile, you are authorized to accept custody of the property from the Finance Officer. In informing the Director of Blockade at Algiers of the course of action desired by your Government, you should state that you are not required to retain the property in its present form if to do so would be contrary to French law but that, in such event, the currency, coin, gold, et cetera may be disposed of as provided by French law and a corresponding credit established in a separate account in your name as representative of the United States Government acting as provisional custodian of the German property it represents. Before actually converting any of the property, however, you should inform the Department of the basis of conversion and await further instructions. Please report fully upon further developments.

Hull

14 Not printed. Mr. Murphy requested instructions regarding treatment of the contents of the safe of the German Consulate General at Algiers held by Col. L. H. Sims, Chief Finance Officer, Allied Force Headquarters. Mr. Murphy added that Col. Sims desired to forward the contents to the Alien Property Custodian. A marginal note, signed B[reckinridge] L[ong], reads: “Tell them to hold on a while. Should go to Spanish Consul I believe.” (702.6251R/70)

15 Telegram 2007 not printed; in this telegram Mr. Murphy informed the Department that the Director of Blockade had recently appointed a sequestrator for sums held for the German Consul at Algiers. The sequestrator, finding quantities of gold and silver on deposit with the American Consul, desired to be in general charge of rights, interests and property of the German Consulate. Mr. Murphy requested instructions. (702.6251R/81)

16 Not printed; it contained instructions to Mr. Murphy relative to the disposition of money found in the German consular office. See section Three of this telegram.

17 E. Somoza y Tenreiro.

18 Peter Pfeiffer.

19 Hans Schwarzmann.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Stimson) 701.0065/28a

[Document 995]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Stimson)

Washington, March 10, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I refer to your letters of April 5 and May 24, 1943, your reference MID 000.2 (5–22–43),20 and to previous correspondence concerning the policy of the United States Government with respect to diplomatic and consular property of enemy governments and the property of enemy diplomatic and consular personnel.

I am sending you herewith for convenient reference a paraphrase of a telegram from the American Mission at Algiers21 concerning the treatment to be accorded to personnel and property at Rome of the categories mentioned above and a paraphrase of this Department’s reply.22 I am also sending you a copy of an airgram to the Mission at Algiers23 recapitulating in general terms the policy of the United States Government with respect to such property and indicating in particular the disposition to be made of certain items of German consular property at Algiers.

Our position with respect to diplomatic and consular property of enemy governments and the property of enemy diplomatic and consular personnel is subject to modification in particular instances. There have already been violations of our diplomatic and consular property, particularly in the Far East,24 and we have for our part not fully maintained our own high standard, particularly in North Africa.25 However, I believe that you will agree with me that any further departures from our policy of respect for such enemy property should be determined by the Government at Washington in the light of all the known circumstances, and not by officers in the field. I therefore suggest that enemy diplomatic and consular property, wherever captured, be accorded the following treatment: (a) If it is in the custody of the protecting Power, that custody should be respected in every way.

(b) If it is not in the custody of the protecting Power, the property should be safeguarded without examination until such time as the Government may direct that it be delivered into the custody of the protecting Power or otherwise disposed of in the light of the then existing circumstances.

In either event, it is desirable that the Government receive a full report for its consideration.

Your comments would be appreciated. I should also be grateful if you would send me copies of such instructions as may be issued on this subject.

Sincerely yours,

Cordell Hull

20 None printed.

21 Telegram 271, December 28, 1943, p. 1473 [Pg. 1473 is part of Doc. 992].

22 Telegram 137, January 14, p. 1474 [Pg. 1474 includes portions of Doc. 992 and Doc. 993].

23 Airgram A–59, February 1, supra.

24 Early in December 1942 the Department was aware that the Japanese had seized archives at the Consulate General, Canton. In April 1943 the Embassy archives at Peiping were confiscated. The Department’s protest of May 1, 1943 (not printed), was casually dismissed. Other violations consisted in the occupation of premises at Nanking, with the sale of certain furnishings, and the seizure of archives from the Consulates General at Tientsin, Hankow, and Shanghai, and from the Consulates at Amoy, Swatow, Tsinan, and Saigon. For a summary, see despatch 7485 from Bern, March 6, 1944, vol. v, p. 1178.

25 Complaints of their treatment were registered with the Department of State by Italian Consul General Arrivabene and German Consul General Pfeiffer after their seizure in Algiers.

The Secretary of War (Stimson) to the Secretary of State 701.0065/29

[Document 996]

The Secretary of War (Stimson) to the Secretary of State

Washington, March 20, 1944.

Dear Mr. Secretary: I refer to your letter of March 10, 1944, in which you suggest a policy with respect to treatment of diplomatic and consular property of enemy governments and the property of enemy diplomatic and consular personnel.

I find that the Combined Chiefs of Staff have established a policy which, while more general in character, does not appear in conflict with State Department policy described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of your letter. I refer to paragraph 28 (c), “Instrument of Surrender of Italy” signed at Malta on September 29, 1943,26 as amended by the protocol signed at Brindisi on November 9, 1943.27

The title of this document was amended by the protocol to read, “Additional Conditions of Armistice with Italy,” which (referring to Axis countries) states as follows: “28. (c) All property in Italian territory belonging to any such country or occupied country or its nationals will be impounded and kept in custody pending further instructions.”

I assume that the more detailed statement of policy contained in your No. 137 to the American Mission at Algiers28 has been presented by the Chief of that mission to the Commander in the field through appropriate channels. I also assume that the Commander has given this statement consideration.

I feel that the policy laid down for the Commander in the field should not be too rigid or detailed. In the unpredictable circumstances of battle we must rely a great deal on his good judgment.

Sincerely yours,

Henry L. Stimson

26 For the terms of the Additional Conditions of the Armistice With Italy, September 29, 1943, see Department of State, United States and Italy, 1986–1946, Documentary Record (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1946), p. 55; or 61 Stat. (pt. 3) 2740.

27  United States and Italy, 1936–1946, p. 65.

28 Dated January 14, p. 1474 [Pg. 1474 includes portions of Doc. 992 and Doc. 993].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 840.414/7b: Telegram

[Document 997]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 25, 1944—4 p.m.

2293. Department believes it may be of great importance to this Government to have copies of some of the major diplomatic and other records of the Axis governments and governments associated with them. The Germans have already utilized records found at Warsaw, Paris, etc., for propaganda purposes29 and Department feels that copies of the most significant Axis records may be needed to protect the United Nations from Axis propaganda campaigns during or after the war and may also yield information of great importance regarding Axis objectives in the war, their methods of operation, responsibility for violations of international law, and their confederates at home and abroad. It is believed that this may also be a matter of interest to the British and the U.S.S.R. and that it should, therefore, be discussed with their representatives with a view to ensuring that this Government will obtain copies of important Axis records even though the archives in question may first come under the control of the armed forces of our associates.

If you see no objection you are requested to take the matter up in the European Advisory Commission and report to the Department whether the desired arrangements can be made. The Department leaves to your discretion the question as to how many governments should cooperate in this matter but stresses the necessity for keeping the project as secret as possible. It is hoped that the appropriate military branches will have the facilities for the work but if copying by microfilm seems to be the most practicable method, the United States Navy is understood to have teams of microfilm experts available.

Department has in mind principally foreign office records, the records of the highest Axis officials and officials of satellite states, and enemy diplomatic and consular records in general not in the custody of protecting powers, which may shed light on Axis intrigue, ruthlessness, and aggression since Hitler’s advent to power and during the war. It is assumed that military authorities have considered the question of possible use of enemy general staff archives and other important enemy military records.

In general the Department would like to see diplomatic and consular property respected as indicated in paragraph two, especially, of Department’s A 59 of February 1, 1944 to Algiers (a copy of which will be sent to you by air); it should, however, be borne in mind that, at the moment, only the copying of especially important records and not their confiscation is proposed. Publication of such records is not contemplated unless it seems to be required later by important considerations of policy.

Similar instructions30 are being sent to Mr. Reber31 with a view to action by the Allied Control Commission for Italy.

Hull

29 From military and diplomatic archives captured or seized in 1939 and 1940, the German Foreign Office published a series of White Books. Among the most notable of this series were the following: Auswärtiges Amt, 1940, No. 3, Polish Documents relative to the Origin of the War, First Series (Berlin, Deutscher Verlag. 1940); Auswärtiges Amt, 1940, No. 4, Documents concerning the Anglo-French Policy of extending the war (Berlin, Zentralverlag der NSDAP, Franz Eher. 1940); Auswärtiges Amt, 1940, No. 5, Allied intrigue in the Low Countries, Further documents concerning the Anglo-French policy of extending the War (Berlin, Zentralverlag der NSDAP, Franz Eher, 1940); Auswärtiges Amt, 1941, No. 6, Die Geheimakten des französischen Generalstabes (Berlin, Zentralverlag der NSDAP, Franz Eher, 1941); Auswärtiges Amt, 1941, No. 7, Documents relating to the conflict with Yugoslavia and Greece (Berlin, Deutscher Verlag, 1941). Another series utilizing confiscated archives was published as the Veröffentlichungen des Deutschen Instituts für Aussenpolitische Forschung. Fritz Berber compiled one volume in this series from the archives of the Czechoslovak Government: Europäische Politik 1933–1938 im Spiegel der Prager Akten (Essen, Verlagsanstalt, 1941).

30 Instruction repeated as No. 897, March 25, to Rome.

31 Samuel Reber, Deputy Vice President, Political Section, Allied Control Commission for Italy.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison) 701.0065/29a

[Document 998]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Harrison)

No. 2101 Washington, April 4, 1944.

Sir: Transmitted herewith is a copy of a letter to the Secretary of War32 concerning the policy of the United States Government with respect to diplomatic and consular property of enemy governments and the property of enemy diplomatic and consular personnel. As you will observe from numbered paragraph three of its enclosure no. 3,33 the Mission at Algiers has been directed to accept custody of certain German consular property at Algiers for eventual delivery into the custody of the Spanish representative at Algiers in charge of German interests there. The Mission at Algiers has reported that it assumed custody of the property on February 19, 1944.34 As you will also observe, the Mission is not to relinquish custody until the German Government replies satisfactorily to the representations of the United States Government with respect to the maltreatment of diplomatic and consular property of the United States at Vichy and Tunis, respectively, and that of American diplomatic and consular personnel formerly at those places and at Paris.

You are requested to inform the Swiss Government in the sense of this instruction and to request that it continue to endeavor to obtain from the German Government satisfactory replies to the representations mentioned above.

In this connection, the Department refers to the following correspondence: (a) Your despatch no. 7157 of January 25, 194435 and previous correspondence concerning the forcible entry into the former American Embassy at Vichy by German officials and their seizure of diplomatic archives (including files on the former representation by the United States of Australian, British, Canadian, New Zealand, and South African interests in unoccupied France) and other property of the United States Government and of personal property of the Embassy’s personnel.

(b) Your despatch no. 6703 of November 26, 194335 and previous correspondence concerning the occupation by German authorities in France of the private residences in the Paris area of certain American diplomatic personnel that had been employed as clerks by the former American Embassy at Paris; and

(c) The Department’s instruction no. 2024 of January 15, 194435 concerning the seizure by German military personnel of consular property of the United States Government at Tunis and of personal property of H. A. Doolittle, Esquire, American Consul General there.

Copies of this instruction will be forwarded to the Embassy at London, the Mission at Algiers, the Consulate at Tunis, and (for Mr. Doolittle’s36 information) the Legation at Cairo.

For your confidential information, the suggested treatment of such enemy diplomatic and consular property as may be captured by our armed forces, described in section (b) of the third paragraph of the letter to the Secretary of War, has been modified since that letter was dispatched. It is now contemplated that the United Nations might wish to copy (but not to confiscate) especially important captured records in the event that they have not been delivered into the custody of the protecting Power. The words “without examination” may accordingly be considered as deleted from Section (b).

Very truly yours,

For the Secretary of State:
Breckinridge Long

32 Dated March 10, p. 1479 [Pg. 1479 is part of Doc. 995].

33 Airgram A–59, February 1, p. 1476 [Pg. 1476 is part of Doc. 994].

34 Despatch 127 dated February 24, 1944, from Algiers, with an enclosure dated February 19 listing the contents of the consular property; neither printed.

35 Not printed.

35 Not printed.

35 Not printed.

36 Hooker A. Doolittle, former Consul at Tunis, whose household goods had been seized by the German Army on November 14, 1942.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/177

[Document 999]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

No. 15410 London, May 3, 1944.
[Received May 11.]

Sir: With reference to your telegram No. 2293 of March 25, 4 p.m., inquiring as to the possibility of making an arrangement through the European Advisory Commission to ensure that important diplomatic and other records of the Axis governments and their satellites be made available to the American Government, I have the honor to report that the British and Russian Delegates on the Commission40 have been informally asked whether they would be willing to take up this question in the Commission. The Russian Delegate has not yet replied, and probably will not do so until the terms of surrender for Germany have been agreed upon in the Commission.41 The British Delegate in a letter dated May 1, 1944 replied as follows: “This is a matter to which we have already given some attention, and I agree with you that it would be desirable to reach agreement about it in the Commission.

I hope shortly to be able to send you and Monsieur Gousev some proposals which we are formulating.”

The question of obtaining and examining enemy records and archives, including records of the German General Staff, is one of the subjects which is being considered by the planning group which has been set up within the American Delegation, as it is intended that a directive to the Allied and Soviet Commanders-in-Chief on this subject will ultimately be drawn up in the Commission.

Respectfully yours,

For the Ambassador:
E. Allan Lightner, Jr.
Secretary to the U.S. Delegation European Advisory Commission

40 Sir William Strang and Fedor Tarasovich Gusev, respectively.

41 For correspondence on negotiations within the European Advisory Commission relating to terms of surrender for Germany, see pp. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75] ff.

The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State 702.0000/1: Telegram

[Document 1000]

The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, June 15, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 7:05 p.m.]

2027. From Murphy. Joint Intelligence Committee has discussed desirability of modifying present AFHQ directive which sets forth that enemy Consulates in territory occupied by Allied Military Forces shall remain immune from entry and search. Military intelligence representatives, American as well as British, expressed view that a not inconsiderable amount of valuable information might be obtained on premises of enemy Consulates in territory yet to be occupied by our forces in this theater of operations.

Committee was told by a member of my staff that the directive in its present form represents the considered views of Department (reference Department’s 137, January 14, 8 p.m.) but that inasmuch as the directive had been originally drawn up with only Rome in mind one could not exclude possibility that a somewhat modified formula might be acceptable with respect to Consular premises in satellite countries. Inasmuch as military members of Committee were intent on having the subject reviewed it was decided to submit question to Combined Chiefs of Staff for their consideration and it is anticipated that a telegram in this sense will go forward to Combined Chiefs within next day or two. [Murphy.]

Chapin

[On June 20, 1944, the Combined Chiefs of Staff received telegram Naf 724 from the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean, General Sir Henry Maitland Wilson. The pertinent section reads in paraphrase as follows: “1. Enemy consulates are likely to contain considerable potential intelligence value, among which are: a. Information of immediate value to counter intelligence organizations.

b. Reports on industrial and commercial matters which affect supply position in country which official represents.

c. Indications of further sources of information.

d. Reports relating to official and commercial activities between two countries.

e. Evidence of methods of German economic control.

f. Intelligence on ports, shipping, imports, exports, industrial and agricultural production, transport, distribution and finance.

2. Existing instructions, framed for occupation of Rome, accord, at request of US State Department, immunity from entry and search to enemy consulates.

Submit that with view to future operations it is desirable to consider reversal of this policy.”

The Combined Chiefs of Staff, in JCS Directive 1011, August 19, 1944, not printed, announced that they were unable to advise General Wilson due to the inability of the British members to agree upon a proposed response. An interim policy, however, was recommended: acceptance of the policy statement submitted by the Secretary of State to the Secretary of War on March 10, 1944, printed on page 1479 [Pg. 1479 is part of Doc. 995], with the reservation that theater commanders were at liberty to disregard consular immunities in the event the security of their forces was threatened.]

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Naples (Brandt) 865.021/36a: Telegram

[Document 1001]

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Naples (Brandt)

Washington, June 22, 1944—9 p.m.

236. For Kirk.44 The Department has been reliably informed that the files of the so-called American Section of the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs contained, during the period of the Fascist regime and German occupation, information of considerable value to the United Nations in dealing with post-war Germany. The Department would like to have these files set aside for inspection by authorized representatives of this Government.

Consult with Reber and ascertain if this request should be addressed by the Control Commission to the present Italian Government, which should be willing to cooperate in a matter of this kind, or to the Allied military authorities in Rome.

Hull

44 Alexander C. Kirk, American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Stimson) Lot 52 M64

[Document 1002]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Stimson)

Washington, June 29, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I refer to your letter of March 20, 1944 and to previous correspondence concerning the policy of the United States Government with respect to diplomatic and consular property of enemy governments and the property of enemy diplomatic and consular personnel.

Since your letter was received, this Department has addressed to the Embassy at London and to the American member of the Political Section of the Allied Control Commission for Italy telegraphic instructions,45 paraphrases of which I am sending you herewith,46 emphasizing the importance of making arrangements with the British and Soviet Governments for the appropriate utilization of such important Axis records as may be captured by the armed forces of the United Nations. You will observe that the Department has in mind principally the records of ministries for foreign affairs in enemy territory, enemy general staff and other important military archives, and miscellaneous records appertaining to the more important officials of enemy states or of their satellites. The position with respect to diplomatic and consular property of enemy governments (including diplomatic and consular archives) and the property of enemy diplomatic and consular personnel, as expressed in this Department’s airgram no. A–59 of February 1, 1944 to the Mission at Algiers, a copy of which was sent to you with my letter of March 10, 1944, remains unchanged except in one respect: It is now contemplated that the United Nations might wish to copy (but not to confiscate) especially important diplomatic or consular archives of the enemy captured within territory of third Powers, provided that such archives have not been delivered into the custody of the protecting Power. This slight modification of policy was brought to the attention of the Embassy at London, the Legation at Bern,47 and the Mission at Algiers when this Department forwarded to those offices copies of my letter to you of March 10, 1944.

I am also sending you herewith a copy of the reply from the Embassy at London48 to this Department’s aforementioned instruction with respect to the utilization of captured Axis records. Since it appears from the reply that this entire subject is being considered by the planning group that has been constituted within the United States Delegation to the European Advisory Commission and that the Commission will eventually prepare a directive to the Allied and Soviet Commanders-in-Chief on the subject, it seems to me that it might be helpful to the Commission in its deliberations and to the Allied and Soviet Commanders-in-Chief in their eventual execution of the directive to be issued, if this Government should suggest the adoption of the following guiding principles (which are fundamentally those stated in my letter to you of March 10, as subsequently modified): “If captured within the territory of third Powers, the diplomatic and consular property of enemy governments (including their diplomatic and consular archives) and the property of enemy diplomatic and consular personnel will be accorded the following treatment: “(a) If any such property is in the custody of the protecting Power, that custody will be respected in every way.

“(b) If any such property is not in the custody of the protecting Power, it should be safeguarded until such time as the interested governments may direct that it be delivered into the custody of the protecting Power or otherwise disposed of in the light of then existing circumstances.

“It is understood in connection with paragraph (b) that important enemy diplomatic and consular archives that have not been delivered into the custody of the protecting Power may be copied (but not confiscated).”

As you indicate in your letter of March 20, provision has apparently been made for the treatment of enemy diplomatic and consular archives and other property captured in Italy. Now, however, it seems probable that with increasing frequency similar situations will arise in other countries of Europe. I agree fully that the policy laid down for the Commander in the field should not be too rigid or detailed, but I feel also that the Command in the field should be aware of the general policy of this Government with respect to such property and archives (to which we have repeatedly committed ourselves in the course of the past two years) in order that he may endeavor to avoid action that might place in jeopardy the good faith of the United States Government.

If you concur in the statement suggested above, I shall be happy to direct the Embassy at London to present it to the European Advisory Commission as representing the policy of the United States Government in this regard.

Sincerely yours,

Cordell Hull

45 See telegram 2293, March 25, to London, p. 1481 [Pg. 1481 includes portions of Doc. 996 and Doc. 997], and footnote 30, p. 1482 [Pg. 1482 includes portions of Doc. 997 and Doc. 998].

46 Not printed.

47 See instruction 2101, April 4, to Bern, p. 1482 [Pg. 1482 includes portions of Doc. 997 and Doc. 998].

48 See despatch 15410, May 3, from London, p. 1484 [Pg. 1484 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000].

The Secretary of State to the American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Wilson) 702.0000/1: Telegram

[Document 1003]

The Secretary of State to the American Representative to the French Committee of National Liberation at Algiers (Wilson)

Washington, July 6, 1944—9 p.m.

2120. For Murphy. Your 2027, June 15, 5 p.m. Question of treatment of enemy consulates in territory occupied by Allied military forces was referred by the Combined Chiefs of Staff to the Combined Intelligence Committee in Washington. The Department instructed its representative on the Committee to take the following position:

The seals of a protecting power should under no circumstances be broken regardless of whether such seals are protecting diplomatic or consular archives and property. During the entire war the Department has taken the position that the protection extended by the third power to belligerent consular and diplomatic property should be respected. It has protested vigorously in the several instances where the enemy has failed to respect the authority of the protecting power. It is contrary to the policy and practice of the United States Government to enter and search consular premises although it is recognized that consulates and consular archives have no right to immunity. If the Allies now establish a practice of entering and searching all German consulates in cities which come under Allied military domination, this Government may expect that its consular premises in enemy-occupied territory will suffer. According to available reports the American consular premises in Rome were not violated and, generally speaking, the enemy has respected the immunity of American consular premises in Germany and the German-occupied territories of Europe. If we should undertake a different course, it can be assumed that the Germans would not continue this practice. Careful consideration has been given to General Wilson’s reasons49 why present Allied policy should be reversed. Routine matters such as visas, invoices and citizenship form the bulk of consular archives. Before the enemy turns over his interests to the protecting power, it can be assumed that the small amount of confidential useful information will, under standing instructions, have been destroyed. Therefore, it is the opinion of the State Department that the doubtful advantages which might be gained from entering and searching enemy consular premises would be outweighed by the damage to American prestige and property resulting from a reversal of policy at this time.

Sent to Algiers, repeated to Naples for Kirk.

Hull

49 See bracketed note, p. 1485 [Pg. 1485 is part of Doc. 1000].

The Consul at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State 702.6265/7–1244: Telegram

[Document 1004]

The Consul at Algiers (Lawton) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, July 12, 1944—10 a.m.
[Received 11:59 a.m.]

2363. From Murphy. Your 2120, July 6, 9 p.m. The Supreme Allied Commander yesterday telegraphed London that the entry into German consulates at Naples and Bari resulted in obtaining important information of various types including German trade records and statistics, police regulations in Germany and Italy, background material for use by special agents, lists and records of Nazi and Fascist party members and other personalities. There were also obtained topographical and psychological warfare material and handbooks of interest to naval and air intelligence. General Wilson stated that he considered this conclusively proved justification of his request for a reversal of the existing policy of according enemy consulates immunity. The Supreme Allied Commander’s message concludes with the statement that should further evidence be required to prove German carelessness in disposing of important documents he considered inventory material found in German Embassy in Rome provided this.

Does this fresh information change in any way our point of view as expressed in Department’s 2120 July 6, 9 p.m.? [Murphy.]

Lawton

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00119 EAC/7–1744

[Document 1005]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

No. 16892 London, July 17, 1944.
[Received July 24.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith copy of a draft directive on German records and archives, which has been received from the British Delegation and which is designed to give effect to pertinent provisions of the draft instrument of surrender for Germany.

The British Delegation intend to circulate this proposed directive to the European Advisory Commission in due course, and have requested that it be given consideration by the United States Delegation. Sir William Strang suggests that the proposal for a central record office made in paragraph 5 of the draft directive should be considered in connection with the proposals for control machinery in Germany which will be studied by the Commission. Any comment upon this proposed directive which the Department is prepared to offer will be appreciated.

Respectfully yours,

For the Ambassador:
E. Allan Lightner, Jr.
Secretary to the U.S. Delegation

[Enclosure]

British Draft Directive on German Records and Archives 50

1. This directive does not apply to archives of an archaeological, artistic, etc., nature on which a separate directive will be issued to you.51

2. Immediately after Germany surrenders, you will issue an ordinance making it an offence punishable in military courts for any person in Germany wilfully to destroy, remove or conceal records and archives of any nature, whether central, regional or local, and whether of the State or the Nazi Party or belonging to any corporation, association, firm, person or ecclesiastical body. You will not refer in this ordinance to any particular document or classes of documents, since to do so might draw attention to your intention to secure them, and increase the prospect of their being destroyed or concealed.

3. You may at any time require the German authority or individual who may be in a position to do so to give you any help you may need in connection with the discovery, seizure, custody, preservation, disposal or study of German records and archives.

The directive was approved by the War Cabinet, Official Committee on Armistice Terms and Civil Administration on July 10, 1944; A.C.A.O./P(44)82 (Revise).

4. You will so far as possible arrange for the preservation from destruction or concealment of all German records and archives. Priority lists of those over which you should take immediate steps to get control as soon as you enter Germany are being supplied to you separately. With regard to those not included in these lists, you will be guided by the directives relating to the various matters to which these records and archives refer and will take appropriate measures to preserve those which are needed for the fulfilment of your directives on these matters.

5. It is probable that a central record office will be established on a tripartite basis in Berlin or some other central place to supervise the custody of records and archives as a whole, including those not immediately required for purposes of administration, demilitarisation, etc., and to ensure that all duly authorised persons can obtain access to records, or copies of them, which they may need in order to carry out their tasks. Its duties will include: (a) ensuring that all necessary steps are taken for the preservation and safe custody of records and archives of all kinds;

(b) co-ordinating and approving applications by Allied agencies and their representatives to study or consult German records and archives not in their immediate custody, and seeing that they are, as far as possible, given access to the documents they require;

(c) assuming direct responsibility for the preservation and safe custody of the records and archives of State or Party offices which are dissolved or cease to exist;

(d) making arrangements for copying or photographing records and archives as may be required;

(e) preventing damage to the value of records and archives by their dispersal;

(f) assembling the information needed for compiling the reports referred to in paragraph 8 below.

6. Whether or not a central record office is established, you will ensure that all records and archives in the area under your control are properly preserved pending further instructions.

7. Subject to further instructions you will forbid the removal from Germany of any original records or archives. Authorised copies or photographs may be removed.

8. You will report from time to time what archives and records you have secured, and what their condition is. You will also report any destruction, removal or concealment of archives and records carried out by the Germans.

50 Circulated unofficially to his colleagues in the European Advisory Commission by the British representative on July 13, 1944, this draft directive was issued as Directive No. 14 in the Handbook of Directives presented by Sir William Strang to the European Advisory Commission on October 27, 1944. In a covering letter to Ambassador Winant on July 13, 1944, Sir William Strang stated that the directive was designed to give effect to the Instrument of Surrender and to General Order No. 1. In the British drafts of these two documents, presented to the European Advisory Commission earlier, both required German authorities to furnish information and documents requested by Allied Representatives, and to permit Allied authorities entry into any building or property for the purpose of obtaining documents or information required. German authorities were required to furnish facilities, assistance and personnel for this purpose. For more detailed information, see ante, pp. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75] ff.

51 For correspondence on the protection and salvage of artistic and historic monuments, see vol. ii, pp. 1031 ff.

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Naples (Brandt) 702.6265/7–1244: Telegram

[Document 1006]

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Naples (Brandt)

Washington, July 22, 1944—8 p.m.

407. For Murphy. The Department has given careful consideration to your 2363, July 12, 10 a.m., concerning immunity of enemy consulates. It regrets that it cannot concur in General Wilson’s views. Department’s position remains as expressed in its 2120, July 6, 9 p.m.

For your information, it is doubted if the violation of the German Consulates at Naples and Bari by Allied forces made available to us any more useful information than the Germans would obtain by the systematic violation of our consular premises and archives in Germany and German-occupied Europe. Most of the material mentioned in your 2363 is of research interest and appears not to have direct bearing on military campaign. Information of interest to the United Nations, for postwar use, which may be contained in enemy consulates could be secured by appropriate clauses in the armistice after Germany has been defeated.

Hull

The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 840.414/7–2444: Telegram

[Document 1007]

The American Representative on the Advisory Council for Italy (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Rome, July 24, 1944—2 p.m.
[Received July 24—11:26 a.m.]

49. From Reber. Reference Department’s 345, July 11, to Naples.52 A reply to Department’s telegraphic instruction No. 897, March 25, 1944, received through Political Advisor’s office AFHQ was made by memorandum to Algiers.

Assurances have been given by Italian Foreign Office that no records containing information of value to Allied Governments will be removed except by authorized representatives.53 Little information has been discovered as most of the confidential records were destroyed in September or removed to Republican Foreign Office in the north.54 Italian Foreign Office states that authorized representatives of Allied Governments are, of course, free to inspect existing files. A cursory inspection has been made by intelligence agencies in search for specific information. Little was found of any value. Two reports relating to the German defense system have been removed and forwarded to G–2 AFHQ55 and 15 of telegrams relating to German withdrawal from the League of Nations56 was deposited with Political Section ACC.57 Some additional information is being secured through search of records at former Ministry of Popular Culture. Full reports on these are being transmitted by mail to the Department. [Reber.]

Kirk

52 Not printed; it requested a reply to instruction 897, March 25, 1944 (see footnote 30, p. 1482 [Pg. 1482 includes portions of Doc. 997 and Doc. 998]).

53 See telegram 236, June 22, to Naples, p. 1486 [Pg. 1486 includes portions of Doc. 1001 and Doc. 1002].

54 The capital of the neo-fascist “Repubblica Sociale Italiana” was located at Said on Lake Garcia and the diplomatic corps was located at Brescia and at Venice

55 Intelligence Section, Allied Force Headquarters.

56 October 14, 1933.

57 Allied Control Commission.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.00110 E.A.C./9–544

[Document 1008]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

No. 17881 London, September 5, 1944.
[Received September 8.]

Subject: European Advisory Commission: Policy with respect to enemy diplomatic and consular property.

Sir: With reference to the policy to be applied after the surrender of Germany to enemy diplomatic and consular property, I have the honor to report that the United States Delegation on the European Advisory Commission is interested in clarifying U.S. policy in connection with several directives which it is preparing or has already prepared for eventual tripartite negotiation in the Commission.

It is understood that the Secretary of State requested the Secretary of War in a letter dated June 29, 1944, to approve a policy statement regarding enemy diplomatic and consular property captured in the territory of third Powers. This statement apparently was expected to be applicable both to the pre-surrender and the post-surrender periods since the Secretary of State mentioned that if approved the statement would be sent to the Embassy at London for presentation to the European Advisory Commission as the policy of the U.S. Government. (Reference JCS 1011 of August 19, 1944.)

It might be useful in examining any such policy to test its applicability in the post-surrender period by the following diagram:

Enemy Diplomatic and Consular Property

Belonging to: Located in:

Germany Germany, Other Axis territory, Liberated territory, Neutral countries

Japan do.

Other enemy countries do.

The question is raised whether it is intended to treat all enemy diplomatic and consular records found in third countries similarly; for example, should German archives be given the same treatment as those of countries which have not been called upon to surrender unconditionally, or should Japanese archives be accorded immunity.

From another angle it raises the question of the jurisdiction of the Allied Representatives in Germany over diplomatic and consular property of Germany and other enemy countries found outside of Germany.

The treatment of enemy diplomatic and consular property has not been specifically covered in the Surrender Terms or in the draft directives which have so far been prepared by the U.S. Delegation. However, Articles 5(b) (ii), 7, 8 and 10 of the Surrender Terms provide authority to take over German information and records in Germany and the draft directive on “Securing and Examining Information and Archives” (Reference: despatch No. 17662 of August 25, 194458 ) implements the Surrender terms in this respect, extending that authority to the areas outside Germany which may be in the sphere of responsibility of the Allied Commanders-in-Chief.

It has been assumed that after the surrender of Germany the tripartite Allied Authority in Germany will have full powers over all official German property wherever located. Directions concerning German property abroad presumably will be included in an appropriate directive on German property. The treatment to be accorded German diplomatic and consular property is not specifically mentioned in the U.S. Delegation’s draft directive on “Disposition of German Officials and Civilians in Occupied Territory” (Reference: despatch No. 17227 of August 2, 194459 ). When the Department comments on that directive it would be helpful to know whether it believes a paragraph on that subject should appropriately be included.

The directive on “Control and Disposal of Nationals, Armed Forces and Property of Enemy Countries Other than Germany” (Reference: despatch No. 17641 of August 24, 194459 ) indicated that all records and property of such countries should be impounded and preserved pending instructions from the Supreme Authority. Here again it is possible that a more definite statement regarding diplomatic and consular property might be considered advisable.

There is no plan at the present time to alter any of the directives which have been submitted or to prepare a separate directive on this subject. If the Department feels that it is a matter which should be covered more specifically, its views should promptly be made known to the U.S. advisers.

Respectfully yours,

For the Ambassador:
E. Allan Lightner, Jr.
Secretary, U.S. Delegation European Advisory Commission

58 Not printed; it transmitted copies of the draft directive prepared by the American Delegation’s Planning Committee on the European Advisory Commission. An extensive revision of this document was undertaken by the Inter-departmental Working Security Committee and the Joint Post-War Committee of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. For the document circulated in the European Advisory Commission, see post, p. 1501 [Pg. 1501 includes portions of Doc. 1011 and Doc. 1012].

59 Not printed.

59 Not printed.

Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, to the Secretary of State Lot 52 M64

[Document 1009]

Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, to the Secretary of State 60

[Washington,] 26 September, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: At the request of the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean, the Combined Chiefs of Staff have considered the question of a policy with respect to enemy diplomatic and consular property captured within the territory of third powers.

The following statement of policy has been approved by the Combined Chiefs of Staff and is understood to have the concurrence of the British Foreign Office: “The bona fide diplomatic and consular property of enemy governments (including their diplomatic and consular archives) and the property of enemy diplomatic and consular personnel, found in the territory of third Powers occupied in the course of hostilities, will be accorded the following treatment: a. If such property is in the custody of the protecting Power, that custody will be respected in every way.

b. If any such property is not in the custody of the protecting Power, it will be safeguarded until such time as the governments represented by the occupying forces may give specific instructions as to its disposition. In such cases important diplomatic and consular archives may be copied, pending disposition, but not confiscated.

“This policy with respect to bona fide diplomatic and consular establishments does not preclude the theater commander at his discretion and on his responsibility from entry and search of premises allegedly diplomatic or consular in character, which he has substantial reason to believe to be or to have been recently used for clandestine warlike operations against his own forces or examination of which he believes to be essential to the security of his own forces, communications and operations. In the case of property in the custody of the protecting power, the theater commander will request the representatives of that power for permission to search the premises. If such permission is refused or unreasonably delayed, however, entry and search by the theater commander is not precluded. In all such cases a full report must be rendered to the governments to which he is responsible justifying the entry and search.”

The concurrence of the Department of State in the above statement of policy is requested,62 in order that all United States and British theater commanders may be promptly informed of this policy.63

Attention is invited to the fact that the second paragraph of the above policy differs in some respects from that previously forwarded to you in a letter from the Secretary of War dated 29 August 1944.64

Sincerely yours,

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
William D. Leahy
Admiral, U.S. Navy

60 Enclosure A to JCS 1011/2, September 30, 1944: “A Policy with respect to enemy diplomatic and consular property captured within the territory of Third Powers.”

62 The Secretary of State informed Admiral Leahy on September 29, 1944, that “the Department perceives no objection to the statement of policy quoted in your letter of September 26 and concurs in your informing United States and British theater commanders of the policy stated therein.” (Enclosure B to J.C.S. 1011/2, September 30, 1944, not printed.)

63 After approval by the Department of State and the Foreign Office, this recommendation was dispatched to the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean, as Fan 433 on September 30, 1944; not printed.

64 Letter not printed.

Memorandum by the Legal Adviser (Hackworth) to the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger) 740.00119 EAC/9–544

[Document 1010]

Memorandum by the Legal Adviser (Hackworth) to the Chief of the Division of Central European Affairs (Riddleberger)

[Washington,] October 17, 1944.

Mr. Riddleberger: I have received your memorandum65 to which is attached a copy of despatch no. 1788166 (“European Advisory Commission: Policy with respect to enemy diplomatic and consular property”).

It is understood that the policy to be followed in the matter relates only to the post-surrender period. The suggested policy to be followed in the pre-surrender period was outlined in a letter from Admiral Leahy to the Secretary of State of September 26, 1944, in which the concurrence of the Department to the adoption of that policy was requested. Such concurrence was furnished in a letter of September 29, 1944 to Admiral Leahy.67

It would seem that the measures to be taken must depend primarily upon the terms of the surrender instruments. There would not appear to be any rule of international law which would prohibit the inclusion in the surrender terms, by specific language or necessary implication, of an obligation to turn over to the United Nations or to the representatives of such nations, diplomatic and consular archives wheresoever located, which would include the repatriation of archives located abroad. In the alternative, the surrender instruments could obligate the enemy states to render the archives available for inspection, even though they are not physically placed in the custody of the representatives of the United Nations. Such a power could be made broad enough to authorize the examination of diplomatic and consular archives in neutral countries, a matter that will be discussed more fully in the concluding part of this memorandum.

The record indicates that surrender terms have been imposed upon and accepted by Italy68 and Rumania;69 that the terms of surrender to be imposed upon Germany70 have been drafted in final form by the European Advisory Commission and that no agreement has as yet been reached as to the terms to be imposed upon Bulgaria,* Hungary,* and Japan.71

In the case of Italy, Article 35 of the long surrender terms provides: “The Italian Government will supply all information and provide all documents required by the United Nations. There shall be no destruction or concealment of archives, records, plans or any other documents or information.”

The above language is somewhat ambiguous, but its intent and tenor seem to be that the Italian Government should retain control over its archives, and should supply individual documents to the United Nations. As a practical matter, since Italy is a co-belligerent, the likelihood of the United Nations requiring or demanding complete possession of the Italian archives would appear to be remote.

The Rumanian armistice terms contain no provision with regard to the custody of archives or the furnishing of information, which leads to the inference that the Rumanian Government is to keep control and custody of its archives wherever located, including, of course, diplomatic and consular archives. Nevertheless, it is fair to assume that if the United Nations require information with regard to any matter covered by the armistice terms, as, for example, war crimes (Article 14 of the Armistice provides that: “The Rumanian Government and High Command undertake to collaborate with the Allied (Soviet) High Command in the apprehension and trial of persons accused of war crimes”), the Rumanian Government would be obligated to furnish that information.

In the case of Germany, the surrender terms have not as yet been imposed on that country. However, the terms have been agreed upon by representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union, so it is unlikely that the terms as they will be imposed upon Germany wall differ from the proposed terms now embodied in the definitive draft.

As indicated in the Embassy’s despatch no. 17881 of September 5, 1944, Articles 5b (ii), 7, 8, and 10 of the surrender terms provide authority to take over German information and records in Germany. However, these clauses relate primarily to the furnishing of information of a military nature and do not mention diplomatic and consular archives specifically. Nevertheless, by Article 12 of the surrender terms the United Kingdom, the United States of America, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics are given very broad powers over Germany. It would seem that a directive issued under authority of Article 12 calling upon the German authority to repatriate their diplomatic and consular archives and turn them over to the Allied representatives would be entirely consonant with the meaning and purport of that clause. In the alternative, a directive obligating the German authorities to agree to an examination of their archives wheresoever situated would seem to be equally permissive, though such a procedure might encounter some of the difficulties noted below.

In view of the fact that diplomatic and consular archives of an enemy country located outside that country present a more difficult problem, that such archives may contain information of extreme value to the military occupant and the Allied Powers, and that countries in which these archives are located, particularly neutral countries and protecting powers in countries of the Allies, may well decline to turn them over or permit their inspection by the Allied representatives in the absence of specific authorization from the enemy country, it would seem that this matter deserves special consideration.

Regardless of whether it may be found to be desirable to examine such archives, it is suggested that the terms of surrender should make this possible. They might provide that all official archives and records of the enemy country wherever located, whether within or without that country, shall remain intact and shall be available to the Allied representatives upon request directed to the custodian of such archives and records.

It is not suggested that the terms of surrender already agreed upon should be reopened for this purpose but rather that this should be borne in mind with respect to terms not already agreed upon. In the case of Germany it may be possible, as already indicated, to accomplish the purpose under Article 12 of the terms of surrender providing for the issuance by the Allied representatives of proclamations, orders, ordinances and instructions laying down additional requirements concerning political, administrative, economic, financial, military and other matters arising from the surrender of Germany. Whether neutral countries would honor such proclamations, orders, etc., so far as concerns diplomatic and consular records in those countries, cannot be foreseen.

It is to be supposed that records of value in neutral countries and in the satellite countries will have been destroyed or removed before the departure of the enemy diplomatic and consular officers but this may not always be true. Consequently, provisions such as have been indicated above might lend something of value to the Allied Powers, particularly as to the over-all aims and purposes of the enemy countries, war crimes, and kindred subjects. In any event the matter would seem to be worthy of consideration.

G[reen] H. H[ackworth]

65 Not printed.

66 Dated September 5, p. 1493 [Pg. 1493 includes portions of Doc. 1007 and Doc. 1008].

67 See footnote 62, above.

68 For text of the Italian Armistice signed September 3, 1943, see Department of State, United States and Italy, 1936–1946: Documentary Record, p. 51; for text of Additional Conditions of the Armistice with Italy, signed September 29, 1943, see ibid., p. 55.

69 For text of the Rumanian Armistice signed at Moscow on September 13 (as of September 12), 1944, see Department of State Executive Agreement Series No. 490, or 59 Stat. (pt. 2) 1712; for correspondence relating to the Rumanian Armistice, see vol. iv, pp. 133 ff.

70 For text of the Draft Instrument for the Unconditional Surrender of Germany, see p. 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 134].

* The proposed Bulgarian and Hungarian terms of surrender are quite similar to the present Rumanian terms, discussed later. [Footnote in the original. For text of the Bulgarian Armistice signed at Moscow on October 28, 1944, see Executive Agreement Series, No. 437, or 58 Stat. (pt. 2) 1498; for correspondence, see vol. iii, pp. 300 ff. For text of the Hungarian Armistice signed at Moscow on January 20, 1945, see Executive Agreement Series No. 456, or 59 Stat. (pt. 2) 1321; for correspondence, see vol. iii, pp. 847 ff.]

* The proposed Bulgarian and Hungarian terms of surrender are quite similar to the present Rumanian terms, discussed later. [Footnote in the original. For text of the Bulgarian Armistice signed at Moscow on October 28, 1944, see Executive Agreement Series, No. 437, or 58 Stat. (pt. 2) 1498; for correspondence, see vol. iii, pp. 300 ff. For text of the Hungarian Armistice signed at Moscow on January 20, 1945, see Executive Agreement Series No. 456, or 59 Stat. (pt. 2) 1321; for correspondence, see vol. iii, pp. 847 ff.]

71 For text of the “Terms between the United States of America and the Other Allied Powers and Japan, signed at Tokyo Bay, September 2, 1945,” see Executive Agreement Series No. 493, or 59 Stat. (pt. 2) 1733.

The Acting Secretary of State to Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy Lot 52 M64

[Document 1011]

The Acting Secretary of State to Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy 72

Washington, November 22, 1944.

My Dear Admiral Leahy: I refer to the Department’s letter of September 29, 1944* which informed you that the Department perceived no objection to the statement of policy regarding the treatment of enemy consular and diplomatic property which was discussed in your letter of September 26.† It added that the Department concurred in your informing the United States and British theater commanders of the policy stated therein.

It was the Department’s understanding of your letter of September 26 that it will rest with the supreme commander in each theater to decide in each instance whether or not he shall exercise the discretion and responsibility conferred upon him for entry and search of actual or alleged diplomatic or consular premises which may be in the custody of the neutral protecting Power. I bring this point up because of the possibility that unless exercise of this discretionary power is closely guarded the United States Government may encounter certain difficulties in respect of the protests addressed to the Japanese Government in the past regarding disrespect of American diplomatic and consular property and in respect of certain important American diplomatic and consular establishments which are still vulnerable to mistreatment by the German enemy.

I attach for your information a very short memorandum on this subject the substance of which it might be advisable to provide to theater commanders for their background guidance.73

Sincerely yours,

E. R. Stettinius, Jr.

[Annex]

Memorandum Regarding Entry by Military Authorities to Diplomatic and Consular Premises of an Enemy Power

1. The Japanese military authorities have repeatedly searched American diplomatic and consular premises in the Far East. So far they have not undertaken to give any excuse for their action although we have lodged many strong protests against their action on the grounds of incompatibility with international practice. If military forces of the United States should enter and search enemy diplomatic and consular premises on an extensive basis or even once without amply proven justification other than a naked allegation of military necessity the Japanese Government would be provided, even at this late date, with an unanswerable defense against our protest.

2. The search of the German Embassy at Rome by Allied military authorities was amply justified on the basis of the proof presented and the espionage and sabotage material actually found on the premises. If the material found had been only of a long-range academic or planning value such as that found by Allied forces in the German Consulkte [sic] at Bari, an entirely different development of the incident might have been expected, including a protest from the German Government and retaliation by that Government. It is noted that the German Government by its silence has accepted the situation at Rome.

3. Many important American diplomatic and consular establishments are in areas still under the control of the German forces. The passport and visa records of those offices constitute one of the principal means with which can be combatted post-war efforts of war criminals and Nazi agents falsely to assume the identity of persons entitled to enter the Western Hemisphere. An implementation of policy which would induce German violation of these premises would imperil the safety and integrity of those important records, which are irreplaceable.

4. In view of the foregoing the grave responsibility for any decision to search consular or diplomatic premises of the enemy which have been previously entrusted to the protection of a neutral power should be borne personally by the Supreme Theater Commander, who is in the best position to evaluate the various considerations entering into such a decision.

72 Enclosure D to J.C.S. 1011/3.

* Enclosure “B” to J.C.S. 1011/2. [Footnote in the original. Letter not printed, but see footnote 62, p. 1496 [Pg. 1496 includes portions of Doc. 1009 and Doc. 1010].]

† Enclosure “A” to J.C.S. 1011/2. [Footnote in the original. For text, see p. 1495 [Pg. 1495 includes portions of Doc. 1008 and Doc. 1009].]

73 Paragraphs 1 through 3 of the memorandum were approved by the Combined Chiefs of Staff in CCS. 659/6, December 24, 1944, not printed. A note by the Combined Secretariat indicates that the recommendations were forwarded to the Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force (Eisenhower), to the Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean (Wilson), and to the Supreme Allied Commander, Southeast Asia (Mountbatten).

Memorandum by the American Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Winant) 740.00119 EAC/12–144

[Document 1012]

Memorandum by the American Representative to the European Advisory Commission (Winant)74

November 23, 1944

Draft Directive No. 4

Securing and Examining Information and Archives

E.A.C. (44) 3375

1. This directive is issued to you as Commander-in-Chief of the U.S. (U.K.) (U.S.S.R.) forces of occupation. Identical directives are being issued simultaneously to the Commanders-in-Chief of the forces of occupation of the other two Allies. In this directive, the phrase “Control Council” refers to the three Allied Commanders-in-Chief acting jointly. The words “you” or “you in your zone” refer to each of the Commanders-in-Chief as zone commander and, where applicable, to the Inter-Allied Governing Authority (Komendatura) in the “Greater Berlin” area.

2. Reference is made to the pertinent provisions of the “Unconditional Surrender of Germany”* and to the pertinent provisions of the General Order,† You will enforce and implement in your zone of occupation the surrender terms and general orders as they relate to securing and examining information and archives, in accordance with the policies and instructions hereinafter set forth.

3. In this directive the word “archives” covers all records, books, documents, papers, files and other data belonging to the State or any agency of government in Germany, whether central, regional or local, or belonging to the Nazi Party or any of its auxiliary organs, or belonging to financial, industrial and commercial institutions and individuals engaged in foreign commercial or financial activities. The words “scientific and industrial information” cover all German or German controlled military and civil plans, drawings, models, records, formulae and other data and equipment relating directly or indirectly to scientific and industrial processes, research and developments.

4. Immediately upon surrender, you will, in your zone, seize or secure: a. All archives located in all military establishments and all establishments of the Government and of the former Nazi Party and its auxiliary organs; and

b. All scientific and industrial information located in military or government establishments and in those private establishments which any of the three Allied Commanders-in-Chief may designate.

5. You also will seize or secure all other archives and scientific and industrial information wherever located within your zone which are desired by the agencies of your government or by the Control Council or which you consider should be seized or secured or which may be designated by accredited representatives of either of the other two Allied Commanders-in-Chief.

6. You will report to the Control Council the location and general nature of all archives and of all scientific and industrial information seized or secured by you.

7. You will permit any representative of either of the other two principal Allied Governments appointed therefor by the appropriate Allied Commander-in-Chief, or any representative of any of the several United Nations and Associated States authorized therefor by the Control Council, to have access to any archives and scientific and industrial information within your zone. You will furnish such accredited representatives with appropriate assistance in their examination of archives and scientific and industrial information.

8. In the examination of archives and scientific and industrial information for your own purposes or in permitting their examination by others, you will take all practicable precautions to prevent their dispersal or disorganisation or the disturbance of the manner of their filing and classification. You will not permit any archives or scientific and industrial information to be removed from your zone, unless such removal is approved by the Control Council.

9. You are authorised to require any person to furnish information relating to any archives or scientific and industrial information, and to require the German authorities to provide archivists and other specialist services for the preservation, storage, cataloguing or interpretation of any archives or scientific and industrial information.

10. You will coordinate your policy and procedures respecting the preservation, storage, cataloguing, treatment, examination and reproduction of archives and scientific and industrial information with those which may be established by the Control Council.

11. Further instructions on securing and examining information and archives relating to enemy equipment are contained in the directives on the disposal of enemy equipment, on the “Disposition of German or German Controlled Aircraft, Equipment and Facilities”, and on the “Disposition of German or German Controlled Naval Craft, Equipment and Facilities”.76

12. In carrying out the provisions of this directive in your zone you will respect in every way bona fide diplomatic and consular archives and property belonging to enemy governments other than Germany and to the diplomatic and consular personnel of such governments, provided such archives and property are in the custody of the protecting power. You will safeguard such archives and property which are not in the custody of the protecting power, pending further instructions from the Control Council as to their disposition.

74 Transmitted to the Department by the Ambassador in the United Kingdom in his despatch 19592, December 1, 1944; received December 8.

75 Circulated by the American Representative to the European Advisory Commission on November 23, 1944.

* Including Articles 5, 7(a) and 8. [Footnote in the original.]

† Including new paragraph following 2; sub-paragraph 10(a); new subparagraph following 15(a); paragraph 37; new paragraph following 37; and paragraph 38. [Footnote in the original.]

76 Neither printed.

Extract Reprinted From the “Handbook for Military Government in Germany Prior to Defeat or Surrender”, Issued by the Office of the Chief of Staff, SHAEF, December 1944 [Document 1013]

Extract Reprinted From the “Handbook for Military Government in Germany Prior to Defeat or Surrender”, Issued by the Office of the Chief of Staff, SHAEF, December 1944

December 1944

part iii

Chapter XVI—Monuments, Fine Arts and Archives

Section II

Archives—General

1196. Every Military Government activity in Germany will entail the use of German public documents, business papers, files and records of every kind, official and unofficial. Military, political, administrative, business, and historical interests will be equally concerned in them. The preservation of such records and files is of the utmost importance in connection with disarmament, the eradication of Nazi institutions, the control of property, and generally for the imposition of control. The Military Government Officer will assist the accomplishment of these objectives of military operations in Germany by securing, sealing and preserving records and files and by co-operation with Military Intelligence and other Allied agencies in making such records available.

1197. The European word “archives” is used hi this Handbook as it embraces all accumulations of documents, both active and historical, and whether public or private. Ancient and modern are frequently preserved together, even forming continuous series. This Section applies, therefore, to German archives of all sorts, whether central, regional or local; whether of the Reich or the Nazi Party or belonging to any corporation, association, firm, person or ecclesiastical body; whether ancient or modern; whether housed separately in a special repository or preserved in the Office in which they are compiled.

Policy

1198. It is the policy of the Supreme Commander to ensure the preservation from destruction, alteration or concealment of all German records, documents, plans or archives of value to the attainment of the objectives of Military Government. (This policy is also set forth in Chapter III, Part I, of this Handbook.)

1199. Army Group Commanders will take such steps as are necessary to carry out the above policy. Supreme Headquarters will issue a List of Archives of Western Germany, containing classifications of records and archives of interest to Military Government and specific instructions for the guidance of military personnel in taking steps for their preservation.

1200. Army Group Commanders will seize and hold records and archives of interest to Military Government in cases where they deem such action is necessary for their preservation or as they may be instructed by subsequent directives of Supreme Headquarters.

1201. With respect to such of these records and archives as are not seized and held by them, Army Group Commanders will, in so far as the military situation permits, supervise their custody and preservation and will make provision for their availability to authorized persons where necessary for the continued functioning of organizations and agencies permitted to operate by Military Government.

1202. Records and archives may be of greatest value in the location in which they were created. Therefore, unless required for military purposes or safe preservation no attempt should be made to remove them. When possible duplicates should be made for sending elsewhere.

1203. Care should be used in handling of records and archives in order to avoid disorganizing them and possibly rendering them useless. Inventories, catalogues, indices, etc., should be preserved with the records to which they relate.

1204. Army Group Commanders will take such steps as are consistent with military necessity to ensure that no unnecessary or wanton damage is done to German records and archives by troops under their command. They will, at their discretion, place public buildings or other places containing records and archives of value to Military Government out-of-bounds/off limits to troops.

1205. Army Group Commanders will require German authorities to give them any assistance they may need in connection with the discovery, seizure, custody, preservation, disposal or study of German records and archives. Full responsibility for the preservation of records and archives not seized and held by Army Group Commanders will be placed on German authorities.

1206. Army Group Commanders will ensure that responsibility for the preservation of records and archives is placed on all Military Commanders. Military Government and Intelligence Officers will extend full co-operation and assistance to each other with respect to preservation of records and archives in which each is primarily interested.

Instructions to Military Government Officers

1207. Military Government Officers are responsible for carrying out the above policy.

1208. The attainment of the policy of the Supreme Commander with respect to German records and archives will require the attention of every Military Government officer. Although a few Military Government specialist officers may be available, the magnitude of the task and the fact that the records and archives are essential to Military Government operations in almost every field make it a subject of general interest.

1209. The preservation of records and archives is made the responsibility of every Military Commander. The particular interest of G–2/Int. is apparent, particularly in military and Nazi party records. Other staff divisions will have an interest in records of German agencies with which they are concerned. Military Government Detachment Commanders must co-ordinate records and archives activities with other interested elements of the staff, in particular to ensure that all elements have access to records and archives, but that they are not removed from their location except when necessary.

1210. Supreme Headquarters will issue a List of Archives of Western Germany containing classifications and locations of records and archives and guidance for all Military Government officers and military personnel in taking steps for their preservation.

1211. The Military Government Officer will facilitate in every possible way the use of records and archives under his control (particularly “live” records) by authorized users. He will, as far as practicable, ensure that the users are impressed with the necessity of handling the contents of the archives with care and that they are replaced after examination in the order in which they were found. Instances in which archives seem to have been removed, in whole or in part, or tampered with, will be reported.

1212. The problem of securing business or administrative archives in current use presents great practical difficulty. The type and importance of the business or administration and its archives and the likelihood of destruction, alteration or dispersal will have to serve as the guide for determining the manner and extent to which the German employees will be allowed to use them.

Policy and attitude of the Department of State with regard to censorshipPolicy and attitude of the Department of State with regard to censorship

[1014] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, March 8, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 5:58 p.m.]

800.711/74: Telegram

[1015] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 17, 1944—4 p.m.

800.711/74: Telegram

[1016] The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, May 6, 1944—8 p.m. [Received 9:02 p.m.]

800.711/77: Telegram

[1017] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, May 13, 1944—midnight.

800.711/79a: Telegram

[1018] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, May 18, 1944—midnight.

740.0011 European War 1939/34701a: Telegram

[1019] The Counselor of Embassy in the United Kingdom (Bucknell) to the Secretary of State

London, May 25, 1944—4 p.m. [Received May 25—3:55 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/34356: Telegram

[1020] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 3, 1944—midnight.

740.0011 European War 1939/34428: Telegram

[1021] The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, July 3, 1944—3 p.m. [Received July 4—12:26 a.m.]

800.711/7–344: Telegram

[1022] The Director of Censorship (Price) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

Washington, July 4, 1944.

811.711/7–444

[1023] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, July 6, 1944—5 p.m.

800.711/7–344: Telegram

[1024] The Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the Director of Censorship (Price)

Washington, July 21, 1944.

811.711/7–444

[1025] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 27, 1944—5 p.m. [Received 9 p.m.]

740.0011 European War/7–2744: Telegram

[1026] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 29, 1944—midnight.

740.0011 European War 1939/7–2744: Telegram

[1027] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 31, 1944—5 p.m. [Received July 31—11:40 a.m.]

740.0011 EW/7–3144: Telegram

[1028] The Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the Director of Censorship (Price)

Washington, October 19, 1944.

811.711/10–744

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 800.711/74: Telegram

[Document 1014]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, March 8, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 5:58 p.m.]

1878. For Dunn1 from Phillips.2 It would be helpful in dealing with questions involving censorship control in liberated areas if I might be informed whether such censorship should be used solely as a military measure or might be broadened in scope to include such matters as trade information, etc., for use in the post war period. My personal understanding is that it should be used only as a military expedient but I should appreciate receiving the Department’s views. [Phillips.]

Winant

1 James Clement Dunn, Director of the Office of European Affairs.

2 William Phillips, Political Adviser at the Headquarters of the Supreme Allied Commander, London.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 800.711/74: Telegram

[Document 1015]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 17, 1944—4 p.m.

2021. For Phillips. Embassy’s 1878, March 8, 5 p.m. Our feeling is that censorship should be based solely on military considerations and should not be used for any other purpose.

Hull

The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State 800.711/77: Telegram

[Document 1016]

The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, May 6, 1944—8 p.m.
[Received 9:02 p.m.]

1478. From Murphy.3 LPSO censorship branch is operating under a directive, promulgated during my absence, which constitutes outright political censorship on Yugoslav matters. It specifically prohibits press mention of: (1) suggestions that Partisans largely Communist organization; (2) attacks on Tito4 and his National Committee or King Peter5 and his Government; (3) anything concerning Peter-Tito relationships which would be harmful to better understanding between them; (4) Allied attitude toward Mihailovic6 or anything particularly derogatory to him; (5) any attack on Macek7 or Croat Peasant Party. It also enjoins care in passing any extreme reference to any of the small political or military parties in Yugoslavia, whether favorable or unfavorable.

At the meeting of General Wilson’s8 Political Committee next week, I propose to urge very strongly that those parts of the directive imposing censorship on purely political matters be dropped, pointing out that criticism aroused by political censorship undoubtedly does more harm than the appearance of any stories such censorship might stop.

The AFHQ chief censor is a British officer and his directive probably reflects a British point of view, but I believe Macmillan9 will go along with me in opposing political censorship.

As an example of the difficulties that can be expected to multiply if the present censorship policy is continued, the Associated Press has complained very bitterly about holding up an article containing statements by Tito. The AP10 representative here insists that the story is held up on political grounds. I took pains to assure him that the State Department is opposed to political censorship in this theater. [Murphy.]

Chapin

3 Robert D. Murphy, United States Political Adviser, Staff of Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater.

4 Marshal Tito (Josip Broz), President of the National Committee of Liberation of Yugoslavia.

5 King Peter II of Yugoslavia.

6 Draza Mihailovieh, Minister of War and Commander in Chief of the Yugoslav Armed Forces as well as leader of the Chetnik resistance forces.

7 Vladko Machek, President of the Croatian Peasant Party.

8 Gen. Sir Henry Maitland Wilson, Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater of Operations.

9 Harold Macmillan, British Minister Resident, Allied Force Headquarters at Algiers.

10 Associated Press.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) 800.711/79a: Telegram

[Document 1017]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, May 13, 1944—midnight.

1473. For Murphy. Wide and hostile coverage given in all papers here to reports that Tito’s interview with AP stopped by censors of Allied Mediterranean Command despite official assurances that political censorship would not be imposed in Mediterranean Theater. No reasons for suppression Tito interview given in domestic stories.

Article signed by Tito radioed by All Slav Committee Moscow to magazine “Free World” New York, highly critical of Mihailovic, passed without question by United States Office Censorship on grounds that since it came by radio it was subject to enemy interception and presumably known to them. Accordingly criticism aroused by political censorship imposed Algiers will cause more harm than appearance of any stories such censorship might stop, particularly when they can reach United States by means beyond control Algiers censorship.

Department, in concurrence with War and Navy Departments and Office of Censorship, feels strongly that there should be no censorship of purely political matters and agrees entirely with action taken by you in present instance.

In order that we may give the question further attention, please report on composition of Algiers censorship board and any recommendations you may have to offer on its reconstitution. For your confidential information we do not look with favor on participation by an American political representative and see no need for political representation on board if there is to be no political censorship.11

Repeated to London as Department’s no. 3852.

Hull

11 In telegram 1580, May 15, 1944, 7 p.m., from Algiers, Mr. Murphy reported that “There is no Algiers censorship board as such. The Information and Censorship Section, AFHQ, including Public Relations, Psychological Warfare and Censorship branches is headed by an American Brigadier General, with a British Lieutenant Colonel in direct charge of the censorship branch. I believe the present setup is satisfactory.” (800.711/80)

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.0011 European War 1939/34701a: Telegram

[Document 1018]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, May 18, 1944—midnight.

3973. For Phillips. Subject to SCAEF12 approval, Department perceives no objection to the adoption of the tentative suggestion made in your letter of May 3 to Dunn13 to the effect that representatives of Allied Governments might be invited to sit with present committee as occasion dictates. It is felt that such participation should be on a non-voting basis and would serve admirably for consultative purposes; however, it should not be allowed to eliminate the direct liaison between SCAEF and the respective governments on censorship matters.

The Department concurs in your view that direct approach to exiled governments regarding censorship agreements would seem expedient.

Your comments on the Committee and related developments are proving very helpful and it is pleasing to note from your no. 3891 of May 1314 that the notion of an additional committee has been dropped.

Hull

12 Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force.

13 Not printed.

14 Not printed; it informed Mr. Dunn that “the British have withdrawn their suggestion for the proposed inter-Allied coordinating committee on censorship.” (800.711/79)

The Counselor of Embassy in the United Kingdom (Bucknell) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/34356: Telegram

[Document 1019]

The Counselor of Embassy in the United Kingdom (Bucknell) to the Secretary of State

London, May 25, 1944—4 p.m.
[Received May 25—3:55 p.m.]

4204. For Dunn from Phillips. Combined Censorship Committee is now prepared to negotiate censorship agreements with the Norwegian, Belgian and Netherlands Governments. We propose to have a single United States/United Kingdom agreement with each Government signed in behalf of SCAEF by General Gale,15 Chief Administrative Officer at SHAEF (as was done in Belgian labor agreement) thus keeping agreements on a military level. Draft agreement we have prepared as a basis of negotiations points out that purposes to be achieved are (a) Security of forces under SCAEF and of other United Nations.

(b) Enforcement of terms of surrender.

(c) Securing of intelligence of value to United Nations in conduct of the war.

After emphasizing need for integrated censorship policy in territory directly under SCAEF and in liberated territories under indigenous Governments, the draft provides that the (blank) Government agrees: (1) To establish adequate censorship of all civilian communications, national and international.

(2) To maintain this censorship in such areas for such time, and in accordance with methods and purposes requested by SCAEF, and to supply SCAEF and US/UK Governments with any information required by them.

(3) To receive liaison officers from SCAEF, and

(4) To appoint representatives to attend CCC16 meetings when requested.

(5) The (blank) Government may conduct its censorship for such additional purposes consistent with the agreement as it desires. After period has expired for which SCAEF has desired the censorship, (blank) Government may not discontinue or substantially modify such censorship save with prior notice to CCC, and after consideration of any representation CCC may desire to make.

(6) Agreement will not apply to press, radio, or public cinema.17

Peake18 and I have prepared joint letters19 as Chairmen of the CCC to Foreign Ministers of the three Governments explaining in broad terms need for cooperation and SCAEF’S wishes in matter and requesting that they appoint representatives to meet with representatives of the CCC. Negotiations will be carried on separately but simultaneously.

Peake is checking the above with Foreign Office, and I shall appreciate receiving your views urgently by telegraph. Text of draft agreement mailed to you today. [Phillips.]

Bucknell

15 Lt. Gen. Humfrey M. Gale, a British officer.

16 Combined Censorship Committee.

17 A copy of the Revised Draft Agreement was sent by Mr. Phillips to Mr. Dunn in a letter dated May 30, 1944; filed under 800.711/95 with the Minutes of the tenth meeting of the Combined Censorship Committee.

18 Charles Brinsley Pemberton Peake, British Political Liaison Officer to the Supreme Allied Commander, with the personal rank of Minister.

19 Not printed; this letter was sent to the French, Norwegian, Netherlands, and Belgian Governments on June 7. See telegram 5944, July 27, from London, p. 1519 [Pg. 1519 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.0011 European War 1939/34428: Telegram

[Document 1020]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 3, 1944—midnight.

4424. For Phillips. Terms of proposed model agreement outlined in your no. 4204, May 25, 4 p.m., as amended in your no. 4365, May 31, 7 p.m.,20 have been discussed with the War Department and with Director of Censorship.21 The proposals meet with our approval except as covered by the comments in the following two paragraphs.

1. In specifically excluding press, radio and cinema censorship from the proposed agreements, it is assumed that SHAEF has in mind satisfactory arrangements and controls for these media and that there is felt to be no need for specific commitments thereon in these proposed agreements.

2. We do not feel that this Government or the other contracting parties should be committed to the perpetuation of censorship and accordingly recommend that the last sentence of Article Four be amended to read as follows: “Before terminating or substantially modifying the censorship, the blank Government agrees to hold discussions with the Governments of the United Kingdom and of the United States in order that it may be determined whether it is desirable in the common interest of the three Governments to continue the operation of censorship.”

Concerning question 2 raised in the last sentence of your no. 4365, the Department’s policy concerning the basic aim of censorship has not been changed from the view that censorship should be based on military considerations, namely, in broad terms, that which will contribute to the defeat of the enemy. The data furnished with the Department’s air mail instruction no. 4016 of May 2622 is to be regarded as a background guide and is not to be used as an indication of the material that we contemplate obtaining from censorship operations in the liberated areas.

Price requests that contents of this message be made available to Manship.23

Stettinius

20 Latter telegram not printed.

21 Byron Price.

22 Not printed.

23 Charles Phelps Manship, Assistant Director, United States Office of Censor ship, London office.

The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State 800.711/7–344: Telegram

[Document 1021]

The Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) to the Secretary of State

Algiers, July 3, 1944—3 p.m.
[Received July 4—12:26 a.m.]

2257. From Murphy. Repeated to Cairo as No. 93 for MacVeagh.24 The draft press censorship directive for Greek affairs which I prepared to eliminate political censorship (Algiers’s 1786 May 30, 7 p.m.25 repeated to Cairo as 69) was agreed upon by Macmillan and discussed at Supreme Allied Commander’s political committee meeting last month. General Wilson then sent the draft directive to the Middle East Defense Committee with a memorandum reviewing the discussion here, pointing out that the political committee had noted that Middle East’s censorship stops on Greek news constituted political censorship contrary to theatre policy. He added that while the Committee here appreciated the responsibility of the Middle East authorities concerning the security of territories under their command, it felt that censorship from Cairo on press stories concerning Balkan affairs should conform to the theatre policy. General Wilson then said he would be grateful if the Middle East authorities would agree to substitute the draft censorship directive prepared here for that being applied from Middle East on Greek affairs.

The chairman of the Middle East Defense Committee now has replied that he and Leeper26 appreciate the desire to achieve uniformity and that “a time has now come when it has been found possible to lift almost all Greek political stops”. The reply adds that difficult days may be ahead however and that Leeper concurs in the view that the direction on “such political censorship as may from time to time be necessary” should come from Cairo where the Greek Government and the British Ambassador to Greece are.

It will be noted that the British Middle East authorities take the position that some political censorship may be necessary from time to time. If this position is maintained when this reply is discussed by SAC’s political committee I propose to request in view of Department’s 1790 June 627 that the Middle East authorities be instructed to make clear to press correspondents involved whenever any despatches may be censored on political grounds that the American Government has no part in such censorship which is done solely on British responsibility. [Murphy.]

Chapin

24 Lincoln MacVeagh, Ambassador to the Governments of Greece and Yugoslavia established at Cairo.

25 Not printed.

26 Sir Reginald W. A. Leeper, British Ambassador to the Greek Government at Cairo.

27 Not printed.

The Director of Censorship (Price) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) 811.711/7–444

[Document 1022]

The Director of Censorship (Price) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

Washington, July 4, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Berle: You will recall that on November 20 last the Censorship Policy Board considered the future of the Office of Censorship and indicated in general a view that progressive curtailments should be inaugurated. Since that time there have been a number of developments: 1. An agreement has been entered into with British and Canadian Censorships, and is now in effect, providing that Censorship will neither distribute nor collect information regarding the post-war plans of firms and individuals other than enemy firms and individuals, unless there is a direct current relation to the war.

2. By mutual agreement British Censorship has ceased opening any United States mail except that which is terminal to the United Kingdom, and United States Censorship has ceased opening any United Kingdom mail except that which is terminal to the United States. The British Censorship Station at Bermuda has been dismantled and the British Censorship Station at Trinidad has ceased to examine inter-American mail.

3. My proposal for a complete communications blockade of Japan after the collapse of Germany has been submitted by the State Department to a considerable number of foreign governments, and has evoked a sufficient number of replies to indicate that the plan cannot be made effective.

4. The British Government has approved a set of general principles upon which action after the collapse of Germany is to be based.

Attached is a memorandum showing the present situation in detail. I am sending a copy of this to each member of the Censorship Policy Board and I am also providing a copy to Joint Security Control with a request for comment and suggestions. I think it would be a mistake to undertake positive decisions until after the collapse of Germany, but I believe events have reached a stage warranting serious study of the possibilities.

This is a matter regarding which I would like, of course, to have the considered advice of the State Department. I hope you will let me have any thoughts which may occur to you.

Sincerely yours,

Byron Price

[Enclosure]

Future Phases of Censorship

July 4, 1944.

1. Since June, 1943, British, Canadian and United States Censorships have been discussing what policies should be adopted after the defeat of Germany and while Japan remains an enemy. These discussions have been predicated upon a realization that in democratic countries censorship can be employed feasibly only as an instrument of war, and that no censorship measures ought to be adopted or maintained except as they contribute to military victory.

2. It was agreed after some consideration that only general principles could be laid down for the time being, and that decision as to exact procedures must await military developments.

3. It appeared that the ideal solution, if it could be attained, would be to impose a universal communications blockade against Japan, thus making it possible to abandon virtually all other censorship. Accordingly, on September 16, 1943, the Director of Censorship wrote the Secretary of State28 suggesting that the possibilities of such a blockade be explored internationally, even though a remote chance existed that the project would succeed. The State Department did approach various foreign governments,29 soliciting their views as to the feasibility of isolating Japan and Japanese-occupied territories completely by international agreement so as to prevent any communication whatever between the Japanese area and the outside world. The replies to this overture were far from satisfactory.30 Some nations readily accepted the plan in principle31 but others were skeptical.32 The Chinese Government declared there was no possibility of cutting off communication between free and occupied China. This Chinese situation, coupled with the uncertain attitude of the Russian Government,33 appears to dispose of any hope of drawing a tight censorship ring around the Japanese area. Some other solution has to be found.

4. Meantime in the Fall of 1943 the British Prime Minister issued a directive to the British war agencies requiring submission of an outline of policies that were to follow the defeat of Germany. Responsive to this directive, and after discussion with Canadian and United States Censorships, the Director General of British Censorship submitted a paper entitled “Plans for the Transition Period,” a copy of which is attached.34 Recently this paper has been approved by the War Cabinet and may now be regarded as representing the settled policy of the British Government.

5. Late in 1943 the United States Director of Censorship brought the situation to the attention of the Censorship Policy Board. The Board at a meeting held November 20 expressed informally its unanimous opinion that Censorship should look forward to progressive curtailment as the military situation improved, and should cease its operations entirely upon the cessation of hostilities.

6. There are numerous compelling reasons why curtailment must take place upon or shortly after the collapse of Germany, even though the Japanese war continues. Some of the more important are: (a) It may be expected that the British decision already taken, although expressed in vague and general terms, will lead to far-reaching retrenchments on the part of British Censorship once Germany is defeated. For five years the people of the United Kingdom have been faced with an unprecedented conflagration on their very doorstep, even over their doorstep; when this menace suddenly disappears, when the lights are turned on, and when the war has moved half way around the world, the tremendous emotional resurgence of this democratic people may be expected to sweep away as many of the annoyances of war as possible. Censorship is, by its very nature, highly vulnerable to public reaction. It is the belief of well-informed British officials that a very large part of the British Censorship Organization, with which United States Censorship is closely intertwined, will disappear. The event is certain to have popular repercussions in the United States, adding to the practical obstacles which would handicap United States Censorship in any endeavor to continue full scale operations without British collaboration.

(b) Upon the arrival of a state of peace in Europe travel between the United States and European countries will be resumed on a tremendous and probably unprecedented scale. It is to the advantage of the United States commercially that such travel be encouraged. American citizens moving in peaceful areas on the business of reconstruction will not endure placidly the delays and annoyances incident to Censorship examination of their papers. Without an effective travellers’ censorship, censorship of the mail and cables will become far less valuable.

(c) The personnel of Censorship is nearly 90% civilian. Upon the collapse of Germany it may be expected that a large part of this personnel, and particularly those executives holding the most important key positions, will resign from Government service and return to their private affairs. They cannot be replaced on any efficient basis.

(d) It would be most difficult and probably impossible after the surrender of Germany to convince Congress that funds should be made available for continuing Censorship, except on an appreciably reduced basis.

7. In view of all of the above, the question is not whether Censorship activities will be reduced, but in what direction they should be reduced. It still is too soon to make binding decisions, but the following is presented here for purposes of discussion as a possible basis for action to be taken as soon as possible after the German surrender: (a) The domestic press and broadcasting codes should be modified to remove all unnecessary restrictions relating to the Atlantic areas. This modification would not be extensive; it would be confined principally to information about travel and merchant shipping in the Atlantic.

(b) Formal censorship of motion picture films offered for export would be abandoned. It should be understood that all military information in such films, whether news reels or features, must be cleared in advance with the Army and Navy.

(c) All mail and cable censorship between the United States and the United Kingdom would be abandoned. Censorship of radiotelegraph and radiotelephone should be continued because of interceptability.

(d) All censorship between the United States and Canada would be abandoned.

(e) All censorship between continental United States and Puerto Rico would be abandoned, and all censorship between continental United States and Alaska and the Canal Zone would be relaxed in whatever degree the military situation might from time to time permit.

(f) All censorship to and within the Caribbean area would be abandoned, except for spot checks.

(g) Censorship of incoming mail and cables from all sources would be abandoned, except in the case of watch-listed persons or firms or communications from Japanese territory.

(h) Censorship of mail destined for Latin America would be reduced and operated largely on a watch-list basis.

(i) Censorship of cables destined for Latin America would be curtailed and concentrated on specific areas to be determined by developments. Censorship of radiotelegraph and radiotelephone would be continued.

(j) The present 100% censorship of German prisoner-of-war mail would be relaxed and a spot check substituted.

8. In general, Censorship activity should be directed almost completely toward preventing the export of military information to dangerous destinations, and the economic, political and social intelligence functions of Censorship would be abandoned.

9. Upon the surrender of Japan and the establishment of an armistice in the Pacific, all U. S. Censorship should cease, except: (a) military censorship within the occupied areas, to be operated by the Military; and

(b) prisoner-of-war censorship to be operated by the Provost Marshal General.

The Office of Censorship would be completely liquidated.

28 Letter not printed.

29 By circular instruction dated October 8, 1943 (not printed), to the Missions in Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Netherlands, Mexico, New Zealand, Paraguay, Peru, the Union of South Africa, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom, and Uruguay.

30 No record found in Department files of replies from Morocco, Australia, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, and the Union of South Africa.

31 Brazil, Mexico, Peru, and the United Kingdom.

32 The Netherlands and New Zealand; also, the American Embassies in Cuba, Paraguay, and Uruguay considered it inappropriate to approach those governments at the time.

33 The American Embassy in Moscow recommended that the Soviet Government not be approached on the matter because the latter was not at war with Japan.

34 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin) 800.711/7–344: Telegram

[Document 1023]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Algiers (Chapin)

Washington, July 6, 1944—5 p.m.

2112. For Murphy. Your 2257 July 3, 3 p.m. repeated for MacVeagh as No. 93. Our consistent policy has been and is now that there should be no censorship on purely political grounds. All considerations of censorship, in our view, should be those involving military security only. Only exception made is in unauthorized disclosure of diplomatic negotiations or conversations having a direct bearing upon military operations.

In view of foregoing Department sees no necessity for revision of censorship directive prepared by you, approved by Macmillan and as indicated by Wilson entirely consistent with theatre policy.

While Department leaves entirely to your judgment whether or not to request that British authorities be instructed to make clear to American correspondents that portions their despatches censored on political grounds is done solely on British authority, it doubts whether this will achieve the practical results desired for following reasons: 1. Channels are open which are beyond control of British Middle East authorities thus penalizing American correspondents Cairo in that they will be unable, despite our disassociation with political censorship that theatre, to file copy which others at more distant points may file as a result of information bearing interpretation less likely to have balance of that available Cairo; and

2. We have no assurance that our position in matter will be made clear to or accepted by representatives of powerful organs of American public opinion.

Under these circumstances should political censorship, exclusive of exception cited in paragraph 1 above, be imposed despite our opposition and be complained of by American correspondents Cairo or be attacked editorially in United States, Department would be obliged to make official statement that it opposed imposition of such censorship initially and continues to oppose it. Furthermore Department feels that pending such a statement here should matter be protested by American newspapermen to missions in area affected they should be free to make position of Department clear to inquirer.

Repeated to AmEmBalk Cairo as Greek Series No. 40.

Hull

The Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the Director of Censorship (Price) 811.711/7–444

[Document 1024]

The Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the Director of Censorship (Price)

Washington, July 21, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Price: I have your letter of July 4 with attached memorandum outlining future phases of censorship after the cessation of hostilities with Germany and Japan respectively.

The Department fully understands the reasons set forth by you for as rapid a curtailment as possible of censorship activities after the two contingencies above-mentioned have materialized. However, pursuant to your request for comment and suggestions, the following points may be noted:

With respect to subparagraphs (f), (g) and (j) of paragraph 7 of your memorandum, this Department feels that if your facilities will possibly permit thereof it would be desirable to continue full censorship of German prisoner-of-war mail, and of mail destined for certain regions of Latin America, as well as censorship within the Caribbean, for a longer period after the surrender of Germany than is contemplated by your memorandum.

If, following upon German surrender, there should be a recurrence of events such as the Spartacist uprisings,35 the operations of German irregular military forces in the Baltic States,36 the Kapp Putsch 37 the assassinations of Erzberger38 and Rathenau,39 and other similar incidents calculated to disturb public order, it would seem that mail to and from German prisoners-of-war, a large number of whom are still far from a cowed or resigned frame of mind, might well prove a fruitful source of information which would be of value from a security angle. Likewise, in Argentina and in certain regions of the Pacific coast of South America, Axis espionage is so well and solidly organized that upon the surrender of Germany these organizations may be expected to continue their activities, whether or not through the medium of the individuals now operating, for a substantial length of time, and censorship reduced practically to a watch-list basis would not be as of much help as could be desired in curbing their activities. The same considerations would apply, though perhaps in lesser degree, to censorship within the Caribbean area.

As regards subparagraph (g) of paragraph 7, the thought covered by the words “Japanese territory”, at the end thereof, might be more clearly defined by substituting the words “Japan or from countries occupied by or aligned with Japan”.

Finally, with respect to paragraph 7 [8?], subparagraph (b), of the attached British memorandum,40 this Department would prefer to have it explicitly stated that information of the kind there mentioned should be supplied to the State Department, rather than, as it now stands, having the Department impliedly excluded from the receipt of such information.

Sincerely yours,

Adolf A. Berle, Jr.

35 January 5–15, 1919.

36 For reports of German operations in the Baltic States following World War I. see section entitled “The Greene Mission to the Baltic Provinces”, Foreign Relations, 1919, The Paris Peace Conference, vol. xii, pp. 136 ff., passim.

37 March 13–17, 1920. General Baron von Luttwitz, Commander in Chief of Berlin, obtained control of several brigades of the German Army of the Baltic and occupied the German capital on the night of March 12. Dr. Wolfgang von Kapp of Berlin was proclaimed chancellor and Luttwitz was appointed head of the national defense. The movement failed to gain popular support. President Ebert issued an appeal to the workers and a resulting general strike paralyzed the revolutionary government and brought about its collapse.

38 In 1921, a campaign of agitation, centered in Bavaria, was directed against those who had played a part in the formation and signing of the Versailles Treaty. On August 26, 1921, the movement claimed the life of Matthias Erzberger, Centrist leader and former Finance Minister, who had led the commission which arranged the armistice and who also was instrumental in setting up the government which accepted the treaty.

39 On June 24, 1922, Walter Rathenau, a Democrat and Minister for Foreign Affairs in the existing government, was assassinated by extreme Nationalists.

40 Memorandum not printed. Paragraph 8, subparagraph (b) read as follows: “Where any communications remain under Censorship for security reasons no information of any kind should be reported to any Government Department except Naval. Military, Air or Economic Intelligence as to Japan.”

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War/7–2744: Telegram

[Document 1025]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 27, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received 9 p.m.]

5944. For Dunn from Phillips. At a meeting of the Combined Censorship Committee yesterday, Colonel Jacobus, Chief Censorship Officer at SHAEF informed the Committee that he had negotiated and signed on behalf of SHAEF a working agreement with Lt. Colonel Manuel representing the French Controles Techniques (censorship organization) providing for Controles Techniques personnel to operate as SHAEF officers in operational areas and in areas declared by SHAEF to be non-operational, Controles Techniques to operate as the French censorship subject to liaison with SHAEF.

Although the wording of this working agreement differs from the Committee’s proposed draft (based on the Belgian agreement modified in accordance with the Department’s telegram No. 4630 of June 1041 ) which had not as yet been discussed with the French, the substance is the same. The Committee has therefore approved the SHAEF agreement as a satisfactory working arrangement covering immediate needs.

The Committee is of the opinion that if a civil affairs agreement is concluded with the French Committee of National Liberation as the result of the talks now taking place in Washington, it would be advisable for our Committee to negotiate and for General Eisenhower to sign a further agreement with the appropriate representative of the French Committee, confirming on a higher level the present working arrangement, and including a clause to the effect that before the said censorship or control is terminated or substantially modified, the French authorities will hold discussions with the Government of the U.K. and the U.S. to determine whether it is desirable in the common interest that such operation on control be continued. This would make the agreement similar in substance to the others. My concurrence was contingent upon receiving the Department’s approval. May I have your views?

For your information, the Belgians have agreed in writing to the Committee’s draft with a few inconsequential drafting changes.42 The Netherlands representatives have also approved, subject to confirmation by the Netherlands Government, which is expected momentarily.43 These two agreements, it is expected, will be signed at an early date without waiting for the Norwegian Government which has not as yet replied to our note of June 744 presumably because the Norwegian censorship experts have been absent from London. [Phillips.]

Winant

41 Not printed.

42 The Belgian Government formally agreed to sign the draft agreement on June 28.

43 The Netherlands representative approved the draft agreement on July 10 pending confirmation by the Netherlands Government.

44 See footnote 19, p. 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1019 and Doc. 1020]. The Norwegian agreement was signed on September 18. The originals were sent to the Norwegian Government and SHAEF for inclusion in the archives.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.0011 European War 1939/7–2744: Telegram

[Document 1026]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 29, 1944—midnight.

6007. For Phillips. ReEmbs 5944, July 27, 4 [5] p.m. In our negotiations with representatives of the French Committee here on agreements as to civil administration, finance, and other matters, we are discussing a memorandum of agreement relating to publicity arrangements, using as a basis memorandum No. 4 of the agreements discussed between the French representatives and the British Foreign Office. We have proposed to the French that we delete paragraph 1 of the Anglo [Franco] British memorandum No. 4, that we keep substance of all the other paragraphs, and add one paragraph,45 which would provide for freedom from political censorship for American correspondents and news agencies in France.

You no doubt have available Franco British memorandum No. 4. You can yourself decide whether arrangement between SHAEF and French authorities mentioned in your reference telegram is in conformity with our proposed agreed memorandum No. 4 with the French.

Stettinius

45 The proposed text of this paragraph read as follows: “The dispatches of British and American Press representatives intended for publication outside of France shall not be subject to political censorship from any French or Allied source.” The paragraph, however (proposed as article 5), was not written into the final version of Memorandum IV of the Civil Affairs Agreement, dated August 25, 1944. For text of the Agreement, see Department of State Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS) No. 2313, or 2 UST 1714. For correspondence relative to the Civil Affairs Agreement, see Foreign Relations, 1944. vol. iii, pp. 694–730, passim.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 EW/7–3144: Telegram

[Document 1027]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 31, 1944—5 p.m.
[Received July 31—11:40 a.m.]

6075. For Dunn from Phillips. Censorship of publicity media to which you refer in your No. 6007, 29 July, midnight, is the responsibility of the Public Relations Division of SHAEF and is therefore not within the scope of the Combined Censorship Committee which deals with the control of civilian communications transmitted by post, telegraph, travelers and other means.

Inasmuch as No. 4 of the proposed agreement regarding civil administration, finance and other matters does not include arrangements for the control of civilian communications transmitted by post, telegraph, travelers, etc., the Combined Censorship Committee desire to proceed with the negotiation of a separate censorship agreement as outlined in my 5944 of 27 July 5 p.m. May I have your approval?46 [Phillips.]

Winant

46 In telegram 6084, August 2, 1944, 3 p.m., to London, the Department indicated that there was no objection “to the Combined Censorship Committee proceeding with the negotiation of a separate censorship agreement upon the conditions set forth” in the telegram referred to (740.0011 EW/7–2744).

The Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the Director of Censorship (Price) 811.711/10–744

[Document 1028]

The Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the Director of Censorship (Price)

Washington, October 19, 1944.

My Dear Mr. Price: The receipt is acknowledged of your letter of October 747 concerning the probability that the British Ministry of Economic Warfare will discontinue its navicert system shortly after the defeat of Germany with the resultant likelihood that the effectiveness of your censorship of international mail will be seriously impaired, and requesting the Department’s comment on certain alternatives which you set forth as possible ways of meeting that situation.

As indicated in the Department’s letter to you of July 21 in reply to your letter of July 4, outlining future phases of censorship after the cessation of hostilities with Germany and Japan, respectively, the Department is in general in favor of as full an exercise of censorship functions, after the defeat of Germany and prior to the defeat of Japan, as your office may find to be feasible with the available personnel and appropriations.

However, as you state, a decision on how best to meet the situation envisaged in your letter now under reply is one which can only be made on the highest policy levels. Accordingly, a substantial amount of investigation and consultation will be necessary before the Department can give you a more specific reply to your letter of October 7; in the meantime, you may rest assured that this consultation and investigation will be energetically pursued and that a further answer will be sent you as soon as possible.48

Sincerely yours,

Adolf A. Berle, Jr.

47 Not printed. On October 7, 1944, Mr. Price addressed identical letters to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of State advising them that the British Ministry of Economic Warfare intended to discontinue the navicert system after the defeat of Germany. He felt that unless positive action were taken, the effectiveness of the American censorship of international mail would be destroyed. He suggested four possible alternative courses of action: (1) pressure upon the British Government to continue some form of the navicert program until all hostilities had ceased; (2) assumption by the United States of a responsibility similar to that exercised by the Ministry of Economic Warfare and negotiation of diplomatic agreements under which trans-Atlantic mail would be channeled through American ports; (3) control of the situation by force, including use of the United States Navy to control mail as a part of the naval blockade of Japan; (4) joint action to force trans-Atlantic mails into either United States or Brazilian ports by either of the methods outlined in the second and third alternatives. (811.711/10–744)

48 In a reply dated April 6, 1945, Acting Secretary of State Acheson advised Mr. Price that the Department considered only alternative 1 to be practicable; and alternatives 2, 3, and 4 to be politically inexpedient (811.711/10–744).

Appendix: Reorganization of the Department of State Appendix: Reorganization of the Department of State

Editorial Note

“Far-reaching changes in the organization of the Department of State to facilitate the conduct of the foreign relations of the United States, in war and in peace,” were announced on January 15, 1944, by Secretary of State Cordell Hull. The new organization was “designed to free the Assistant Secretaries and principal officers of the Department from administrative duties” in order that they might “devote the greater part of their time to matters of important foreign policy.” Mr. Hull also announced the establishment of two principal committees—a Policy Committee and a Committee on Postwar Programs—and of an Advisory Council on Postwar Foreign Policy. For text of the announcement and of Departmental Order 1218, see Department of State Bulletin, January 15, 1944, pages 43–67. Department of State publication 3580, Postwar Foreign Policy Preparation, 1939–1945 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1949), presents a comprehensive account of administrative arrangements as well as substantive work relating to postwar planning.

For correspondence regarding the resignation of Mr. Hull as Secretary of State on November 21, 1944, and the appointment of Edward R. Stettinius, Jr., as his successor, see Department of State Bulletin, December 3, 1944, pages 649–653. Mr. Stettinius was confirmed by the Senate on November 30 and took the oath of office on December 1. President Roosevelt on December 4 nominated Joseph C. Grew as Under Secretary of State and announced various other appointments (ibid., December 10, 1944, page 685).

Further measures of reorganization were announced on December 20, 1944. These included the grouping of the geographic offices under Assistant Secretaries and the establishment of a Secretary’s Staff Committee and a Coordinating Committee, both of which were to be served by a Joint Secretariat. For text of the announcement and of Departmental Order 1301 of December 20, see ibid., December 17, 1944, Supplement, pages 777–813.

Charts showing the organization of the Department of State as of April 1942, January 1944, and December 1944, are reproduced on the following pages. Additional information concerning the officers and organization of the Department and the Foreign Service at various times may be found in the appropriate volumes of the following official serial publications: United States Government Manual; Official Register of the United States; Biographic Register of the Department of State; Foreign Service List; and Department of State Bulletin.

Index Index1

Acheson, Dean, 1523n [Pg. 1523 is part of Doc. 1028]

Ackermann, Leonard E., 1054n [Pg. 1054 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611], 1062 [Pg. 1062 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1063 [Pg. 1063 is part of Doc. 619], 1070n [Pg. 1070 includes portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627], 1093 [Pg. 1093 is part of Doc. 642], 1097–1098 [Pgs. 1097–1098 include portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1125 [Pg. 1125 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666]

Allied Control Commission in Italy, 1064 [Pg. 1064 includes portions of Doc. 619 and Doc. 620]; in Rumania, 1191 [Pg. 1191 is part of Doc. 724]

Allied Displaced Persons Commission, 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586]

Alphand, Hervé, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 55]

American-Jewish Joint Distribution Committee, 1130n [Pg. 1130 is part of Doc. 670]

American Republics. See Refugees from Europe; also individual countries.

Argentina, 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 929–930 [Pgs. 929–930 include portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514], 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 522], 959 [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 526], 1433–1435 [Pgs. 1433–1435 include portions of Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, and Doc. 945], 1519 [Pg. 1519 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025]

Armour, Norman, 924–925 [Pgs. 924–925 include portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 929 [Pg. 929 is part of Doc. 513], 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 520], 956 [Pg. 956 is part of Doc. 526]

Armstrong, Hamilton Fish, 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521], 945–949 [Pgs. 945–949 include portions of Doc. 521 and Doc. 522]

Arnold, Gen. Henry H., 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

Atcheson, George, Jr., 1351n [Pg. 1351 includes portions of Doc. 864, Doc. 865, and Doc. 866], 1399 [Pg. 1399 includes portions of Doc. 905, Doc. 906, and Doc. 907]

Atlantic Charter, 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

Atrocities. See Nazi atrocities, etc.; United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes; and War criminals.

Australia, 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1283 [Pg. 1283 is part of Doc. 827]

Austria: European Advisory Commission, consideration of questions relative to. See under European Advisory Commission.

Postwar boundary with Germany, U. S. recommendation concerning, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 154], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 154]

Badoglio, Marshal Pietro, 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 276], 508n [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 276]

Balkans (see also Unconditional surrender principle, question of application to Bulgaria, Finland, Hungary, and Rumania; also Bulgaria, Greece, Rumania, and Yugoslavia under Refugees from Europe, etc.): Extension of financial assistance to Americans in the Balkans, 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763]; surrender terms for the Balkan States, European Advisory Commission’s consideration of, 39–40 [Pgs. 39–40 include portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 82], 583–584 [Pgs. 583–584 include portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Ballantine, Joseph W., 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

Baltic States, rescue of refugees from, 1049 [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607], 1160 [Pg. 1160 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698]

Barnes, Lt. Col., 547–548 [Pgs. 547–548 include portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319]

Beaulac, Willard L., 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 269], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]

Been, Joseph, 47–48 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 33]

Beck, Gen. Ludwig, 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 280], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 280], 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

Belgium (see also European Advisory Commission: Civil affairs arrangements for liberated areas, and Consultation with other Allied Governments): Censorship agreement with United States, 1510 [Pg. 1510 includes portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019], 1511n [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1019 and Doc. 1020], 1520 [Pg. 1520 is part of Doc. 1025]

Dumbarton Oaks Proposals, views regarding, 940–941 [Pgs. 940–941 include portions of Doc. 518, Doc. 519, and Doc. 520]

Liberation of Brussels and Antwerp, Sept. 4–5, 1204 [Pg. 1204 includes portions of Doc. 737 and Doc. 738]

Postwar boundary with Germany, U. S. recommendation concerning, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 154], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 154]

Reestablishment of American Consulate General in Antwerp Oct. 17, 1207 [Pg. 1207 includes portions of Doc. 743 and Doc. 744]; of American Embassy, Sept. 14, 1207 [Pg. 1207 includes portions of Doc. 743 and Doc. 744]

Representation on United Nations War Crimes Commission, 1283 [Pg. 1283 is part of Doc. 827], 1290–1298 [Pgs. 1290–1298 include portions of Doc. 832 and Doc. 833]

Swiss representation of Belgian interests in Rumania, 1202–1203 [Pgs. 1202–1203 include portions of Doc. 734, Doc. 735, and Doc. 736]

Beneš, Eduard, 944–945 [Pgs. 944–945 include portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521], 948–949 [Pgs. 948–949 include portions of Doc. 521 and Doc. 522]

Berezhkov, V. M., 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 716n [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 420], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 798 [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 460], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 507]

Berle, Adolf A., Jr., 496–497 [Pgs. 496–497 include portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 302], 1518–1519 [Pgs. 1518–1519 include portions of Doc. 1023, Doc. 1024, and Doc. 1025], 1522–1523 [Pgs. 1522–1523 include portions of Doc. 1027 and Doc. 1028]

Best, Werner, 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Bianchi, João Antonio de, 1425 [Pg. 1425 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932], 1428 [Pg. 1428 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936], 1430 [Pg. 1430 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939]

Bidault, Georges, 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

Biddle, Francis, 1395 [Pg. 1395 includes portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900]

Blanco, Juan Carlos, 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 937 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 518], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 518], 942 [Pg. 942 is part of Doc. 520]

Bogomolov, A. E., 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Boheman, Erik C., 494–495 [Pgs. 494–495 include portions of Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297], 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 596 and Doc. 597], 1039 [Pg. 1039 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 1414 [Pg. 1414 includes portions of Doc. 918 and Doc. 919], 1416 [Pg. 1416 includes portions of Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922]

Bohlen, Charles E., 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 589–590 [Pgs. 589–590 include portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349], 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 452], 933–936 [Pgs. 933–936 include portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518]

Bolivia, 1022n [Pg. 1022 is part of Doc. 580], 1026n [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 584], 1027n [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1086 [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 637]

Bonomi, Ivanoe, 1212n [Pg. 1212 includes portions of Doc. 749 and Doc. 750], 1212 [Pg. 1212 includes portions of Doc. 749 and Doc. 750], 1222 [Pg. 1222 is part of Doc. 761]

Boris III, Tsar of Bulgaria, 1109 [Pg. 1109 is part of Doc. 655], 1456n [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 974]

Bormann, Martin, 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 303], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 303], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 336]

Bowman, Isaiah, 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 382], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 398], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

Brandt, Joel, 1050 [Pg. 1050 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608], 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 618], 1062 [Pg. 1062 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1089–1090 [Pgs. 1089–1090 include portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640]

Brandt, Willy, 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 320]

Brazil: Acceptance of children and other refugees from Europe, 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1033n [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1120n [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1130 [Pg. 1130 is part of Doc. 670], 1156 [Pg. 1156 includes portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693]

Membership in United Nations War Crimes Commission, question of, 1285 [Pg. 1285 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1316 [Pg. 1316 includes portions of Doc. 836 and Doc. 837]

Questions relative to proposed United Nations Organization: Proposal regarding establishment of, 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 526]; seat in Council, question of, 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 424], 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 427], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 428], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 429], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 437], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 442 and Doc. 443], 932–933 [Pgs. 932–933 include portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517], 952–953 [Pgs. 952–953 include portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]

Brown, Aaron, 1444–1445 [Pgs. 1444–1445 include portions of Doc. 958 and Doc. 959], 1449 [Pg. 1449 includes portions of Doc. 965 and Doc. 966]

Bucknell, Howard, Jr., 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, and Doc. 372], 994n [Pg. 994 includes portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, and Doc. 563], 1455n [Pg. 1455 is part of Doc. 974], 1456n [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 974], 1462 [Pg. 1462 is part of Doc. 982], 1462n [Pg. 1462 is part of Doc. 982], 1510–1511 [Pgs. 1510–1511 include portions of Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, and Doc. 1020]

Bulgaria (see also Unconditional surrender principle, question of application to Bulgaria, etc.; and under Refugees from Europe, etc.): Death of King Boris III, 1456n [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 974]; extension of financial assistance to American nationals in Bulgaria, 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763]; surrender terms for, preparation of, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 28], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 29]; U.S.-Soviet cooperation in, question of, 1456 [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 974]

Butler, Nevile, 1434–1435 [Pgs. 1434–1435 include portions of Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, and Doc. 945]

Butler, Richard A., 971 [Pg. 971 includes portions of Doc. 538 and Doc. 539], 976–977 [Pgs. 976–977 include portions of Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545], 979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547]

Byrnes, James F., 1469n [Pg. 1469 is part of Doc. 990]

Cabot, John M., 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 927–930 [Pgs. 927–930 include portions of Doc. 512, Doc. 513, and Doc. 514]

Caceres, Julian R., 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 520], 956 [Pg. 956 is part of Doc. 526]

Cadogan, Sir Alexander, 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 641–642 [Pgs. 641–642 include portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, and Doc. 393], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 711–751 [Pgs. 711–751 include portions of Doc. 415, Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433] passim, 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 764–766 [Pgs. 764–766 include portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 445], 773–805 [Pgs. 773–805 include portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462] passim, 811 [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 465], 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470], 816 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 471], 818–824 [Pgs. 818–824 include portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475], 830n [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 481], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 482], 842–856 [Pgs. 842–856 include portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490] passim, 870 [Pg. 870 is part of Doc. 496], 979–980 [Pgs. 979–980 include portions of Doc. 546, Doc. 547, and Doc. 548]

Caffery, Jefferson, 1207n [Pg. 1207 includes portions of Doc. 743 and Doc. 744]

Caiazzo incident, 1315 [Pg. 1315 is part of Doc. 835], 1315n [Pg. 1315 is part of Doc. 835], 1325 [Pg. 1325 includes portions of Doc. 844 and Doc. 845]

Campbell, Sir Ronald Hugh, 496–497 [Pgs. 496–497 include portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 1412n [Pg. 1412 includes portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, and Doc. 917], 1412 [Pg. 1412 includes portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, and Doc. 917], 1428 [Pg. 1428 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936], 1430 [Pg. 1430 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939], 1439 [Pg. 1439 includes portions of Doc. 950 and Doc. 951]

Campbell, Sir Ronald I., 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 697–698 [Pgs. 697–698 include portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409], 1007 [Pg. 1007 is part of Doc. 570], 1237–1238 [Pgs. 1237–1238 include portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, and Doc. 779], 1243 [Pg. 1243 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784], 1339 [Pg. 1339 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857]

Canada, 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565], 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1120n [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1129 [Pg. 1129 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 779 and Doc. 780], 1513 [Pg. 1513 includes portions of Doc. 1021 and Doc. 1022], 1514 [Pg. 1514 is part of Doc. 1022], 1515 [Pg. 1515 is part of Doc. 1022], 1516 [Pg. 1516 is part of Doc. 1022]; views regarding Dumbarton Oaks Proposals, 933–936 [Pgs. 933–936 include portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518]

Canaris, Adm. Wilhelm, 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 269], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 280]

Cannon, Cavendish W., 612–613 [Pgs. 612–613 include portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375]

Capel-Dunn, Colonel, 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 507]

Cárcano, Miguel Angel, 1433n [Pg. 1433 includes portions of Doc. 941 and Doc. 942], 1434 [Pg. 1434 includes portions of Doc. 942 and Doc. 943]

Cárdenas, Juan Francisco de, 1416–1417 [Pgs. 1416–1417 include portions of Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, and Doc. 923], 1419 [Pg. 1419 includes portions of Doc. 927 and Doc. 928], 1432 [Pg. 1432 includes portions of Doc. 940 and Doc. 941]

Carroll, Wallace, 1455n [Pg. 1455 is part of Doc. 974], 1456 [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 974]

Castillo Nájera, Francisco, 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 937–938 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 518], 942–943 [Pg. 942 is part of Doc. 520], 943–944 [Pgs. 943–944 include portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521]

Castro, Hector D., 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 929 [Pg. 929 is part of Doc. 513]

Censorship, policy and attitude of Department of State with regard to, 1507–1523 [Pgs. 1507–1523 include portions of Doc. 1014, Doc. 1015, Doc. 1016, Doc. 1017, Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, Doc. 1022, Doc. 1023, Doc. 1024, Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, Doc. 1027, and Doc. 1028]

Chang, P. H., 1399 [Pg. 1399 includes portions of Doc. 905, Doc. 906, and Doc. 907]

Charles, Sir Noel, 65n [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 1124n [Pg. 1124 is part of Doc. 664], 1140 [Pg. 1140 includes portions of Doc. 678 and Doc. 679], 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 880 and Doc. 881], 1377 [Pg. 1377 includes portions of Doc. 881 and Doc. 882], 1378 [Pg. 1378 includes portions of Doc. 882 and Doc. 883], 1384 [Pg. 1384 includes portions of Doc. 887 and Doc. 888], 1389 [Pg. 1389 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893]

Chauvel, Jean, 1238–1239 [Pgs. 1238–1239 include portions of Doc. 778 and Doc. 779]

Chiang Kai-shek, 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 303], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 476]

Chile, 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 520], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 526], 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 526], 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 1021n [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1026n [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 584], 1027n [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1085 [Pg. 1085 is part of Doc. 637], 1115 [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 1157n [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694]

China: Chinese Communists, 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 452]

Military strength, 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 410]

Participation in Dumbarton Oaks Conversations. See Dumbarton Oaks Conversations: Anglo-American-Chinese phase; also under Dumbarton Oaks Conversations: Activities, etc., preliminary to Conversations.

Representation on United Nations War Crimes Commission, 1274 [Pg. 1274 includes portions of Doc. 819, Doc. 820, and Doc. 821], 1284 [Pg. 1284 is part of Doc. 827], 1328 [Pg. 1328 includes portions of Doc. 846 and Doc. 847], 1338 [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 854 and Doc. 855], 1399 [Pg. 1399 includes portions of Doc. 905, Doc. 906, and Doc. 907]

Churchill, Winston S.: Balkans, 610–611 [Pgs. 610–611 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

Correspondence with Roosevelt, 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 180–182 [Pgs. 180–182 include portions of Doc. 94, Doc. 95, and Doc. 96], 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, and Doc. 100], 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 117], 513–515 [Pgs. 513–515 include portions of Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 517–518 [Pgs. 517–518 include portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287], 564–566 [Pgs. 564–566 include portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332], 836–838 [Pgs. 836–838 include portions of Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482], 849–850 [Pgs. 849–850 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, and Doc. 489]

France, 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516]

International Security Organization, preliminaries to the establishment of, 636–637 [Pgs. 636–637 include portions of Doc. 385, Doc. 386, and Doc. 387], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 429], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 445], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 447], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 479], 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516], 935 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 517]

Italy, 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 47]

Miscellaneous, 474–475 [Pgs. 474–475 include portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 475n [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 253], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 340], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 429], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 447], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 479], 937 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 518], 1007 [Pg. 1007 is part of Doc. 570], 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885]

Occupation questions, 180–182 [Pgs. 180–182 include portions of Doc. 94, Doc. 95, and Doc. 96], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 340–341 [Pgs. 340–341 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164]

Statement by the Allies to the German Army, question of, 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 517–518 [Pgs. 517–518 include portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 290], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 290], 565–566 [Pgs. 565–566 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332]

Surrender terms for Germany, 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 101], 359n [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

Cicognani, A. G., 995–996 [Pgs. 995–996 include portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565], 1069n [Pg. 1069 includes portions of Doc. 624 and Doc. 625]

Clark Kerr. See Kerr, Sir Archibald J. K. Clark.

Clattenburg, A. E., Jr., 1214–1215 [Pgs. 1214–1215 include portions of Doc. 751 and Doc. 752]

Cohen, Benjamin V., 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 398], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480]

Colban, Erik, 1283 [Pg. 1283 is part of Doc. 827], 1343 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 861], 1364 [Pg. 1364 includes portions of Doc. 873 and Doc. 874]

Colina, Rafael de la, 956–957 [Pg. 956 is part of Doc. 526], 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 526]

Colombia, 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 938–939 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 518], 943–944 [Pgs. 943–944 include portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521], 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1157n [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694], 1177 [Pg. 1177 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], 1188 [Pg. 1188 includes portions of Doc. 720 and Doc. 721], 1190 [Pg. 1190 includes portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724]

Combined Censorship Committee, 1510–1511 [Pgs. 1510–1511 include portions of Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, and Doc. 1020], 1519–1520 [Pgs. 1519–1520 include portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025], 1521–1522 [Pgs. 1521–1522 include portions of Doc. 1026, Doc. 1027, and Doc. 1028]

Combined Chiefs of Staff, 340–341 [Pgs. 340–341 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 203], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 230], 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 241], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, and Doc. 247], 1315 [Pg. 1315 is part of Doc. 835], 1325 [Pg. 1325 includes portions of Doc. 844 and Doc. 845], 1326 [Pg. 1326 is part of Doc. 845], 1339 [Pg. 1339 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857], 1340 [Pg. 1340 is part of Doc. 857], 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 880 and Doc. 881], 1384 [Pg. 1384 includes portions of Doc. 887 and Doc. 888], 1409 [Pg. 1409 is part of Doc. 914], 1457 [Pg. 1457 is part of Doc. 975], 1480–1481 [Pgs. 1480–1481 include portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, and Doc. 997], 1485 [Pg. 1485 is part of Doc. 1000], 1488 [Pg. 1488 includes portions of Doc. 1002 and Doc. 1003], 1495–1496 [Pgs. 1495–1496 include portions of Doc. 1008, Doc. 1009, and Doc. 1010], 1500n [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1011]

Combined Civil Affairs Committee, 972 [Pg. 972 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540]

Conference of Allied Ministers of Education, held at London Apr. 5–29, 965–980 [Pgs. 965–980 include portions of Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, and Doc. 548] Emergency aid program, U. S. and British consideration of, 976–977 [Pgs. 976–977 include portions of Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545], 979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547]

Participation in Conference: Attitudes of Canada, China, and New Zealand, 965 [Pg. 965 is part of Doc. 533]; U. S. acceptance of British invitation, and composition of delegation, 967–969 [Pgs. 967–969 include portions of Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, and Doc. 537], 973–974 [Pgs. 973–974 include portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541]

Proposal for a United Nations organization for educational and cultural reconstruction, development and post-Conference consideration of, 966–967 [Pgs. 966–967 include portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535], 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536], 969–973 [Pgs. 969–973 include portions of Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540], 974–975 [Pgs. 974–975 include portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 979–980 [Pgs. 979–980 include portions of Doc. 546, Doc. 547, and Doc. 548]; report to Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt, 977–978 [Pgs. 977–978 include portions of Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545]

Cooper, Alfred Duff. See Duff Cooper, Alfred.

Cornwall-Jones, Gen. A. T., 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 241], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 308]

Costa Rica, 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 526], 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 1021n [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1026n [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 584], 1027n [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 1072 [Pg. 1072 is part of Doc. 628], 1084 [Pg. 1084 is part of Doc. 637], 1096 [Pg. 1096 is part of Doc. 644], 1115n [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 1116n [Pg. 1116 includes portions of Doc. 659 and Doc. 660], 1157n [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694]

Cretzianu, Alexander, 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 1044n [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 1045–1046 [Pgs. 1045–1046 include portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, and Doc. 605]

Cuba, 1022n [Pg. 1022 is part of Doc. 580], 1026n [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 584], 1027n [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1033n [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1157n [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694]

Cutter, Col. R. Ammi, 1469 [Pg. 1469 is part of Doc. 990]

Cyrenaica. See under Refugees from Europe, etc.

Czechoslovakia (see also European Advisory Commission: Consultation with other Allied Governments and under Refugees from Europe, etc.): Civil affairs agreement with United States, proposed, 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]; Dumbarton Oaks Proposals, views regarding, 948–949 [Pgs. 948–949 include portions of Doc. 521 and Doc. 522]; interests of American nationals in Czechoslovakia, 1217 [Pg. 1217 includes portions of Doc. 753 and Doc. 754]; post-war boundary with Germany, U. S. recommendation concerning, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 154], 308–309 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 154]; representation on United Nations War Crimes Commission, 1283 [Pg. 1283 is part of Doc. 827], 1338 [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 854 and Doc. 855], 1341 [Pg. 1341 is part of Doc. 858], 1353 [Pg. 1353 includes portions of Doc. 866 and Doc. 867], 1360–1361 [Pgs. 1360–1361 include portions of Doc. 869, Doc. 870, Doc. 871, and Doc. 872], 1367 [Pg. 1367 includes portions of Doc. 876 and Doc. 877]; restoration of 1937 borders, 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 231]

Dahlerus, Birger, 574–578 [Pgs. 574–578 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338]

Deane, Gen. John R., 557–580 [Pgs. 557–580 include portions of Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, and Doc. 340]

De Baer, General, 1283 [Pg. 1283 is part of Doc. 827], 1290 [Pg. 1290 includes portions of Doc. 832 and Doc. 833], 1318 [Pg. 1318 includes portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1337 [Pg. 1337 is part of Doc. 853], 1363 [Pg. 1363 is part of Doc. 873]

de Gaulle, Gen. Charles, 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

Dejean, Maurice, 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 67], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 198, Doc. 199, and Doc. 200]

de Kauffmann, Henrik, 1475n [Pg. 1475 is part of Doc. 993]

De Moor, Mr., 1284 [Pg. 1284 is part of Doc. 827], 1299 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 834], 1343 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 861], 1354 [Pg. 1354 includes portions of Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869]

Denmark: Postwar boundary with Germany, U. S. position, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 154], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 154]; war crimes committed in, 1291–1292 [Pg. 1291 is part of Doc. 833]

Despres, Emile, 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 224], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]

de Valera, Eamon, 1429n [Pg. 1429 includes portions of Doc. 936 and Doc. 937], 1437 [Pg. 1437 includes portions of Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948], 1438 [Pg. 1438 includes portions of Doc. 948 and Doc. 949], 1439 [Pg. 1439 includes portions of Doc. 950 and Doc. 951], 1442 [Pg. 1442 includes portions of Doc. 954, Doc. 955, and Doc. 956], 1443 [Pg. 1443 includes portions of Doc. 956 and Doc. 957], 1445 [Pg. 1445 is part of Doc. 959], 1447–1448 [Pgs. 1447–1448 include portions of Doc. 961, Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965], 1449 [Pg. 1449 includes portions of Doc. 965 and Doc. 966], 1452 [Pg. 1452 includes portions of Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]

Dewey, Thomas E., 890n [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 506], 922 [Pg. 922 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 1261 [Pg. 1261 includes portions of Doc. 809 and Doc. 810]

Diplomatic and consular property of enemy governments and property of enemy diplomatic and consular personnel in liberated areas, U. S. policy regarding, 1471–1506 [Pgs. 1471–1506 include portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, Doc. 993, Doc. 994, Doc. 995, Doc. 996, Doc. 997, Doc. 998, Doc. 999, Doc. 1000, Doc. 1001, Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, Doc. 1004, Doc. 1005, Doc. 1006, Doc. 1007, Doc. 1008, Doc. 1009, Doc. 1010, Doc. 1011, Doc. 1012, and Doc. 1013] Enemy records and archives, availability to and utilization by Allied Governments, question of, 1481–1482 [Pgs. 1481–1482 include portions of Doc. 996, Doc. 997, and Doc. 998], 1483 [Pg. 1483 is part of Doc. 998], 1484 [Pg. 1484 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1486–1488 [Pgs. 1486–1488 include portions of Doc. 1001, Doc. 1002, and Doc. 1003], 1492–1493 [Pgs. 1492–1493 include portions of Doc. 1006, Doc. 1007, and Doc. 1008]

European Advisory Commission, discussions concerning securing and examining of information and archives, 1484 [Pg. 1484 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1489–1491 [Pgs. 1489–1491 include portions of Doc. 1003, Doc. 1004, and Doc. 1005], 1493–1495 [Pgs. 1493–1495 include portions of Doc. 1007, Doc. 1008, and Doc. 1009]; draft directive, 1501–1506 [Pgs. 1501–1506 include portions of Doc. 1011, Doc. 1012, and Doc. 1013]

Treatment to be accorded to enemy diplomatic and consular premises and personnel, U. S. directive and discussions regarding, 1471–1481 [Pgs. 1471–1481 include portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, Doc. 993, Doc. 994, Doc. 995, Doc. 996, and Doc. 997], 1482–1483 [Pgs. 1482–1483 include portions of Doc. 997 and Doc. 998], 1484–1485 [Pgs. 1484–1485 include portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1488–1489 [Pgs. 1488–1489 include portions of Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, Doc. 1004, and Doc. 1005], 1492 [Pg. 1492 includes portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007], 1495–1501 [Pgs. 1495–1501 include portions of Doc. 1008, Doc. 1009, Doc. 1010, Doc. 1011, and Doc. 1012]

Displaced persons. See Germany: Prisoners of war and foreign nationals held by Germany.

Dominican Republic, 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 1030 [Pg. 1030 is part of Doc. 587], 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1033n [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1120n [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1157n [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694]

Donovan, Gen. William J., 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, and Doc. 301], 556–557 [Pgs. 556–557 include portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325], 566–569 [Pgs. 566–569 include portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 339], 580–582 [Pgs. 580–582 include portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]

Doolittle, Hooker A., 1483 [Pg. 1483 is part of Doc. 998]

DuBois, Josiah E., Jr., 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 224], 1120 [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1125–1126 [Pgs. 1125–1126 include portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666], 1127 [Pg. 1127 includes portions of Doc. 667 and Doc. 668], 1131 [Pg. 1131 includes portions of Doc. 670 and Doc. 671]

Duff Cooper, Alfred, 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 1235n [Pg. 1235 is part of Doc. 775], 1236 [Pg. 1236 includes portions of Doc. 775, Doc. 776, and Doc. 777], 1239 [Pg. 1239 is part of Doc. 779], 1241 [Pg. 1241 includes portions of Doc. 781 and Doc. 782]

Dulles, Allen W., 497n [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 269], 510n [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

Dulles, John Foster, 890n [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 506], 921–922 [Pgs. 921–922 include portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc. 510]

Dumbarton Oaks Conversations preparatory to establishment of an international organization for the maintenance of peace and security, 614–923 [Pgs. 614–923 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, Doc. 414, Doc. 415, Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc. 510] Activities, discussions, and exchanges of papers preliminary to Conversations: Agenda, tentative, 649–650 [Pgs. 649–650 include portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]

American Group, composition and assignments, 646–650 [Pgs. 646–650 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399]

Chinese participation in Conversations, question of, and Soviet position, 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 637–638 [Pgs. 637–638 include portions of Doc. 386, Doc. 387, and Doc. 388], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 644–646 [Pgs. 644–646 include portions of Doc. 395, Doc. 396, and Doc. 397], 651–652 [Pgs. 651–652 include portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401], 669–670 [Pgs. 669–670 include portions of Doc. 402, Doc. 403, and Doc. 404], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 696–697 [Pgs. 696–697 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, and Doc. 408]; Chinese delegation, 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]

Dates for Conversations, question of, 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 396], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 411], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]

Delegations, 697–699 [Pgs. 697–699 include portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, and Doc. 410], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488]

Moscow Conference documents (1943), cited as basis for discussions, 614n [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 376], 622n [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 628–629 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 381], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 404], 691–692 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 404]; Soviet position on Four Nation Declaration, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]

Preliminary draft papers: Exploratory discussions relative to, and suggestions for preparation and exchange of, 622–623 [Pgs. 622–623 include portions of Doc. 377, Doc. 378, and Doc. 379], 627–636 [Pgs. 627–636 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, and Doc. 386], 640–642 [Pgs. 640–642 include portions of Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, and Doc. 393]

Plans for handling Conversations, and tentative agenda, U.S., 647–650 [Pgs. 647–650 include portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]

Summaries of topics for discussion: British, 623–625 [Pgs. 623–625 include portions of Doc. 378, Doc. 379, and Doc. 380]; U.S., 625–626 [Pgs. 625–626 include portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]

Tentative proposals for a general international organization: British draft (July 22), 670–693 [Pgs. 670–693 include portions of Doc. 403, Doc. 404, and Doc. 405]; Chinese proposals (Aug. 23), 718–728 [Pgs. 718–728 include portions of Doc. 421, Doc. 422, and Doc. 423]; Soviet memorandum (Aug. 12), 706–711 [Pgs. 706–711 include portions of Doc. 414, Doc. 415, and Doc. 416]; U.S. draft (July 18), 653–669 [Pgs. 653–669 include portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]; U.S. memorandum and statement of Dec. 23 and 29, 1943, 614–622 [Pgs. 614–622 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]

Publicity: Press announcement (Aug. 1) by Acting Secretary of State on planned opening of Conversations, 698–699 [Pgs. 698–699 include portions of Doc. 408, Doc. 409, and Doc. 410]; press statement by President Roosevelt (June 15) on postwar security organization program, 642–643 [Pgs. 642–643 include portions of Doc. 392, Doc. 393, and Doc. 394]

Roosevelt’s views: Approval of U.S. arrangements and tentative agenda, 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]; press statement of June 15, 642–643 [Pgs. 642–643 include portions of Doc. 392, Doc. 393, and Doc. 394]; views on U.S. plans of Dec. 23, 1943, 620–622 [Pgs. 620–622 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]

Separate Anglo-American-Soviet and Anglo-American-Chinese talks, arrangements for, 637–638 [Pgs. 637–638 include portions of Doc. 386, Doc. 387, and Doc. 388], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 644–646 [Pgs. 644–646 include portions of Doc. 395, Doc. 396, and Doc. 397], 651–652 [Pgs. 651–652 include portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401], 669–670 [Pgs. 669–670 include portions of Doc. 402, Doc. 403, and Doc. 404], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 696–697 [Pgs. 696–697 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, and Doc. 408]

Smaller nations, considerations regarding, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 389], 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416]

Soviet Union: Attitude and exchange of views with U. S. and British Governments, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 384], 637–638 [Pgs. 637–638 include portions of Doc. 386, Doc. 387, and Doc. 388], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 643–646 [Pgs. 643–646 include portions of Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, and Doc. 397], 650–652 [Pgs. 650–652 include portions of Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401], 669–670 [Pgs. 669–670 include portions of Doc. 402, Doc. 403, and Doc. 404], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 696–697 [Pgs. 696–697 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, and Doc. 408], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 411], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413], 712–713 [Pgs. 712–713 include portions of Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419]; delegation, 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]; memorandum on an international security organization (Aug. 12), 706–711 [Pgs. 706–711 include portions of Doc. 414, Doc. 415, and Doc. 416]; Svegda article, 694–696 [Pgs. 694–696 include portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Territorial settlements and territorial trusteeships, views of Joint Chiefs of Staff as to military factors in relation to, 699–703 [Pgs. 699–703 include portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]

Timing of establishment of world security organization, question of, 636–637 [Pgs. 636–637 include portions of Doc. 385, Doc. 386, and Doc. 387]

Aggression, acts of, discussions concerning (see also Breaches of the peace, infra), 710–711 [Pgs. 710–711 include portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 420], 725–726 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 422], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 490], 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 493], 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 494], 896–898 [Pg. 896 is part of Doc. 506], 907–908 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 507], 909–912 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 507]

Aims and principles of an international organization, 615–616 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 376], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 379], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 653–654 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 402], 670–673 [Pgs. 670–673 include portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 685–686 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 404], 706–707 [Pgs. 706–707 include portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 415], 715–716 [Pgs. 715–716 include portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 421], 718–719 [Pgs. 718–719 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 746–747 [Pgs. 746–747 include portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 491], 890–891 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 506], 902–903 [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 507]

Amendments to the basic document, question of, 729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 423], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 435], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 448], 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482], 900 [Pg. 900 is part of Doc. 506], 914 [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 507]

American Group: Composition and assignments, 647–650 [Pgs. 647–650 include portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]; meetings, 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 446], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 459], 808–809 [Pgs. 808–809 include portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474], 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 482], 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502]

Anglo-American-Chinese phase, Sept. 29–Oct. 7, 850–900 [Pgs. 850–900 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506] Arrangements for, 786–787 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 452], 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 482], 841–842 [Pgs. 841–842 include portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483], 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 484 and Doc. 485]

Ceremonial opening session, 850–851 [Pgs. 850–851 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490]

Draft document on establishment of international organization, arrangements for publication, 861 [Pg. 861 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491], 863 [Pg. 863 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 869–871 [Pgs. 869–871 include portions of Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 502]

Joint Formulation Group, meetings and proposals of, 865–866 [Pgs. 865–866 include portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 867–868 [Pgs. 867–868 include portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 498 and Doc. 499], 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 885–888 [Pgs. 885–888 include portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504]

Joint Steering Committee, meetings of, 851–861 [Pgs. 851–861 include portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, and Doc. 491], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 491], 866–869 [Pgs. 866–869 include portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 871–880 [Pgs. 871–880 include portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498]

Plenary sessions, 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 491], 863–865 [Pgs. 863–865 include portions of Doc. 492, Doc. 493, and Doc. 494], 884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 502]

Special Military Group, 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494]

Anglo-American-Soviet phase, Aug. 21–Sept. 28, 713–850 [Pgs. 713–850 include portions of Doc. 418, Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, and Doc. 489] Draft document on establishment of international organization, developments concerning, 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 838–839 [Pgs. 838–839 include portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482], 844 [Pg. 844 is part of Doc. 484]

Hull, Cordell, meetings and discussions with President Roosevelt, Under Secretary Stettinius, and other officials, 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 437], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 768–769 [Pgs. 768–769 include portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 769–770 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 445], 772–776 [Pgs. 772–776 include portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448], 780–782 [Pgs. 780–782 include portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461], 809–810 [Pgs. 809–810 include portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 811 [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 465], 823–824 [Pgs. 823–824 include portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 831–834 [Pgs. 831–834 include portions of Doc. 478, Doc. 479, and Doc. 480]; with Congressmen, 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 445], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 445]

Progress reports on meetings: American Group, 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 446], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 459], 808–809 [Pgs. 808–809 include portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474], 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 482]

Formulation Groups, 746–747 [Pgs. 746–747 include portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 761–764 [Pgs. 761–764 include portions of Doc. 440, Doc. 441, and Doc. 442], 767–768 [Pgs. 767–768 include portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445], 771–772 [Pgs. 771–772 include portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 789–791 [Pgs. 789–791 include portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, and Doc. 455], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 805–806 [Pgs. 805–806 include portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, and Doc. 463], 807–808 [Pgs. 807–808 include portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464]

Joint Steering Committee, 714–715 [Pgs. 714–715 include portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 420], 732–743 [Pgs. 732–743 include portions of Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 430], 750–753 [Pgs. 750–753 include portions of Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, and Doc. 434], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 435], 756–758 [Pgs. 756–758 include portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437], 764–767 [Pgs. 764–767 include portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, and Doc. 444], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 446], 776–778 [Pgs. 776–778 include portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc. 449], 789–793 [Pgs. 789–793 include portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 794–795 [Pgs. 794–795 include portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458], 796–797 [Pgs. 796–797 include portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 798–804 [Pgs. 798–804 include portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461], 818–820 [Pgs. 818–820 include portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 824–826 [Pgs. 824–826 include portions of Doc. 474, Doc. 475, and Doc. 476], 828–830 [Pgs. 828–830 include portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478], 838–839 [Pgs. 838–839 include portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Legal Subcommittee, 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 755–756 [Pgs. 755–756 include portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 446]

Plenary sessions, 713–714 [Pgs. 713–714 include portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 715–716 [Pgs. 715–716 include portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 844–845 [Pgs. 844–845 include portions of Doc. 484 and Doc. 485]

Special Military Subcommittee, 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 753–754 [Pgs. 753–754 include portions of Doc. 433 and Doc. 434]

Subcommittee on Organization (see also Formulation Groups, supra), 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 421], 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 434], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

Subcommittee on Security (see also Formulation Groups, supra), 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]

Recessing of meetings, question of, 816–818 [Pgs. 816–818 include portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 832–833 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 479], 835–836 [Pgs. 835–836 include portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481]

Roosevelt–Stalin exchanges of messages, 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 782–783 [Pgs. 782–783 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, and Doc. 451], 788–789 [Pgs. 788–789 include portions of Doc. 452, Doc. 453, and Doc. 454], 806–807 [Pgs. 806–807 include portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, and Doc. 464]

Smuts, Jan Christian, message to Churchill concerning Soviet attitude, 836–838 [Pgs. 836–838 include portions of Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482]; Roosevelt’s comment, 849–850 [Pgs. 849–850 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, and Doc. 489]

Soviet refusal to sign joint agreement with Chinese, 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 458]

Stettinius, Edward R., meetings and discussions with— President Roosevelt, 730–732 [Pgs. 730–732 include portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425], 743–746 [Pgs. 743–746 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430], 758–759 [Pgs. 758–759 include portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437], 772–776 [Pgs. 772–776 include portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448], 784–787 [Pgs. 784–787 include portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 812–813 [Pgs. 812–813 include portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 814–815 [Pgs. 814–815 include portions of Doc. 468, Doc. 469, and Doc. 470], 831–834 [Pgs. 831–834 include portions of Doc. 478, Doc. 479, and Doc. 480], 842–843 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 483]

Secretary of State Hull and other officials, 748–750 [Pgs. 748–750 include portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 437], 768–770 [Pgs. 768–770 include portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 772–776 [Pgs. 772–776 include portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448], 778–782 [Pgs. 778–782 include portions of Doc. 448, Doc. 449, and Doc. 450], 783–788 [Pgs. 783–788 include portions of Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 793–794 [Pgs. 793–794 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, and Doc. 458], 804–805 [Pgs. 804–805 include portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462], 809–812 [Pgs. 809–812 include portions of Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467], 813–814 [Pgs. 813–814 include portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 821–822 [Pgs. 821–822 include portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474], 822–824 [Pgs. 822–824 include portions of Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475], 831–834 [Pgs. 831–834 include portions of Doc. 478, Doc. 479, and Doc. 480], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486]

Assembly of international organization. See General Assembly, infra.

Brazil, question of permanent seat on Council of international organization, 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 424], 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 427], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 428], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 429], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 437], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 442 and Doc. 443], 932–933 [Pgs. 932–933 include portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517], 952–953 [Pgs. 952–953 include portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]

Breaches of the peace (see also Aggression, supra), 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 402], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 761–762 [Pgs. 761–762 include portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 442 and Doc. 443], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 490], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 491], 896–898 [Pg. 896 is part of Doc. 506]

Chinese participation. See under Activities, etc., preliminary to Conversations, supra, and Anglo-American-Chinese phase, supra.

Communiqués: Discussions concerning drafting and issuance of, 816–818 [Pgs. 816–818 include portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 482], 844 [Pg. 844 is part of Doc. 484], 845–846 [Pgs. 845–846 include portions of Doc. 484, Doc. 485, and Doc. 486], 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 880–881 [Pgs. 880–881 include portions of Doc. 497, Doc. 498, and Doc. 499], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 502], 888–889 [Pgs. 888–889 include portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506]

Draft texts, 817–818 [Pgs. 817–818 include portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 840–841 [Pgs. 840–841 include portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483]

Text issued to the press Oct. 9, 889–890 [Pgs. 889–890 include portions of Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506]

Council of international organization. See Security Council, infra.

Cultural relations, question of, 723–724 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 422], 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 494]

Delegations to Conversations, 697–699 [Pgs. 697–699 include portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, and Doc. 410], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488]

Dependent areas, treatment of, 631–632 [Pgs. 631–632 include portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 445]

Disarmament and regulation of armaments, 662–663 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 402], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 452], 807 [Pg. 807 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464], 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 475], 912–913 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 507]

Economic and social cooperation, and proposed establishment of Economic and Social Council, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 376], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 379], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 380], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 381], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 381], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 663–665 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 402], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 402], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 404], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 415], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 420], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 421], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 422], 722–723 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 422], 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 732–733 [Pgs. 732–733 include portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 734–736 [Pgs. 734–736 include portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 431], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 435], 760n [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 443], 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 776 [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 449], 783 [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 452], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 452], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 807 [Pg. 807 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464], 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 494], 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496], 898–899 [Pg. 898 is part of Doc. 506], 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 507]

European Advisory Commission, relation to international organization, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 21]

Executive Council of international organization. See Security Council, infra.

France, question of inclusion as member of Council of international organization, 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 424], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 427], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 428], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 428], 743–744 [Pgs. 743–744 include portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 437], 764–765 [Pgs. 764–765 include portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443], 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 490]

General Assembly of international organization, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 376], 618–619 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 376], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 655–657 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 402], 673–674 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 404], 708–709 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 415], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 421], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 422], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 435], 807 [Pg. 807 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464], 891–893 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 506], 904–906 [Pg. 904 is part of Doc. 507], 928–929 [Pg. 928 is part of Doc. 513]

Human rights, 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 475], 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 477], 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482], 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 483]

Interim security arrangements, question of, 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 454], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 459], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 464], 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 900 [Pg. 900 is part of Doc. 506], 914–915 [Pgs. 914–915 include portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508]

Internal affairs of states, question of non-intervention by international organization, 741–742 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 428], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 464], 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 477], 838–839 [Pgs. 838–839 include portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

International air force, proposed, 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 420], 748–749 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 431], 769–770 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 445], 772–773 [Pgs. 772–773 include portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 452], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 458], 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 490], 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 493], 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494]

International Court of Justice, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 376], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 380], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 402], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 404], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 415], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 420], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 422], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 446], 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 483], 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 493], 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 494], 895 [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 506], 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 507]

International Labor Organization, 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 404], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 404], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 406], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 422]

International police force, proposed, 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 404], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 406], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 422], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 447]

Liquidation of League of Nations and transition to new international organization, 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 483], 857–858 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 490], 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 885–888 [Pgs. 885–888 include portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504], 915–921 [Pgs. 915–921 include portions of Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509]

Membership of international organization (see also Voting, infra): Admission and expulsion or withdrawal of states, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 404], 717–718 [Pgs. 717–718 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 422], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 424], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 425], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 427], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 428], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 429], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 430], 774–775 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 447], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 448], 783 [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451], 891 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 506], 903–904 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 507]

Council membership, permanent and nonpermanent, 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 427], 739–740 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 428], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 454], 791–793 [Pgs. 791–793 include portions of Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 475]; Brazil and France, question of permanent seats for, 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 424], 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 427], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 428], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 428], 743–744 [Pgs. 743–744 include portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 437], 764–765 [Pgs. 764–765 include portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443], 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 490], 932–933 [Pgs. 932–933 include portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517], 952–953 [Pgs. 952–953 include portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]

Initial membership, question of, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 404], 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 742–743 [Pgs. 742–743 include portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 430], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 431], 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433], 756–758 [Pgs. 756–758 include portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437], 776–777 [Pgs. 776–777 include portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 477], 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 483], 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 483], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 486], 856–857 [Pg. 856 is part of Doc. 490], 879–880 [Pgs. 879–880 include portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498]

Non-member states, 727–728 [Pgs. 727–728 include portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

Obligations of member states, 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 727 [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 422]

Method and procedure for establishing international organization, question of, 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 668–669 [Pgs. 668–669 include portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403], 690–693 [Pgs. 690–693 include portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

Military aspects of postwar organization (see also International air force, supra), 661–663 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 402], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 422], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 753–754 [Pgs. 753–754 include portions of Doc. 433 and Doc. 434], 762–763 [Pgs. 762–763 include portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 443], 767–768 [Pgs. 767–768 include portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445], 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453], 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 458], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 464], 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 829–830 [Pgs. 829–830 include portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 491], 892–893 [Pg. 892 is part of Doc. 506], 896–897 [Pg. 896 is part of Doc. 506], 910–912 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 507]

Name and headquarters of international organization, suggestions and discussions, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 404], 731–732 [Pgs. 731–732 include portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 745–746 [Pgs. 745–746 include portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 447], 789–790 [Pgs. 789–790 include portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 458], 848–849 [Pgs. 848–849 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 490], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 490]

Non-participating governments, reactions to Dumbarton Oaks Proposals, 924–959 [Pgs. 924–959 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526] Canada, views of, 933–936 [Pgs. 933–936 include portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518]

European countries, views in response to U. S. request for: Belgium, 940–941 [Pgs. 940–941 include portions of Doc. 518, Doc. 519, and Doc. 520]; Governments-in-exile in London (Netherlands, Poland, and Czechoslovakia), attitudes of, 944–949 [Pgs. 944–949 include portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, and Doc. 522], 953–954 [Pgs. 953–954 include portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526]; U. S. communication requesting information as to reactions, 931–932 [Pgs. 931–932 include portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516]

Latin American countries: Brazil’s interest in a seat on Council of proposed international organization, and U. S. position, 932–933 [Pgs. 932–933 include portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517], 952–953 [Pgs. 952–953 include portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]; U. S.-Latin American discussions, 924–931 [Pgs. 924–931 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, and Doc. 515], 936–940 [Pgs. 936–940 include portions of Doc. 517, Doc. 518, and Doc. 519], 941–944 [Pgs. 941–944 include portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521], 949–951 [Pgs. 949–951 include portions of Doc. 521 and Doc. 522], 954–959 [Pgs. 954–959 include portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526]

Pacific settlement of disputes, 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 658–659 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 402], 676–685 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 404], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 415], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 420], 724–726 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 422], 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 440], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 442 and Doc. 443], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 464], 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 475], 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 493], 865–866 [Pgs. 865–866 include portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496], 895–896 [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 506], 908–909 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 507]

Post-Dumbarton Oaks activities of Department of State, and continuing preparations for a United Nations Conference: Memorandum on transition from League of Nations to new international organization, 915–921 [Pgs. 915–921 include portions of Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509]; résumé of evolution of the Dumbarton Oaks Proposals, 901–915 [Pgs. 901–915 include portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508]; suggestions and further consideration regarding questions of voting procedures and trusteeships, 921–923 [Pgs. 921–923 include portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc. 510]

Preliminaries. See Activities, discussions, and exchanges of papers preliminary to Conversations, supra.

Principal organs of international organization, 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 376], 654–655 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 402], 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 404], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 415], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 415], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 422], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 430], 891 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 506], 904 [Pg. 904 is part of Doc. 507]

Proposals for establishment of an international organization: Preliminary drafts: Dec. 23 and 29, 1943, U. S. memorandum and statement, 614–622 [Pgs. 614–622 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]

July 18, U. S. draft, 653–669 [Pgs. 653–669 include portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]

July 22, British draft, 670–693 [Pgs. 670–693 include portions of Doc. 403, Doc. 404, and Doc. 405]

Aug. 12, Soviet memorandum, 706–711 [Pgs. 706–711 include portions of Doc. 414, Doc. 415, and Doc. 416]

Aug. 23, Chinese draft, 718–728 [Pgs. 718–728 include portions of Doc. 421, Doc. 422, and Doc. 423]

Publication of document, arrangements for, 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 838–839 [Pgs. 838–839 include portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482], 844 [Pg. 844 is part of Doc. 484], 860–861 [Pgs. 860–861 include portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491], 863 [Pg. 863 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 869–871 [Pgs. 869–871 include portions of Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497], 880 [Pg. 880 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 502]

Résumé (Nov. 20) of drafting procedures and of evolution of the various sections of the document, 901–915 [Pgs. 901–915 include portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508]

Text of agreed draft dated Oct. 7, released to the press Oct. 9, 899–900 [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 506]; joint communiqué of Oct. 9, 889–900 [Pgs. 889–900 include portions of Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506]

Regional arrangements, question of, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 381], 636–637 [Pgs. 636–637 include portions of Doc. 385, Doc. 386, and Doc. 387], 688–689 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 404], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 420], 727 [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 422], 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 454], 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 475], 847–848 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 486], 898 [Pg. 898 is part of Doc. 506], 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 507]

Secretariat of international organization, plans for, 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 380], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 402], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 404], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 415], 719–720 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 422], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 446], 900 [Pg. 900 is part of Doc. 506], 914 [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 507]

Security Council of international organization (see also Voting, infra), 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 376], 617–618 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 376], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 380], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 402], 674–675 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 404], 709–710 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 415], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 422], 729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 423], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 427], 738–740 [Pgs. 738–740 include portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 435], 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 763–764 [Pgs. 763–764 include portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442], 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 443], 893–894 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 506], 906–907 [Pg. 906 is part of Doc. 507]; composition of Council, 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 427], 739–740 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 428], 764–765 [Pgs. 764–765 include portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 454], 791–793 [Pgs. 791–793 include portions of Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 475], 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 506]

Smaller nations, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 389], 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449], 826–827 [Pgs. 826–827 include portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 481], 888–889 [Pgs. 888–889 include portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506]

Soviet republics, question of admission to international organization as member states (X matter), 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 743n [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 429], 750–751 [Pgs. 750–751 include portions of Doc. 431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433], 751–753 [Pgs. 751–753 include portions of Doc. 432, Doc. 433, and Doc. 434], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 437], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 760n [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 445], 776 [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 782–783 [Pgs. 782–783 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, and Doc. 451], 810–812 [Pgs. 810–812 include portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467], 868–869 [Pgs. 868–869 include portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496]; position of Roosevelt, 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 433], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 776 [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 483], 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 495]

Structure of international organization, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 376], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 376], 654–655 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 402], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 422]

Territorial integrity and political independence, proposals regarding, 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 490], 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 493], 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 494]

Territorial settlements and trusteeships, 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 380], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 665–667 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 402], 699–703 [Pgs. 699–703 include portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 422], 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 483], 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 483], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 486], 848 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 486], 856 [Pg. 856 is part of Doc. 490], 922–923 [Pgs. 922–923 include portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510]

Treaty obligations of international organization members, 727 [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 422], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 491]

United Nations Conference, plans for (see also Post-Dumbarton Oaks activities, etc., supra), 776 [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 778–779 [Pgs. 778–779 include portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 482], 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 483], 848 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 486], 929 [Pg. 929 is part of Doc. 513]

Voting procedures in international organization: Assembly, 729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 423], 807 [Pg. 807 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464], 878 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 497], 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 506], 905–906 [Pg. 905 is part of Doc. 507]

Council (see also States parties to dispute, infra), 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 420], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 422], 729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 423], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 424], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 425], 740–742 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 428], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 431], 763–764 [Pgs. 763–764 include portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442], 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 445], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 445], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 447], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 448], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 449], 783 [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 452], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453], 798–805 [Pgs. 798–805 include portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462], 824–825 [Pgs. 824–825 include portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 842–843 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 483], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 486], 851–856 [Pgs. 851–856 include portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 871–879 [Pgs. 871–879 include portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497], 880 [Pg. 880 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 894 [Pg. 894 is part of Doc. 506], 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 507]

States parties to a dispute, 737–738 [Pgs. 737–738 include portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 740–742 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 428], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 429], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 431], 750 [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 441], 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 445], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 447], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 448], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 452], 788–789 [Pgs. 788–789 include portions of Doc. 452, Doc. 453, and Doc. 454], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 459], 798–805 [Pgs. 798–805 include portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462], 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497], 879 [Pg. 879 is part of Doc. 497], 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509]; compromise proposal drafted by Formulation Group, and further discussion, 805–807 [Pgs. 805–807 include portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, and Doc. 464], 808–810 [Pgs. 808–810 include portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 812–814 [Pgs. 812–814 include portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 814–815 [Pgs. 814–815 include portions of Doc. 468, Doc. 469, and Doc. 470], 816 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 471], 818–824 [Pgs. 818–824 include portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475], 826–828 [Pgs. 826–828 include portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477], 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 477], 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 834–835 [Pgs. 834–835 include portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 853–855 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 490], 882–883 [Pgs. 882–883 include portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502]

X matter. See Soviet republics, question of admission to international organization as member states, supra.

Dumbarton Oaks Proposals. See Dumbarton Oaks Conversations: Proposals for establishment of an international organization.

Dunn, James Clement, 4–5 [Pgs. 4–5 include portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 85–86 [Pgs. 85–86 include portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 165–166 [Pgs. 165–166 include portions of Doc. 87, Doc. 88, and Doc. 89], 207–208 [Pgs. 207–208 include portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 251–253 [Pgs. 251–253 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134], 421n [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 221], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 339], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 398], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 398], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 713n [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 419], 716n [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 420], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 428], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 433], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 437], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 445], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 447], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 449], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 792–793 [Pgs. 792–793 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 460], 802–803 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 460], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 490], 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 490], 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 490], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 490], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497], 873 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 497], 874 [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 497], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 497], 876 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 497], 879 [Pg. 879 is part of Doc. 497], 880 [Pg. 880 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498], 885–887 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 503], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 507], 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509], 1467 [Pg. 1467 is part of Doc. 988], 1469 [Pg. 1469 is part of Doc. 990], 1507n [Pg. 1507 includes portions of Doc. 1014, Doc. 1015, and Doc. 1016]

Ecer, Mr., 1283 [Pg. 1283 is part of Doc. 827], 1360 [Pg. 1360 includes portions of Doc. 869 and Doc. 870], 1367 [Pg. 1367 includes portions of Doc. 876 and Doc. 877]

Ecuador, 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 1021n [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1026n [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 584], 1027n [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1033n [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 1072 [Pg. 1072 is part of Doc. 628], 1084 [Pg. 1084 is part of Doc. 637], 1096 [Pg. 1096 is part of Doc. 644], 1115n [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 1116n [Pg. 1116 includes portions of Doc. 659 and Doc. 660], 1120n [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1157n [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694]

Eden, Anthony, discussions and activities in connection with— Allied declarations regarding Nazi atrocities, 1033 [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1233n [Pg. 1233 is part of Doc. 773], 1235 [Pg. 1235 is part of Doc. 775], 1237 [Pg. 1237 includes portions of Doc. 777 and Doc. 778], 1250–1251 [Pgs. 1250–1251 include portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796], 1258 [Pg. 1258 is part of Doc. 806], 1264 [Pg. 1264 is part of Doc. 815], 1379–1380 [Pgs. 1379–1380 include portions of Doc. 883 and Doc. 884]

European Advisory Commission, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 6], 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 40], 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 50], 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 83, Doc. 84, and Doc. 85], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 145], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 162], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 197], 390n [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 197], 474–475 [Pgs. 474–475 include portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Governmental assistance to persons forced to emigrate, 1126 [Pg. 1126 is part of Doc. 666], 1142 [Pg. 1142 includes portions of Doc. 681 and Doc. 682]

Preliminaries to the establishment of an International Security Organization, 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 384], 636–637 [Pgs. 636–637 include portions of Doc. 385, Doc. 386, and Doc. 387], 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 447], 827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 476], 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480]

Surrender terms for Bulgaria, Hungary, and Rumania, 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

Surrender terms for Germany and unofficial peace feelers from Germany, 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 538n [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 337], 584–585 [Pgs. 584–585 include portions of Doc. 342, Doc. 343, and Doc. 344]

United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes, 1265 [Pg. 1265 includes portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817], 1281 [Pg. 1281 includes portions of Doc. 825 and Doc. 826], 1342 [Pg. 1342 includes portions of Doc. 859 and Doc. 860], 1350 [Pg. 1350 is part of Doc. 864], 1360 [Pg. 1360 includes portions of Doc. 869 and Doc. 870], 1376–1378 [Pgs. 1376–1378 include portions of Doc. 880, Doc. 881, Doc. 882, and Doc. 883], 1379–1380 [Pgs. 1379–1380 include portions of Doc. 883 and Doc. 884], 1380–1381 [Pgs. 1380–1381 include portions of Doc. 883, Doc. 884, and Doc. 885], 1384 [Pg. 1384 includes portions of Doc. 887 and Doc. 888], 1385 [Pg. 1385 includes portions of Doc. 889 and Doc. 890], 1390 [Pg. 1390 is part of Doc. 893], 1391 [Pg. 1391 includes portions of Doc. 893 and Doc. 894], 1401–1403 [Pg. 1401 is part of Doc. 909]

Educational and Cultural reconstruction. See Conference of Allied Ministers of Education.

Eichmann, Adolf, 1050 [Pg. 1050 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608]

Eisenhower, Gen. Dwight D., 27n [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 117], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 203], 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 209], 460n [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 241], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 290], 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 308], 543–544 [Pgs. 543–544 include portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311], 544n [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 1174–1175 [Pgs. 1174–1175 include portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709], 1175n [Pg. 1175 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709], 1193n [Pg. 1193 includes portions of Doc. 725 and Doc. 726], 1237 [Pg. 1237 includes portions of Doc. 777 and Doc. 778], 1238 [Pg. 1238 includes portions of Doc. 778 and Doc. 779], 1240n [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 779 and Doc. 780], 1241 [Pg. 1241 includes portions of Doc. 781 and Doc. 782], 1243 [Pg. 1243 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784], 1244 [Pg. 1244 includes portions of Doc. 784 and Doc. 785], 1262 [Pg. 1262 includes portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812], 1337 [Pg. 1337 is part of Doc. 853], 1500n [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1011]

El Salvador, 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 1021n [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1026n [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 584], 1027n [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1033n [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 1072 [Pg. 1072 is part of Doc. 628], 1115n [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 1116n [Pg. 1116 includes portions of Doc. 659 and Doc. 660], 1120n [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1157n [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694], 1173–1174 [Pgs. 1173–1174 include portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, and Doc. 708], 1185n [Pg. 1185 includes portions of Doc. 717 and Doc. 718]

Embick, Gen. Stanley D., 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 398], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 479], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 479]

Emergency Advisory Committee for Political Defense, 1051n [Pg. 1051 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609], 1052 [Pg. 1052 includes portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610], 1054 [Pg. 1054 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611], 1073–1074 [Pgs. 1073–1074 include portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, and Doc. 631]

Emergency measures for the welfare of U. S. citizens in enemy, former enemy, and enemy-occupied countries, 1192–1226 [Pgs. 1192–1226 include portions of Doc. 725, Doc. 726, Doc. 727, Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, Doc. 734, Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, Doc. 748, Doc. 749, Doc. 750, Doc. 751, Doc. 752, Doc. 753, Doc. 754, Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, and Doc. 765] American properties in Italy, discussions regarding desequestration of, 1212 [Pg. 1212 includes portions of Doc. 749 and Doc. 750], 1222–1223 [Pg. 1222 is part of Doc. 761]; American properties in Bulgaria and Hungary, 1199–1200 [Pgs. 1199–1200 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733], 1209 [Pg. 1209 includes portions of Doc. 746 and Doc. 747]

Financial assistance to American nationals, instructions and reports regarding, 1192–1199 [Pgs. 1192–1199 include portions of Doc. 725, Doc. 726, Doc. 727, Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, and Doc. 731], 1200 [Pg. 1200 includes portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733], 1206 [Pg. 1206 includes portions of Doc. 740, Doc. 741, and Doc. 742], 1210–1212 [Pgs. 1210–1212 include portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc. 750], 1217 [Pg. 1217 includes portions of Doc. 753 and Doc. 754], 1224–1225 [Pgs. 1224–1225 include portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763]

Protection of lives of U. S. citizens, and of Allied property, 1199–1200 [Pgs. 1199–1200 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733], 1205 [Pg. 1205 includes portions of Doc. 738, Doc. 739, and Doc. 740], 1209 [Pg. 1209 includes portions of Doc. 746 and Doc. 747], 1217–1219 [Pgs. 1217–1219 include portions of Doc. 753, Doc. 754, Doc. 755, and Doc. 756], 1220 [Pg. 1220 includes portions of Doc. 757 and Doc. 758], 1221 [Pg. 1221 includes portions of Doc. 758, Doc. 759, and Doc. 760], 1226 [Pg. 1226 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765]

Repatriation of American civilians, discussions concerning, 1204–1205 [Pgs. 1204–1205 include portions of Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, and Doc. 740], 1209 [Pg. 1209 includes portions of Doc. 746 and Doc. 747], 1216–1217 [Pgs. 1216–1217 include portions of Doc. 752, Doc. 753, and Doc. 754], 1226 [Pg. 1226 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765]; use of State Department facilities, proposed, 1213–1215 [Pgs. 1213–1215 include portions of Doc. 751 and Doc. 752]

Swiss representation of American interests, 1200–1202 [Pgs. 1200–1202 include portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735], 1203 [Pg. 1203 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 1204 [Pg. 1204 includes portions of Doc. 737 and Doc. 738], 1205–1206 [Pgs. 1205–1206 include portions of Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, and Doc. 742], 1207–1208 [Pgs. 1207–1208 include portions of Doc. 743, Doc. 744, and Doc. 745], 1208 [Pg. 1208 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 1209 [Pg. 1209 includes portions of Doc. 746 and Doc. 747], 1217 [Pg. 1217 includes portions of Doc. 753 and Doc. 754], 1219 [Pg. 1219 includes portions of Doc. 755 and Doc. 756], 1226 [Pg. 1226 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765]; of interests of other nations, 1202–1203 [Pgs. 1202–1203 include portions of Doc. 734, Doc. 735, and Doc. 736], 1208 [Pg. 1208 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 1209 [Pg. 1209 includes portions of Doc. 746 and Doc. 747], 1211–1212 [Pgs. 1211–1212 include portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc. 750], 1220–1221 [Pgs. 1220–1221 include portions of Doc. 757, Doc. 758, Doc. 759, and Doc. 760], 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763], 1226 [Pg. 1226 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765]

Transfer of American interests from Swiss to U. S. officials: Discussions concerning, 1200–1204 [Pgs. 1200–1204 include portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, Doc. 734, Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738], 1205 [Pg. 1205 includes portions of Doc. 738, Doc. 739, and Doc. 740], 1206–1208 [Pgs. 1206–1208 include portions of Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, and Doc. 745], 1221 [Pg. 1221 includes portions of Doc. 758, Doc. 759, and Doc. 760]

Reestablishment of U. S. Consulates in Antwerp, Naples, Palermo, Rome, and Salonika, 1194n [Pg. 1194 includes portions of Doc. 726 and Doc. 727], 1200 [Pg. 1200 includes portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733], 1200n [Pg. 1200 includes portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733], 1207 [Pg. 1207 includes portions of Doc. 743 and Doc. 744], 1210n [Pg. 1210 is part of Doc. 748], 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763]; of U. S. Embassies in Athens and Brussels, 1207 [Pg. 1207 includes portions of Doc. 743 and Doc. 744], 1225n [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763]; of U. S. Mission in Paris, 1207n [Pg. 1207 includes portions of Doc. 743 and Doc. 744]

Emerson, Sir Herbert W., 983n [Pg. 983 is part of Doc. 551], 994 [Pg. 994 includes portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, and Doc. 563], 1022 [Pg. 1022 is part of Doc. 580], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 653], 1132 [Pg. 1132 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 1142–1144 [Pgs. 1142–1144 include portions of Doc. 681, Doc. 682, and Doc. 683], 1151 [Pg. 1151 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], 1152 [Pg. 1152 is part of Doc. 690], 1153 [Pg. 1153 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691], 1190 [Pg. 1190 includes portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724]

Emrys-Evans, Mr., 1448–1449 [Pgs. 1448–1449 include portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, Doc. 965, and Doc. 966]

Erhardt, John G., 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

Ertegün, Mehmet Münir, 1041n [Pg. 1041 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600], 1436 [Pg. 1436 includes portions of Doc. 945 and Doc. 946]

Escalante, Diogenes, 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 518], 942 [Pg. 942 is part of Doc. 520]

European Advisory Commission, 1–483 [Pgs. 1–483 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, Doc. 7, Doc. 8, Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, Doc. 22, Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, Doc. 26, Doc. 27, Doc. 28, Doc. 29, Doc. 30, Doc. 31, Doc. 32, Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, Doc. 66, Doc. 67, Doc. 68, Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, Doc. 104, Doc. 105, Doc. 106, Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123, Doc. 124, Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, and Doc. 256] Austria, consideration by EAC of questions relative to, 434–483 [Pgs. 434–483 include portions of Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, and Doc. 256] Economic and financial matters, 439–440 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 231], 445–446 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 231], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 231]

Establishment of democratic self-government, U. S. and British policies, 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 79], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 80], 397–398 [Pgs. 397–398 include portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 231], 441–442 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 231], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 231], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 231], 446–447 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 231], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 231], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 238], 478–483 [Pgs. 478–483 include portions of Doc. 254, Doc. 255, and Doc. 256]

Frontiers with Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Hungary, Italy, and Germany, 440–441 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 231], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 231], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 231]

International status, 438–439 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 231], 447–448 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 231]

Military government, directive by Combined Chiefs of Staff, 460–462 [Pgs. 460–462 include portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 469–470 [Pgs. 469–470 include portions of Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249]

Moscow Declaration on Austria (Nov. 1, 1943), cited, 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 79], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 203], 438–439 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 231], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Occupation and control (see also Zones of occupation, infra): British policy papers, 227–230 [Pgs. 227–230 include portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 455–458 [Pgs. 455–458 include portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]

Character and duration of, 442–443 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 231], 455–458 [Pgs. 455–458 include portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]

Combined Chiefs of Staff directive, 460–462 [Pgs. 460–462 include portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 469–470 [Pgs. 469–470 include portions of Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249]

Participation by United States in tripartite occupation, discussions and recommendations, 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 93], 434–438 [Pgs. 434–438 include portions of Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 231], 448–449 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 231], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 232], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 237], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 238], 458–459 [Pgs. 458–459 include portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 472–477 [Pgs. 472–477 include portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, and Doc. 253]

Relationship between Austrian and German control machinery, 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]

Security functions, 443–444 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 231], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 231]

Soviet draft protocol regarding, 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 232]

Stages of control, 456–457 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 238]

Political matters and policy recommendations, 222–223 [Pgs. 222–223 include portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 438–439 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 231], 441–442 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 231], 444–445 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 231], 448–449 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 231], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Separation from Germany, 455–456 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 238], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 241]

U. S. policy regarding, 437–449 [Pgs. 437–449 include portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 462–466 [Pgs. 462–466 include portions of Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, and Doc. 244]

Vienna, plans for establishment of a tripartite control commission, 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 238], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 241], 466–468 [Pgs. 466–468 include portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, and Doc. 247], 472–473 [Pgs. 472–473 include portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252], 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]

Zones of occupation: Discussions concerning allocation of, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 236], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 237], 458–459 [Pgs. 458–459 include portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]; Soviet draft protocol, and views regarding, 470–473 [Pgs. 470–473 include portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252]

Civil affairs arrangements for liberated areas, question of: Discussions by U. S., British, and Soviet Governments regarding, 8–11 [Pgs. 8–11 include portions of Doc. 4, Doc. 5, and Doc. 6], 14–16 [Pgs. 14–16 include portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8], 20–21 [Pgs. 20–21 include portions of Doc. 11, Doc. 12, Doc. 13, and Doc. 14], 24–26 [Pgs. 24–26 include portions of Doc. 17, Doc. 18, and Doc. 19], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 21]

France, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 6–8 [Pgs. 6–8 include portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 19–20 [Pgs. 19–20 include portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 21–22 [Pgs. 21–22 include portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, Doc. 15, and Doc. 16]

Norway, Netherlands, and Belgium, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 7], 16–17 [Pgs. 16–17 include portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9], 18–19 [Pgs. 18–19 include portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11], 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, and Doc. 14], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 17], 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 26–27 [Pgs. 26–27 include portions of Doc. 18, Doc. 19, and Doc. 20], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 21], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 22], 34–39 [Pgs. 34–39 include portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, Doc. 26, Doc. 27, and Doc. 28]; citations to texts of various agreements signed May 16, 10n [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 38–39 [Pgs. 38–39 include portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

Combined Civil Affairs Committee, 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 178], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 178], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 178]

Consultation with other Allied Governments, question of, 40–84 [Pgs. 40–84 include portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, Doc. 31, Doc. 32, Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, and Doc. 54] Consideration of question in general, 40–43 [Pgs. 40–43 include portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31]

Inter-Allied Armistice Study Committee, proposed study program for disarmament of Germany, 47–50 [Pgs. 47–50 include portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 52–53 [Pgs. 52–53 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36]

Surrender terms for Germany and its satellites: Allied Consultation Committee, establishment by EAC, and invitations to Allied Governments for consultation with, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 54]

Desire of European Allied countries to participate in preparation of, and views of U. S., British, and Soviet Governments, 43–46 [Pgs. 43–46 include portions of Doc. 30, Doc. 31, and Doc. 32], 50–52 [Pgs. 50–52 include portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, and Doc. 35], 54–62 [Pgs. 54–62 include portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, Doc. 42, and Doc. 43], 79–82 [Pgs. 79–82 include portions of Doc. 50, Doc. 51, and Doc. 52]

Letter to nine European Governments requesting views on draft surrender instrument, 62–63 [Pgs. 62–63 include portions of Doc. 42, Doc. 43, and Doc. 44], 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 134], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 134]; views of the Governments, 68–77 [Pgs. 68–77 include portions of Doc. 47, Doc. 48, and Doc. 49], 86–88 [Pgs. 86–88 include portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59]

Participation of Italy, question of, 64–68 [Pgs. 64–68 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48], 77–78 [Pgs. 77–78 include portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 53]

Enemy records and archives, securing and examining of, 1484 [Pg. 1484 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1489–1491 [Pgs. 1489–1491 include portions of Doc. 1003, Doc. 1004, and Doc. 1005], 1493–1495 [Pgs. 1493–1495 include portions of Doc. 1007, Doc. 1008, and Doc. 1009], 1501–1506 [Pgs. 1501–1506 include portions of Doc. 1011, Doc. 1012, and Doc. 1013]

First formal meeting, 17–18 [Pgs. 17–18 include portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10]

France, admission to full membership in EAC (see also Consultation with other Allied Governments, supra), 85–100 [Pgs. 85–100 include portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, Doc. 66, Doc. 67, Doc. 68, Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75] Admission of France to discussions of German surrender terms within EAC prior to membership, 85–91 [Pgs. 85–91 include portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61], 92–94 [Pgs. 92–94 include portions of Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 155]

French formal request, 91–92 [Pgs. 91–92 include portions of Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, and Doc. 63]

Permanent membership, steps leading to, 95–100 [Pgs. 95–100 include portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75]; press statement issued Nov. 11, 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Germany, work of EAC on questions relative to. See Germany.

Military matters, status of EAC in relation to, 13–14 [Pgs. 13–14 include portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 25–26 [Pgs. 25–26 include portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 21]

Moscow Conference documents cited with respect to role of EAC, 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 6n [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 4], 11–12 [Pgs. 11–12 include portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 15n [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 7], 16n [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 18], 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 28], 110n [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 77]

Press release, Jan. 14, text, 18n [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]

Scope of activity and functions, U. S. and British divergence of views and Soviet position, 1–5 [Pgs. 1–5 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 11–14 [Pgs. 11–14 include portions of Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7], 16–17 [Pgs. 16–17 include portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9], 27–34 [Pgs. 27–34 include portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24]

Surrender terms for Bulgaria, Hungary, Rumania, and Finland, information concerning preparation of, 39–40 [Pgs. 39–40 include portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 82], 583–584 [Pgs. 583–584 include portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Terms of reference, 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 11–12 [Pgs. 11–12 include portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 31–32 [Pgs. 31–32 include portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 28], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 34], 110n [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 77]

Working Security Committee (U. S.): Establishment and functions, 111–112 [Pgs. 111–112 include portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, and Doc. 79], 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

Memoranda by, 100–109 [Pgs. 100–109 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, and Doc. 76], 185–188 [Pgs. 185–188 include portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 335–338 [Pgs. 335–338 include portions of Doc. 160, Doc. 161, and Doc. 162], 306–368 [Pgs. 306–368 include portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, and Doc. 181], 376–378 [Pgs. 376–378 include portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Preparation and review of documents, 211n [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 267–269 [Pgs. 267–269 include portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 154], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 154], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 352–353 [Pgs. 352–353 include portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 357–358 [Pgs. 357–358 include portions of Doc. 175, Doc. 176, and Doc. 177], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

Exchange of nationals. See under Refugees from Europe, etc.: Passports, etc.

Fairchild, Gen. Muir S., 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 398], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]

Falkenhausen, Gen. Alexander von, 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 280], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 280]

Falla, Paul, 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 715n [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488]

Feldscher, A., 1169–1170 [Pgs. 1169–1170 include portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1178–1179 [Pgs. 1178–1179 include portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713]

Finland (see also Unconditional surrender principle, question of application to Bulgaria, Finland, etc.): Rescue of Jews from Finland, 1036–1037 [Pgs. 1036–1037 include portions of Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596], 1037–1039 [Pgs. 1037–1039 include portions of Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, and Doc. 598], 1065–1066 [Pgs. 1065–1066 include portions of Doc. 620, Doc. 621, and Doc. 622]; surrender terms for, preparation of, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 28], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 29]

Fitin, Gen. P. M., 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

Fletcher, Henry P., 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 502], 914 [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 507]

Foot, Dingle, 1145 [Pg. 1145 is part of Doc. 683]

Forrestal, James V., 1392 [Pg. 1392 includes portions of Doc. 895 and Doc. 896], 1468 [Pg. 1468 is part of Doc. 989], 1469n [Pg. 1469 is part of Doc. 990]

France (see also Emergency measures, etc.; and under Nazi atrocities and Refugees from Europe, etc.): Alsace-Lorraine, U. S. recommendation for return to France, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 154], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 154]

American interests, 1221 [Pg. 1221 includes portions of Doc. 758, Doc. 759, and Doc. 760], 1224–1225 [Pgs. 1224–1225 include portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763]

Censorship, 1511n [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1019 and Doc. 1020], 1521 [Pg. 1521 includes portions of Doc. 1026 and Doc. 1027]

European Advisory Commission: Admission of France to full membership in. See France, etc., under European Advisory Commission.

Civil affairs arrangements for France, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 6–8 [Pgs. 6–8 include portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 19–20 [Pgs. 19–20 include portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 21–22 [Pgs. 21–22 include portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, Doc. 15, and Doc. 16]

Consultation of EAC with other Allied Governments and France. See European Advisory Commission: Consultation, etc.

French interest in zones of occupation in Germany, possibility of, 95–96 [Pgs. 95–96 include portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 384–385 [Pgs. 384–385 include portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

French position regarding surrender terms and control machinery for Germany, 427–429 [Pgs. 427–429 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Liberation of Paris Aug. 23, 1944, 1202n [Pg. 1202 includes portions of Doc. 734 and Doc. 735]

Postwar policing of, views of Roosevelt and Churchill on question, 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 181–182 [Pgs. 181–182 include portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 97], 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 117], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 137]

Representation on United Nations War Crimes Commission, 1283 [Pg. 1283 is part of Doc. 827], 1285 [Pg. 1285 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1398 [Pg. 1398 is part of Doc. 905], 1406 [Pg. 1406 includes portions of Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

United Nations Organization, proposed, question of French seat in Council of, 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 424], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 427], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 428], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 428], 743–744 [Pgs. 743–744 include portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 437], 764–765 [Pgs. 764–765 include portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443], 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 490]

U. S. Mission in Paris, reestablishment of, 1207 [Pg. 1207 includes portions of Doc. 743 and Doc. 744]

Franco, Gen. Francisco, 1243 [Pg. 1243 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784], 1430 [Pg. 1430 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939]

Freedom of speech, press, and religion in postwar Germany, 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 112], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 115], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 128], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 161]

French North Africa. See under Refugees, etc.

Fromn, Col.-Gen. Fritz, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 301]

Fulbright, J. William, 969–970 [Pgs. 969–970 include portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 540]; Fulbright Resolution of Sept. 21, 1943, relative to an international security organization, cited, 614n [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 376]

Gates, Artemus L., 1466n [Pg. 1466 is part of Doc. 988], 1468 [Pg. 1468 is part of Doc. 989], 1469 [Pg. 1469 is part of Doc. 990]

Gauss, Clarence E., 1351 [Pg. 1351 includes portions of Doc. 864, Doc. 865, and Doc. 866]

Geneva Convention relative to prisoners of war (1929), cited, 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 1027 [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1039 [Pg. 1039 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 1072 [Pg. 1072 is part of Doc. 628], 1077 [Pg. 1077 is part of Doc. 633], 1228 [Pg. 1228 includes portions of Doc. 767, Doc. 768, and Doc. 769], 1229 [Pg. 1229 is part of Doc. 770], 1230 [Pg. 1230 includes portions of Doc. 770 and Doc. 771], 1269 [Pg. 1269 is part of Doc. 818]

Gerig, O. Benjamin, 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 503], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 507], 902 [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 507]

German surrender, anticipation of (see also Germany, work of European Advisory Commission, etc.: Surrender instrument; and Unconditional surrender terms for Germany), 484–579 [Pgs. 484–579 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, and Doc. 339] Allied propaganda activities, and rejected proposals: Appeals to German people and army, 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 501n [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 502–505 [Pgs. 502–505 include portions of Doc. 273, Doc. 274, and Doc. 275], 520–522 [Pgs. 520–522 include portions of Doc. 290, Doc. 291, and Doc. 292], 527–529 [Pgs. 527–529 include portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, and Doc. 301], 540–541 [Pgs. 540–541 include portions of Doc. 306, Doc. 307, and Doc. 308], 543–544 [Pgs. 543–544 include portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]

“Black propaganda” plan of OSS, 567–570 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 333], 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 339]; proposal for fake Hitler broadcast, 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 290, Doc. 291, and Doc. 292]

German reactions to Allied propaganda, 505–507 [Pgs. 505–507 include portions of Doc. 274, Doc. 275, and Doc. 276]

Roosevelt proposals to Churchill and Stalin, and replies, 513–515 [Pgs. 513–515 include portions of Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 517–518 [Pgs. 517–518 include portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 564–566 [Pgs. 564–566 include portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332]

SHAEF directive for Germany, joint propaganda use of, 560–562 [Pgs. 560–562 include portions of Doc. 326, Doc. 327, and Doc. 328]

Assassination attempt on Hitler, July 20, 1944, rumors and reports following, 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319], 552–553 [Pgs. 552–553 include portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 323], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 336], 575–576 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 337], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 337]; citation to statement by Secretary Hull, 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

Free Germany movement, Soviet-sponsored, 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 275], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 294], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

German collaborators and informants, questions relating to Allied use of, 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 302], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

Peace feelers from Germany (unofficial): Accounts and rumors of peace feelers, and Allied reactions and demands for unconditional surrender, 485–493 [Pgs. 485–493 include portions of Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265], 495–496 [Pgs. 495–496 include portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 497–500 [Pgs. 497–500 include portions of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, and Doc. 271], 510–513 [Pgs. 510–513 include portions of Doc. 279, Doc. 280, and Doc. 281], 515–517 [Pgs. 515–517 include portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 523–527 [Pgs. 523–527 include portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 529–530 [Pgs. 529–530 include portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, and Doc. 301], 532–540 [Pgs. 532–540 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 546–547 [Pgs. 546–547 include portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314], 547–548 [Pgs. 547–548 include portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 550–553 [Pgs. 550–553 include portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, and Doc. 321], 554–556 [Pgs. 554–556 include portions of Doc. 322, Doc. 323, and Doc. 324], 557–559 [Pgs. 557–559 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 563–564 [Pgs. 563–564 include portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 571–572 [Pgs. 571–572 include portions of Doc. 334, Doc. 335, and Doc. 336]

Contacts with peace emissaries, instructions to U. S. and British representatives regarding, 495–496 [Pgs. 495–496 include portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 496–497 [Pgs. 496–497 include portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 500n [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 271], 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 548 [Pg. 548 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 549–550 [Pgs. 549–550 include portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319], 553n [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 338]

German attempts to divide Allies, speculation regarding, 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 496–497 [Pgs. 496–497 include portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 498–499 [Pgs. 498–499 include portions of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, and Doc. 271], 510–513 [Pgs. 510–513 include portions of Doc. 279, Doc. 280, and Doc. 281], 537–538 [Pgs. 537–538 include portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, and Doc. 305], 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 319], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 325], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 325]

Soviet requests for information, and U. S. and British responses, 538–539 [Pgs. 538–539 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306], 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

Postwar treatment of Germany, 501–502 [Pgs. 501–502 include portions of Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274], 507–510 [Pgs. 507–510 include portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319]; Roosevelt’s criticism of Handbook of Military Government in Germany, 544–546 [Pgs. 544–546 include portions of Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312]

Soviet Union, speculation and rumor regarding good faith of, 494–495 [Pgs. 494–495 include portions of Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 303]

Yalta statement by Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin calling for German surrender, 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 339]

Germany (see also German surrender, anticipation of; Nazi atrocities; Unconditional surrender terms for Germany; and under Refugees from Europe, etc.), work of European Advisory Commission on questions relative to, 100–434 [Pgs. 100–434 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, Doc. 104, Doc. 105, Doc. 106, Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123, Doc. 124, Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, and Doc. 228] Archives, records, and other information, proposed arrangements regarding, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 76], 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 79], 135–136 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 79], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 134], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 161]

Censorship and public information control, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 112], 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]

Combined Chiefs of Staff, 340–341 [Pgs. 340–341 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 203]

Communications facilities, control of, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 76], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 79], 123–124 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 79], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 79], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 93], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 112], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 134], 259–260 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 134], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 161], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 167], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Control Council, 187–188 [Pgs. 187–188 include portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 129], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 152], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 187], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 191], 395–396 [Pgs. 395–396 include portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]

Control machinery and military government: Administration of Germany, U. S. statement of military and political policies to be followed, 335–338 [Pgs. 335–338 include portions of Doc. 160, Doc. 161, and Doc. 162]

Administrative machinery, 213–214 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 111], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 111], 220–221 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 112], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 129], 299–301 [Pgs. 299–301 include portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 317–318 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 154], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 154], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 187], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 187], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 191], 400–401 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 204]

Agreement on Control Machinery in Germany, signed Nov. 14, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 192], 391–392 [Pgs. 391–392 include portions of Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, and Doc. 200], 395–396 [Pgs. 395–396 include portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 404–406 [Pgs. 404–406 include portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]; citation to text, 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

Discussions and working papers (see also Draft directives, infra), 154–159 [Pgs. 154–159 include portions of Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82], 185–188 [Pgs. 185–188 include portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 199–207 [Pgs. 199–207 include portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, Doc. 107, and Doc. 108], 211–216 [Pgs. 211–216 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 241–243 [Pgs. 241–243 include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127], 246–248 [Pgs. 246–248 include portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 267–269 [Pgs. 267–269 include portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145], 299–301 [Pgs. 299–301 include portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 344–346 [Pgs. 344–346 include portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 358–359 [Pgs. 358–359 include portions of Doc. 176, Doc. 177, and Doc. 178], 369–372 [Pgs. 369–372 include portions of Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 374–378 [Pgs. 374–378 include portions of Doc. 186, Doc. 187, and Doc. 188], 423–426 [Pgs. 423–426 include portions of Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, and Doc. 225]

Draft directives to Allied Commanders-in-Chief: Discussions and suggested texts of general directives, 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 79], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 217–222 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 112], 224–227 [Pgs. 224–227 include portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 244–246 [Pgs. 244–246 include portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 393–394 [Pgs. 393–394 include portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 203]

U. S. and British directives: Consideration of British drafts by U. S. Government officials, 378–383 [Pgs. 378–383 include portions of Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, and Doc. 191], 407–408 [Pgs. 407–408 include portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]; lists and information concerning, 242n [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 127], 350n [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 170], 353–354 [Pgs. 353–354 include portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 361n [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 178], 371–372 [Pgs. 371–372 include portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 201], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 416–417 [Pgs. 416–417 include portions of Doc. 217, Doc. 218, and Doc. 219], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 223]; U. S. directive to Supreme Allied Commander (J.C.S. 1067), 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 359–364 [Pgs. 359–364 include portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 191], 389–391 [Pgs. 389–391 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, and Doc. 198], 393–394 [Pgs. 393–394 include portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 406–407 [Pgs. 406–407 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, and Doc. 208], 410–411 [Pgs. 410–411 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211], 418–422 [Pgs. 418–422 include portions of Doc. 220, Doc. 221, and Doc. 222], 429–430 [Pgs. 429–430 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 227]

French position, 427–429 [Pgs. 427–429 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

High Commission for Germany, 156–159 [Pgs. 156–159 include portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 201–207 [Pgs. 201–207 include portions of Doc. 106, Doc. 107, and Doc. 108], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 111]

Post-surrender (or “Middle”) period, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 81], 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 211–216 [Pgs. 211–216 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 224–227 [Pgs. 224–227 include portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 288–289 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 151], 299–301 [Pgs. 299–301 include portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]; U. S. draft directive to Supreme Allied Commander (J.C.S. 1067), 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 359–364 [Pgs. 359–364 include portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 191], 389–391 [Pgs. 389–391 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, and Doc. 198], 393–394 [Pgs. 393–394 include portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 406–407 [Pgs. 406–407 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, and Doc. 208], 410–411 [Pgs. 410–411 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211], 418–422 [Pgs. 418–422 include portions of Doc. 220, Doc. 221, and Doc. 222], 429–430 [Pgs. 429–430 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Pre-surrender period, 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 81], 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 217–223 [Pgs. 217–223 include portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 203]

Proclamations and general orders to implement surrender terms, 193–194 [Pgs. 193–194 include portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 105], 199–200 [Pgs. 199–200 include portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 332–333 [Pgs. 332–333 include portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 365–368 [Pgs. 365–368 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, and Doc. 181], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 203], 413–414 [Pgs. 413–414 include portions of Doc. 212, Doc. 213, and Doc. 214], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 418–419 [Pgs. 418–419 include portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 430–432 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 227]

Reconstruction of Europe, relation to control machinery for Germany, 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 154]

Smaller United Nations, question of participation in control of Germany, 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 154], 319–320 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 154], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Treatment of Germany in control period: Economic policy on Germany, U. S. objectives, 276–287 [Pgs. 276–287 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 154], 312–313 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 154], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 154], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 167], 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 398–403 [Pgs. 398–403 include portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, and Doc. 205], 409–410 [Pgs. 409–410 include portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 411–412 [Pgs. 411–412 include portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]

Morgenthau plan, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 167], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 172], 425–426 [Pgs. 425–426 include portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]

Soviet position, 403–404 [Pgs. 403–404 include portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206]

U. S. policy recommendations (see also Economic policy, supra), 251–252 [Pgs. 251–252 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 142], 301–328 [Pgs. 301–328 include portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 335–338 [Pgs. 335–338 include portions of Doc. 160, Doc. 161, and Doc. 162], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 357–358 [Pgs. 357–358 include portions of Doc. 175, Doc. 176, and Doc. 177]

U. S. procedures in developing policy papers for negotiation in EAC, problems connected with, 331–332 [Pgs. 331–332 include portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 348–351 [Pgs. 348–351 include portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171], 352–354 [Pgs. 352–354 include portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173], 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 178], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

U. S. summary memoranda: Status of negotiations in EAC as of Aug. 22, 325–328 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 154]; status of negotiations and summary of problems as of Sept. 29, 344–346 [Pgs. 344–346 include portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]; status of plans for Germany as of Nov. 11, 395–398 [Pgs. 395–398 include portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204]; summary memorandum of Jan. 22, 1945, 429–434 [Pgs. 429–434 include portions of Doc. 226, Doc. 227, and Doc. 228]

Decentralization, 226–227 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 115], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 154], 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 154]

Demobilization. See Disarmament and demilitarization, infra.

Denazification policies (see also Nazi Party, etc., infra), 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 187], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 187], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 221]

Diplomatic and trade relations of Germany, 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 76], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 79], 132–133 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 79], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 154], 313–314 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 154], 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Disarmament and demilitarization of Germany, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 76], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 79], 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 79], 126–127 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 79], 142–143 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 80], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 93], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 105], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 112], 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 115], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 128], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 129], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 134], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 154], 310–311 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 154], 320–321 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 154], 335–336 [Pgs. 335–336 include portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 167], 358–359 [Pgs. 358–359 include portions of Doc. 176, Doc. 177, and Doc. 178], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 227]

Discriminatory laws, suspension of, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 76], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 112], 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 115], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 128], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 134], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 161]

Dismemberment of Germany, 161–163 [Pgs. 161–163 include portions of Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86], 163–166 [Pgs. 163–166 include portions of Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, and Doc. 89], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 148], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 154], 311–312 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 154], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 167], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Displaced persons. See Prisoners of war, etc., infra.

EAC meeting of July 25, minutes, 252–254 [Pgs. 252–254 include portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]

EAC reports to U.S., British, and Soviet Governments: July 25, 254–256 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 134]; Nov. 14, 404–406 [Pgs. 404–406 include portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207]

East Prussia and Danzig, 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 80], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 80], 152–153 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 80], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 154]

Economic and financial matters: Provisions in draft documents and working papers, and discussions concerning, 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 75], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 76], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 76], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 79], 131–132 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 79], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 81], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 129], 303–304 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 154], 312–313 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 154], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 154], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 420–421 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 221]

U.S., British, and Soviet divergence of views regarding economic treatment of Germany, 398–403 [Pgs. 398–403 include portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, and Doc. 205], 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]

U. S. economic policy with respect to Germany, objectives of, 276–287 [Pgs. 276–287 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 154], 312–313 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 154], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 154], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 167], 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 398–403 [Pgs. 398–403 include portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, and Doc. 205], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 208], 409–410 [Pgs. 409–410 include portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 411–412 [Pgs. 411–412 include portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]

Educational system and cultural agencies, 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 76], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 167], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Enemy nationals and property, treatment of, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 79], 127–128 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 79], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 112], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 134]

Evacuation of territory by German forces, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 76], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 79], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 79]

Freedom of speech, press, and religion, 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 112], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 115], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 128], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 161]

Frontiers, 143–144 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 80], 302–303 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 154], 307–310 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 154], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 231]

German naval vessels and aircraft, question of disposition of, 122–123 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 79], 175–176 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 93], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 134], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 134], 355–356 [Pgs. 355–356 include portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]

Joint Chiefs of Staff (see also Control machinery: Draft directives, supra), 167–172 [Pgs. 167–172 include portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 183–184 [Pgs. 183–184 include portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 98], 190–191 [Pgs. 190–191 include portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 195–196 [Pgs. 195–196 include portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 207–208 [Pgs. 207–208 include portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 109], 251–252 [Pgs. 251–252 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 154], 352–353 [Pgs. 352–353 include portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 355–356 [Pgs. 355–356 include portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 365–366 [Pgs. 365–366 include portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 368–369 [Pgs. 368–369 include portions of Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182], 374–375 [Pgs. 374–375 include portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 385–387 [Pgs. 385–387 include portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 198, Doc. 199, and Doc. 200], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

Law and order, maintenance of, 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 76], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 128]

Merchant shipping, disposition of, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 76], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 79], 128–129 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 79]

Minority groups, compensation for injuries to, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 151]

Minutes of EAC meeting of July 25, 252–254 [Pgs. 252–254 include portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]

Movement of persons, control of, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 76], 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Nazi Party and Nazi organizations, dissolution of, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 76], 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 79], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 79], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 80], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 112], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 112], 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 115], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 128], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 129], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 154], 322–323 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 154], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 154], 335–336 [Pgs. 335–336 include portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 161], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 167], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Occupation (see also Occupation zones, infra): Occupation currency, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 79]

Occupation organs, 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 75], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 76]

Provisions in draft documents and working papers, and discussions concerning, 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 75], 102–103 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 75], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 76], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 76], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 76], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 79], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 79], 139–154 [Pgs. 139–154 include portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, and Doc. 81], 157–158 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 81], 304–306 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 154], 317–321 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 154]

Stages of occupation, 145–146 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 80]

Occupation zones: Allocation of zones (see also Berlin, infra), 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 80], 150–153 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 80], 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93], 177–178 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 93], 179–181 [Pgs. 179–181 include portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95], 195–196 [Pgs. 195–196 include portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 108], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 223–224 [Pgs. 223–224 include portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, Doc. 114, and Doc. 115], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 116], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 117], 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 261–262 [Pgs. 261–262 include portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 154], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154], 340–341 [Pgs. 340–341 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 342–343 [Pgs. 342–343 include portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 354–355 [Pgs. 354–355 include portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, and Doc. 174], 368–369 [Pgs. 368–369 include portions of Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182], 385–387 [Pgs. 385–387 include portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194], 388–389 [Pgs. 388–389 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197]; possibility of French demands, 95–96 [Pgs. 95–96 include portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 384–385 [Pgs. 384–385 include portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

Berlin: Access to, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 192], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]; administrative machinery for, proposed, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 152]; joint occupation by the three Powers, proposed, 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 177–178 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 93], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 98], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 116]; Soviet-proposed delimitation of three zones for “Greater Berlin”, 237–239 [Pgs. 237–239 include portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 240–241 [Pgs. 240–241 include portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 135], 347–348 [Pgs. 347–348 include portions of Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170], 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

French interest, possibility of, 95–96 [Pgs. 95–96 include portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 384–385 [Pgs. 384–385 include portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

Participation of other Allied nations in occupation zones, question of, 249–250 [Pgs. 249–250 include portions of Doc. 130, Doc. 131, and Doc. 132], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 154], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Protocol of Sept. 12 and amending protocol of Nov. 14: British approval, 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]; citations to texts, 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]; discussions leading to, 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 237–239 [Pgs. 237–239 include portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 261–262 [Pgs. 261–262 include portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 340–341 [Pgs. 340–341 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 342–343 [Pgs. 342–343 include portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 346–348 [Pgs. 346–348 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170], 351–352 [Pgs. 351–352 include portions of Doc. 170, Doc. 171, and Doc. 172], 354–355 [Pgs. 354–355 include portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, and Doc. 174], 384–387 [Pgs. 384–387 include portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194], 388–389 [Pgs. 388–389 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197], 391–392 [Pgs. 391–392 include portions of Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, and Doc. 200], 394–395 [Pgs. 394–395 include portions of Doc. 201, Doc. 202, and Doc. 203], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 208]

Provisions in draft documents and working papers, and discussions concerning, 147–153 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 80], 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 93], 179–180 [Pgs. 179–180 include portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95], 186–188 [Pgs. 186–188 include portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 195–196 [Pgs. 195–196 include portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 107], 207–209 [Pgs. 207–209 include portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 111], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 111], 230–231 [Pgs. 230–231 include portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 240–241 [Pgs. 240–241 include portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 142], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 154], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154]

Roosevelt’s interest in, and exchange of messages with Churchill, 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93], 179–182 [Pgs. 179–182 include portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, and Doc. 96], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 97], 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 196n [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 104], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 108], 208n [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 108], 223–224 [Pgs. 223–224 include portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, Doc. 114, and Doc. 115], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 117], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 136], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 137], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154]

Roosevelt–Churchill approval of allocation of zones, 340–341 [Pgs. 340–341 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164]

Transit across Soviet zone, question of, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 192], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

Partition. See Dismemberment, supra.

Peace and security, maintenance of, 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 151], 313–314 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 154]

Peace measures, question of German cooperation in, 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 75], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 76], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 128]

Persons detained under German law, review of cases, 108–109 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 76]

Political activities, control of, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 112], 226–227 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 115], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 128], 322–323 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 154], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 161]

Ports of Bremen and Bremerhaven, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 346–347 [Pgs. 346–347 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, and Doc. 169], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 368–369 [Pgs. 368–369 include portions of Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182], 384–385 [Pgs. 384–385 include portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 193], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 195], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197]

Post-War Programs, Committee on, memoranda on the treatment of Germany, 302–328 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 154]

Press, radio, and mail. See Communications, supra.

Pre-war debts and claims, 297–299 [Pgs. 297–299 include portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152]

Prisoners of war and foreign nationals held by Germany, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 76], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 79], 133–134 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 79], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 90], 174–175 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 93], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 112], 258–259 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 134], 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 432–433 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 227], 433–434 [Pgs. 433–434 include portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

Prize Court proceedings, question of suspension of, 106–107 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 76]

Property, disposition of, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 76], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 79], 133–134 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 79], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 134], 296–297 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 151], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 161]

Quislings, 119–120 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 79], 134–135 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 79]

Reparation and restitution, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 76], 130–131 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 79], 234–235 [Pgs. 234–235 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 239–240 [Pgs. 239–240 include portions of Doc. 123, Doc. 124, and Doc. 125], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127], 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 250–251 [Pgs. 250–251 include portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133], 271–273 [Pgs. 271–273 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147], 274–276 [Pgs. 274–276 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 151], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 151], 282–283 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 151], 287–299 [Pgs. 287–299 include portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 154], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 372–374 [Pgs. 372–374 include portions of Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, and Doc. 187], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 204], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 204], 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]; Reparation Commission, 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 151]

Roosevelt’s views and exchanges of correspondence with Churchill, 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93], 179–182 [Pgs. 179–182 include portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, and Doc. 96], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 97], 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, and Doc. 100], 196n [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 104], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 108], 208n [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 108], 223–224 [Pgs. 223–224 include portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, Doc. 114, and Doc. 115], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 117], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 136], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 137], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, and Doc. 140], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154], 340–341 [Pgs. 340–341 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 174], 358–359 [Pgs. 358–359 include portions of Doc. 176, Doc. 177, and Doc. 178], 409–410 [Pgs. 409–410 include portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

Self-government for Germany, U. S. objectives, 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 154], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 154], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 154], 324–325 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 154]

Supreme Allied Authority, 201–203 [Pgs. 201–203 include portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 211–213 [Pgs. 211–213 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 247–248 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 129], 254–255 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 134], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 134], 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 161], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 187], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 191], 395–396 [Pgs. 395–396 include portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]

Surrender instrument: Definitions of terms used, 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 79], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 79], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 90]

Discussions and working papers looking toward formulation of surrender terms (see also Drafts, infra), 100–112 [Pgs. 100–112 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, and Doc. 79], 159–161 [Pgs. 159–161 include portions of Doc. 81, Doc. 82, and Doc. 83], 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 189–195 [Pgs. 189–195 include portions of Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104], 197–201 [Pgs. 197–201 include portions of Doc. 104, Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 109], 233–234 [Pgs. 233–234 include portions of Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 235–236 [Pgs. 235–236 include portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 154], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 154], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 154], 452–453 [Pgs. 452–453 include portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

Drafts: Agreed draft of July 25: Acceptance by the representatives of the three Powers, 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]; approval by EAC, and report to U. S., British, and Soviet Governments transmitting text, 252–256 [Pgs. 252–256 include portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]; British and Soviet positions, 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151], 329–330 [Pgs. 329–330 include portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 338–340 [Pgs. 338–340 include portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 422–423 [Pgs. 422–423 include portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]; China, question of communication of information to, 265–267 [Pgs. 265–267 include portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, and Doc. 142], 269–271 [Pgs. 269–271 include portions of Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, Doc. 145, and Doc. 146], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]; Roosevelt’s approval, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 137], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, and Doc. 140]; text, 256–261 [Pgs. 256–261 include portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

British draft (Jan. 15), 121–139 [Pgs. 121–139 include portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]; presentation of draft and summary to EAC, 112–121 [Pgs. 112–121 include portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

Soviet draft (Feb. 18), 173–179 [Pgs. 173–179 include portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94]; observations of U. S. representative on EAC, 172–173 [Pgs. 172–173 include portions of Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93]

U. S. draft (Feb. 5), 168–170 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 90]; presentation to EAC and modification, 167–168 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 90], 171–172 [Pgs. 171–172 include portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 182–183 [Pgs. 182–183 include portions of Doc. 95, Doc. 96, and Doc. 97]

Duration and enforcement, 103–104 [Pgs. 103–104 include portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 76]

French position, 427–429 [Pgs. 427–429 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Long form versus short form of surrender document, 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 79], 171–172 [Pgs. 171–172 include portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 100], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 109], 315–316 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 154], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 382–383 [Pgs. 382–383 include portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Proclamations and general orders to implement surrender terms. See under Control machinery, supra.

Signatories, 101–102 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 75], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 154]

Unconditional surrender, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 79], 314–315 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 154]; definition of term, 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 90]

War guilt clause, question of, 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 106], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 154]

Transfer of Germanic populations, 302–303 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 154], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 154], 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Transportation and power facilities, control of, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 76], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 79], 129–130 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 79], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 134]

United Nations agencies in Germany, proposals concerning, 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 107], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 107], 214–215 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 111]

United Nations forces, stationing of in Germany, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 79], 124–125 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 79]

War criminals, treatment of, 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 75], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 76], 119–120 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 79], 134–135 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 79], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 106], 219–220 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 112], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 129]

War materials, surrender of, 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 75], 105–106 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 76], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 79], 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 79], 126–127 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 79], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 93], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 134], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 154], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 161]

Glasser, Harold, 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 224], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]

Goebbels, Joseph, 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 275], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 336], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 337], 1227 [Pg. 1227 includes portions of Doc. 766 and Doc. 767], 1353 [Pg. 1353 includes portions of Doc. 866 and Doc. 867], 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885]

Goering, Hermann, 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 290], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 337], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 337], 1353 [Pg. 1353 includes portions of Doc. 866 and Doc. 867], 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926]

Goldmann, Nahun, 1057n [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 613], 1137 [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676]

Goodhart, Arthur, 1129 [Pg. 1129 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 1139 [Pg. 1139 includes portions of Doc. 677 and Doc. 678]

Gore-Booth, Paul H., 698n [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 1234–1235 [Pgs. 1234–1235 include portions of Doc. 773, Doc. 774, and Doc. 775], 1245 [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 1315 [Pg. 1315 is part of Doc. 835], 1317–1318 [Pgs. 1317–1318 include portions of Doc. 837, Doc. 838, and Doc. 839], 1323 [Pg. 1323 is part of Doc. 843], 1329 [Pg. 1329 includes portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 1339 [Pg. 1339 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857], 1405–1406 [Pgs. 1405–1406 include portions of Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

Greece (see also European Advisory Commission: Consultation with other Allied Governments; and under Refugees from Europe, etc.): Nazi atrocities in Greece, 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 807 and Doc. 808]; reopening of American Embassy at Athens and Consulate in Salonika, 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763]

Green, Gen. Thomas H., 1272 [Pg. 1272 is part of Doc. 818]

Grew, Joseph C., 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 398], 696–697 [Pgs. 696–697 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, and Doc. 408], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 482], 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 490], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 497], 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 503], 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509], 1525 [Pg. 1525 is part of Appendix: Reorganization of the Department of State]

Gromyko, A. A.: Discussions and activities in connection with preliminaries to the establishment of an international security organization, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 396], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 713–718 [Pgs. 713–718 include portions of Doc. 418, Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422] passim, 734–743 [Pgs. 734–743 include portions of Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429] passim, 747n [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 430], 748–760 [Pgs. 748–760 include portions of Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, and Doc. 439], 761n [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 440], 764–767 [Pgs. 764–767 include portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, and Doc. 444], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 445], 777–805 [Pgs. 777–805 include portions of Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462] passim, 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 815–824 [Pgs. 815–824 include portions of Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475] passim, 825n [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 475], 830n [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480], 838–839 [Pgs. 838–839 include portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482], 843–846 [Pgs. 843–846 include portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, and Doc. 486] passim, 863 [Pg. 863 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 495], 869–870 [Pgs. 869–870 include portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496]; conferences with Roosevelt, 780–782 [Pgs. 780–782 include portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 784–787 [Pgs. 784–787 include portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452]

Miscellaneous, 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 498–499 [Pgs. 498–499 include portions of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, and Doc. 271], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

Soviet position on asylum for war criminals, 1417 [Pg. 1417 includes portions of Doc. 922 and Doc. 923]

Gros, André, 1283 [Pg. 1283 is part of Doc. 827], 1284 [Pg. 1284 is part of Doc. 827], 1285 [Pg. 1285 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828]

Grove-White, Gen. M. P., 697n [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 865n [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 503], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 507]

Guatemala, 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 520], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 526], 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 526], 1022n [Pg. 1022 is part of Doc. 580], 1026n [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 584], 1027n [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1033n [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 1072 [Pg. 1072 is part of Doc. 628], 1084 [Pg. 1084 is part of Doc. 637], 1096 [Pg. 1096 is part of Doc. 644], 1115n [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 1116n [Pg. 1116 includes portions of Doc. 659 and Doc. 660], 1120n [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1157n [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694]

Günther, Christian E., 1414–1415 [Pgs. 1414–1415 include portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, and Doc. 920], 1416 [Pg. 1416 includes portions of Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922]

Gusev (Gousev), F. T., 36–37 [Pgs. 36–37 include portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 29], 42n [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 55–56 [Pgs. 55–56 include portions of Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39], 61–62 [Pgs. 61–62 include portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 79–80 [Pgs. 79–80 include portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 54], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 67], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 102], 197–199 [Pgs. 197–199 include portions of Doc. 104, Doc. 105, and Doc. 106], 235–236 [Pgs. 235–236 include portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122], 238–239 [Pgs. 238–239 include portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 134], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 134], 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 145], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151], 299–301 [Pgs. 299–301 include portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 162], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 165], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 182], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 192], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 403–404 [Pgs. 403–404 include portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206], 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 413–414 [Pgs. 413–414 include portions of Doc. 212, Doc. 213, and Doc. 214], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 232], 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 236], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 237], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, and Doc. 247], 471 [Pg. 471 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 253], 499n [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 1484n [Pg. 1484 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000]

Hackworth, Green H., 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 398], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 398], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 713n [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 420], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 507], 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509], 938–939 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 518], 1247–1248 [Pgs. 1247–1248 include portions of Doc. 787, Doc. 788, Doc. 789, Doc. 790, and Doc. 791], 1251 [Pg. 1251 includes portions of Doc. 795 and Doc. 796], 1325–1326 [Pgs. 1325–1326 include portions of Doc. 844 and Doc. 845], 1329 [Pg. 1329 includes portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 1397–1399 [Pgs. 1397–1399 include portions of Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, Doc. 906, and Doc. 907], 1400 [Pg. 1400 includes portions of Doc. 907 and Doc. 908], 1407–1408 [Pgs. 1407–1408 include portions of Doc. 912, Doc. 913, and Doc. 914], 1496–1499 [Pgs. 1496–1499 include portions of Doc. 1009, Doc. 1010, and Doc. 1011]

Haiti, 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 526], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 566 and Doc. 567], 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 1021n [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1026n [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 584], 1027n [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 1084 [Pg. 1084 is part of Doc. 637], 1115n [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 1116n [Pg. 1116 includes portions of Doc. 659 and Doc. 660], 1156 [Pg. 1156 includes portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693], 1157n [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694], 1420–1422 [Pgs. 1420–1422 include portions of Doc. 928 and Doc. 929], 1441 [Pg. 1441 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954]

Halifax, Viscount, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 17], 389–391 [Pgs. 389–391 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, and Doc. 198], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 274], 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 381], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 641–642 [Pgs. 641–642 include portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, and Doc. 393], 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470], 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 849n [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 495], 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497], 873–874 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 497], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 497], 876 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 497], 880 [Pg. 880 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498], 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 618], 1243–1244 [Pgs. 1243–1244 include portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785], 1250 [Pg. 1250 includes portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795], 1258–1259 [Pgs. 1258–1259 include portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1263–1264 [Pgs. 1263–1264 include portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, and Doc. 815], 1287–1289 [Pgs. 1287–1289 include portions of Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, and Doc. 832], 1314 [Pg. 1314 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1349–1351 [Pgs. 1349–1351 include portions of Doc. 862, Doc. 863, Doc. 864, Doc. 865, and Doc. 866], 1351–1353 [Pgs. 1351–1353 include portions of Doc. 864, Doc. 865, Doc. 866, and Doc. 867], 1401–1402 [Pg. 1401 is part of Doc. 909], 1423–1424 [Pgs. 1423–1424 include portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931], 1452–1453 [Pgs. 1452–1453 include portions of Doc. 970, Doc. 971, Doc. 972, and Doc. 973]

Hall, George, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 6]

Hall-Patch, Leo Edmund, 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]

Hamilton, Maxwell M., 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 406]

Hanneken, Gen. Hermann von, 1291–1292 [Pg. 1291 is part of Doc. 833]

Hare, Raymond A., 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

Hayter, W. G., 14–16 [Pgs. 14–16 include portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8], 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

Heathcote-Smith, Clifford Edward, 1062 [Pg. 1062 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1063 [Pg. 1063 is part of Doc. 619], 1123 [Pg. 1123 includes portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664], 1124 [Pg. 1124 is part of Doc. 664], 1132 [Pg. 1132 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672]

Henlein, Konrad, 1353 [Pg. 1353 includes portions of Doc. 866 and Doc. 867]

Hepburn, Adm. Arthur J., 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 398], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]

Heusinger, Gen. Adolf, 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 280], 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Hewitt, Abran, 489–492 [Pgs. 489–492 include portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 495–496 [Pgs. 495–496 include portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269]

Hickerson, John D., 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 1469 [Pg. 1469 is part of Doc. 990]

Hilldring, Gen. John H., 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 105], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 108], 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 208], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 227], 1469 [Pg. 1469 is part of Doc. 990]

Himmler, Heinrich, 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 489–490 [Pgs. 489–490 include portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 263], 492–493 [Pgs. 492–493 include portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 303], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 336], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 337], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 337], 1164 [Pg. 1164 includes portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703], 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885], 1416 [Pg. 1416 includes portions of Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 1425 [Pg. 1425 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932]

Hirschmann, Ira, 1009 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 571], 1045–1048 [Pgs. 1045–1048 include portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, and Doc. 605], 1061–1062 [Pgs. 1061–1062 include portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1104–1105 [Pgs. 1104–1105 include portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 1119 [Pg. 1119 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661]

Hiss, Alger, 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 398], 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 715n [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 716n [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 420], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 750 [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483], 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 483], 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497]

Hitler, Adolf, 452n [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 263], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 263], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 263], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 275], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 280], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 280], 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 290, Doc. 291, and Doc. 292], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 294], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 301], 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 303], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 303], 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 547 [Pg. 547 includes portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 320], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 325], 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 337], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 337], 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 999 [Pg. 999 includes portions of Doc. 565 and Doc. 566], 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 569], 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 569], 1006 [Pg. 1006 is part of Doc. 570], 1007 [Pg. 1007 is part of Doc. 570], 1009 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 571], 1015 [Pg. 1015 includes portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575], 1066 [Pg. 1066 includes portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622], 1230 [Pg. 1230 includes portions of Doc. 770 and Doc. 771], 1231 [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 771 and Doc. 772], 1298 [Pg. 1298 is part of Doc. 833], 1353 [Pg. 1353 includes portions of Doc. 866 and Doc. 867], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 878 and Doc. 879], 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885], 1416 [Pg. 1416 includes portions of Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 1425 [Pg. 1425 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932]

Hodgson, Lt. Col. Joseph V., 1344 [Pg. 1344 is part of Doc. 861], 1360 [Pg. 1360 includes portions of Doc. 869 and Doc. 870], 1363 [Pg. 1363 is part of Doc. 873], 1364 [Pg. 1364 includes portions of Doc. 873 and Doc. 874], 1391 [Pg. 1391 includes portions of Doc. 893 and Doc. 894]

Holmes, Gen. Julius C., 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 1471n [Pg. 1471 is part of Doc. 991]

Honduras, 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 520], 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 526], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 566 and Doc. 567], 1021n [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1026n [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 584], 1027n [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1033n [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 1072 [Pg. 1072 is part of Doc. 628], 1083 [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 637], 1084 [Pg. 1084 is part of Doc. 637], 1087 [Pg. 1087 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638], 1096 [Pg. 1096 is part of Doc. 644], 1115n [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 1116n [Pg. 1116 includes portions of Doc. 659 and Doc. 660], 1120n [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1150 [Pg. 1150 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1157n [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694]

Hoo, Victor, 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 851–862 [Pgs. 851–862 include portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, and Doc. 491] passim, 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 494], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497], 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 503], 886–887 [Pg. 886 is part of Doc. 503]

Hopkins, Harry, 359n [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 178], 360n [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 178], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 429], 780–781 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 449], 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 810–811 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 465], 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 483], 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 483]

Hoppenot, Henri, 90–91 [Pgs. 90–91 include portions of Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61], 1244 [Pg. 1244 includes portions of Doc. 784 and Doc. 785]

Hornbeck, Stanley K., 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 398], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]

Horthy, Adm. Nicholas (Miklos), 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 1069n [Pg. 1069 includes portions of Doc. 624 and Doc. 625], 1106 [Pg. 1106 includes portions of Doc. 652 and Doc. 653], 1120 [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663]

Hull, Cordell: Communication of views and recommendations to President Roosevelt, 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 344–346 [Pgs. 344–346 include portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 437–438 [Pgs. 437–438 include portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265], 509–510 [Pgs. 509–510 include portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280], 527–528 [Pgs. 527–528 include portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 584–585 [Pgs. 584–585 include portions of Doc. 342, Doc. 343, and Doc. 344], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, and Doc. 348], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 606–607 [Pgs. 606–607 include portions of Doc. 367, Doc. 368, and Doc. 369], 614–615 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 376], 647–650 [Pgs. 647–650 include portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 968–969 [Pgs. 968–969 include portions of Doc. 535, Doc. 536, and Doc. 537]

Discussions and activities relative to— Asylum for war criminals, 1431–1432 [Pgs. 1431–1432 include portions of Doc. 940 and Doc. 941], 1436 [Pg. 1436 includes portions of Doc. 945 and Doc. 946], 1447 [Pg. 1447 includes portions of Doc. 961, Doc. 962, and Doc. 963], 1450 [Pg. 1450 includes portions of Doc. 967 and Doc. 968], 1453–1454 [Pgs. 1453–1454 include portions of Doc. 972 and Doc. 973]

Austria, 437–438 [Pgs. 437–438 include portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

Diplomatic and consular property of enemy governments, 1479–1480 [Pgs. 1479–1480 include portions of Doc. 995 and Doc. 996], 1496n [Pg. 1496 includes portions of Doc. 1009 and Doc. 1010]

European Advisory Commission, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 90–91 [Pgs. 90–91 include portions of Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61]

France, 90–91 [Pgs. 90–91 include portions of Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61]

Germany, postwar treatment of, 276–277 [Pgs. 276–277 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 344–346 [Pgs. 344–346 include portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 357–358 [Pgs. 357–358 include portions of Doc. 175, Doc. 176, and Doc. 177]

International Security Organization, preliminaries to the establishment of, 614–615 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 376], 620–622 [Pgs. 620–622 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 637–638 [Pgs. 637–638 include portions of Doc. 386, Doc. 387, and Doc. 388], 638n –639n [Pgs. 638–639 include portions of Doc. 387, Doc. 388, and Doc. 389], 641–642 [Pgs. 641–642 include portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, and Doc. 393], 646–650 [Pgs. 646–650 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 714n [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 419], 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 744n [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 429], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 433], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 437], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 761n [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 440], 768–770 [Pgs. 768–770 include portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 773–776 [Pgs. 773–776 include portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 780–781 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 449], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461], 809–810 [Pgs. 809–810 include portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 811 [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 465], 813–814 [Pgs. 813–814 include portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 816 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 471], 816n [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 471], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 473], 823–824 [Pgs. 823–824 include portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 832–833 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 479], 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489], 863 [Pg. 863 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501]; reactions of other nations, 925–930 [Pgs. 925–930 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, and Doc. 514], 968–969 [Pgs. 968–969 include portions of Doc. 535, Doc. 536, and Doc. 537]

July 20 attack on Hitler, statement regarding, 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

Nazi atrocities and persecution of Jewish people, 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 549], 1101 [Pg. 1101 is part of Doc. 648], 1242 [Pg. 1242 includes portions of Doc. 782 and Doc. 783], 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 787, Doc. 788, and Doc. 789], 1248 [Pg. 1248 includes portions of Doc. 789, Doc. 790, and Doc. 791], 1249 [Pg. 1249 includes portions of Doc. 792 and Doc. 793], 1259n [Pg. 1259 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1261 [Pg. 1261 includes portions of Doc. 809 and Doc. 810]

Statements to weaken German resistance, question of, 527–528 [Pgs. 527–528 include portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309, and Doc. 310]

Surrender terms for Germany, and reports of peace feelers, 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265], 509–510 [Pgs. 509–510 include portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]; surrender terms for Axis satellites, 584–585 [Pgs. 584–585 include portions of Doc. 342, Doc. 343, and Doc. 344], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, and Doc. 348], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 606–607 [Pgs. 606–607 include portions of Doc. 367, Doc. 368, and Doc. 369]

War crimes and U. N. War Crimes Commission, 1324–1325 [Pgs. 1324–1325 include portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, and Doc. 845], 1351 [Pg. 1351 includes portions of Doc. 864, Doc. 865, and Doc. 866], 1361–1362 [Pgs. 1361–1362 include portions of Doc. 870, Doc. 871, and Doc. 872], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 878 and Doc. 879], 1389 [Pg. 1389 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1401n [Pg. 1401 is part of Doc. 909]

Resignation as Secretary of State, 1525 [Pg. 1525 is part of Appendix: Reorganization of the Department of State]

Hungarian Red Cross, 1119 [Pg. 1119 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1128–1129 [Pgs. 1128–1129 include portions of Doc. 668, Doc. 669, and Doc. 670], 1134 [Pg. 1134 is part of Doc. 674], 1165 [Pg. 1165 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1181 [Pg. 1181 includes portions of Doc. 715 and Doc. 716]

Hungary (see also Unconditional surrender principle, question of application to Bulgaria, Finland, Hungary, and Rumania; and under Refugees from Europe, etc.): American interests, 1199–1200 [Pgs. 1199–1200 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733], 1211–1212 [Pgs. 1211–1212 include portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc. 750], 1221 [Pg. 1221 includes portions of Doc. 758, Doc. 759, and Doc. 760]; Austro-Hungarian border, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 231]; Nazi atrocities in Hungary, 1341 [Pg. 1341 is part of Doc. 858]; surrender terms for, preparation of, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 28]

Hurley, Gen. Patrick J., 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 452], 1351n [Pg. 1351 includes portions of Doc. 864, Doc. 865, and Doc. 866]

Hurst, Sir Cecil J. B., 1265 [Pg. 1265 includes portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817], 1274 [Pg. 1274 includes portions of Doc. 819, Doc. 820, and Doc. 821], 1285 [Pg. 1285 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1286 [Pg. 1286 includes portions of Doc. 828 and Doc. 829], 1321–1322 [Pgs. 1321–1322 include portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842], 1327–1328 [Pgs. 1327–1328 include portions of Doc. 846 and Doc. 847], 1341 [Pg. 1341 is part of Doc. 858], 1343 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 861], 1344 [Pg. 1344 is part of Doc. 861], 1345 [Pg. 1345 is part of Doc. 861], 1349 [Pg. 1349 includes portions of Doc. 862, Doc. 863, and Doc. 864], 1352 [Pg. 1352 is part of Doc. 866], 1354 [Pg. 1354 includes portions of Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869], 1360 [Pg. 1360 includes portions of Doc. 869 and Doc. 870], 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 880 and Doc. 881], 1379 [Pg. 1379 is part of Doc. 883], 1383–1384 [Pgs. 1383–1384 include portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, and Doc. 888], 1392 [Pg. 1392 includes portions of Doc. 895 and Doc. 896]

Inter-American Committee for Political Defense, 1182 [Pg. 1182 includes portions of Doc. 716 and Doc. 717], 1183 [Pg. 1183 is part of Doc. 717]

Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees. See under Refugees from Europe, etc.

International Committee of the Red Cross. See under Refugees from Europe, etc.

International Labor Organization, 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 404], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 404], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 406], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 422]

International organization for maintenance of peace and security, preliminaries to establishment of. See Dumbarton Oaks Conversations.

Ireland (see also under War criminals, representations to neutral governments, etc.: U. S. and British representations), 1120n [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1150 [Pg. 1150 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707]

Ismay, Gen. Sir Hastings L., 1455n [Pg. 1455 is part of Doc. 974]

Italy (see also German war crimes in Italy and Italian war crimes under United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes; see also under Refugees from Europe, etc.): American interests in, 1200 [Pg. 1200 includes portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733], 1210–1211 [Pgs. 1210–1211 include portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 1212 [Pg. 1212 includes portions of Doc. 749 and Doc. 750], 1215–1217 [Pgs. 1215–1217 include portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, Doc. 753, and Doc. 754], 1222–1223 [Pg. 1222 is part of Doc. 761]; armistice, consideration in connection with preparing German surrender terms, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 77], 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]; frontier with Austria, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 231]; German atrocities in Italy, 1254 [Pg. 1254 includes portions of Doc. 799, Doc. 800, and Doc. 801], 1256 [Pg. 1256 includes portions of Doc. 803 and Doc. 804], 1257 [Pg. 1257 includes portions of Doc. 804 and Doc. 805], 1259–1260 [Pgs. 1259–1260 include portions of Doc. 806, Doc. 807, and Doc. 808]; German surrender arrangements, question of Italian participation in, 64–68 [Pgs. 64–68 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48], 77–78 [Pgs. 77–78 include portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 53]; liberation of Rome, June 4, 1944, 1200 [Pg. 1200 includes portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733]

Jacobus, Colonel, 1519–1520 [Pgs. 1519–1520 include portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025]

Japan: Censorship in U. S.-Japanese war, 1513 [Pg. 1513 includes portions of Doc. 1021 and Doc. 1022], 1514 [Pg. 1514 is part of Doc. 1022], 1516 [Pg. 1516 is part of Doc. 1022], 1517 [Pg. 1517 includes portions of Doc. 1022 and Doc. 1023], 1519 [Pg. 1519 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025], 1522 [Pg. 1522 includes portions of Doc. 1027 and Doc. 1028]; violation of U. S. diplomatic and consular property in Far East, 1479n [Pg. 1479 is part of Doc. 995], 1500 [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1011]; war crimes, 1230 [Pg. 1230 includes portions of Doc. 770 and Doc. 771], 1327–1329 [Pgs. 1327–1329 include portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848], 1331 [Pg. 1331 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850]

Jebb, Gladwyn, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 420], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 750 [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 436], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 455], 798 [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 460], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 460], 803 [Pg. 803 is part of Doc. 460], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 852–860 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 490], 861 [Pg. 861 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497], 874 [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 497], 876 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 497], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 497], 878 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 497], 880 [Pg. 880 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498], 885–888 [Pgs. 885–888 include portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 507], 902 [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 507]

Jewish Agency for Palestine, 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 602], 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 613], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637], 1089 [Pg. 1089 includes portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640], 1130 [Pg. 1130 is part of Doc. 670], 1143 [Pg. 1143 is part of Doc. 682]

Jews, atrocities against (see also Refugees from Europe, etc.), 1199 [Pg. 1199 includes portions of Doc. 730 and Doc. 731], 1199n [Pg. 1199 includes portions of Doc. 730 and Doc. 731], 1221 [Pg. 1221 includes portions of Doc. 758, Doc. 759, and Doc. 760], 1230–1231 [Pgs. 1230–1231 include portions of Doc. 770, Doc. 771, and Doc. 772], 1234 [Pg. 1234 includes portions of Doc. 773, Doc. 774, and Doc. 775], 1235 [Pg. 1235 is part of Doc. 775], 1250 [Pg. 1250 includes portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795], 1261 [Pg. 1261 includes portions of Doc. 809 and Doc. 810], 1292 [Pg. 1292 is part of Doc. 833], 1341 [Pg. 1341 is part of Doc. 858], 1379–1380 [Pgs. 1379–1380 include portions of Doc. 883 and Doc. 884], 1404 [Pg. 1404 is part of Doc. 909]

John, Otto, 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 269], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Johnson, Joseph E., 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

Joint Chiefs of Staff (see also under Germany, etc.): Interest in European Advisory Commission discussions on Austria, 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 231], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 462–465 [Pgs. 462–465 include portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 469–470 [Pgs. 469–470 include portions of Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249], 470–471 [Pgs. 470–471 include portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]; jurisdiction over Office of Strategic Services, 1455n [Pg. 1455 is part of Doc. 974] ; members, 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410] ; memorandum in connection with Dumbarton Oaks discussions on territorial trusteeships, 699–703 [Pgs. 699–703 include portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]; repatriation of American citizens from Europe, 1214n [Pg. 1214 is part of Doc. 751] ; representation on London Political Warfare Coordinating Committee, 1455n [Pg. 1455 is part of Doc. 974] ; State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee, reference of questions by, 1467 [Pg. 1467 is part of Doc. 988], 1468 [Pg. 1468 is part of Doc. 989], 1470n [Pg. 1470 is part of Doc. 990]

Kallay, Nicholas, 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 1050 [Pg. 1050 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608]

Kapustin, Alexander N., 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]

Kefauver, Grayson N., 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 973–974 [Pgs. 973–974 include portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541], 977 [Pg. 977 includes portions of Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545], 978 [Pg. 978 is part of Doc. 545], 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 547 and Doc. 548]

Keitel, Field Marshal Wilhelm, 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 280]

Keller, Hermann, 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 271], 500n [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 271]

Kennan, George F., 19–20 [Pgs. 19–20 include portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 108], 208n [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 108], 208–209 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 108]

Kerr, Sir Archibald J. K. Clark, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 17], 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 575–577 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 337], 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 603–604 [Pgs. 603–604 include portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 384], 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 1405 [Pg. 1405 includes portions of Doc. 909 and Doc. 910], 1453 [Pg. 1453 includes portions of Doc. 972 and Doc. 973], 1457n [Pg. 1457 is part of Doc. 975]

Kersten, Felix, 489–493 [Pgs. 489–493 include portions of Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265]

Kessel, Albrecht von, 532–537 [Pgs. 532–537 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 571–572 [Pgs. 571–572 include portions of Doc. 334, Doc. 335, and Doc. 336]

Kesselring, Field Marshal Albrecht, 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 303]

Keynes, John Maynard, 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 381]

King, Adm. Ernest J., 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

Kirk, Alexander C., 548–550 [Pgs. 548–550 include portions of Doc. 314, Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 1054n [Pg. 1054 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611], 1149 [Pg. 1149 includes portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, and Doc. 688], 1200 [Pg. 1200 includes portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733], 1201 [Pg. 1201 includes portions of Doc. 733 and Doc. 734], 1203n [Pg. 1203 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 1257 [Pg. 1257 includes portions of Doc. 804 and Doc. 805], 1259–1260 [Pgs. 1259–1260 include portions of Doc. 806, Doc. 807, and Doc. 808], 1378 [Pg. 1378 includes portions of Doc. 882 and Doc. 883], 1384 [Pg. 1384 includes portions of Doc. 887 and Doc. 888], 1389 [Pg. 1389 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1408 [Pg. 1408 includes portions of Doc. 913 and Doc. 914], 1486n [Pg. 1486 includes portions of Doc. 1001 and Doc. 1002]

Kleffens, Eelco van, 58–60 [Pgs. 58–60 include portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 389], 944–947 [Pgs. 944–947 include portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521], 953–954 [Pgs. 953–954 include portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526]

Kleist, Peter von, 525–526 [Pgs. 525–526 include portions of Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 325]

Kloth, Mr., 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 337], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 337]

Koenig, Gen. Joseph Pierre, 1236n [Pg. 1236 includes portions of Doc. 775, Doc. 776, and Doc. 777], 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 779 and Doc. 780], 1243 [Pg. 1243 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784], 1244 [Pg. 1244 includes portions of Doc. 784 and Doc. 785], 1245 [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786]

Koo, V. K. Wellington, 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 743n [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 482], 841–842 [Pgs. 841–842 include portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483], 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 484 and Doc. 485], 850–862 [Pgs. 850–862 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, and Doc. 491] passim, 863–869 [Pgs. 863–869 include portions of Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 871–880 [Pgs. 871–880 include portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 498 and Doc. 499], 884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 502], 885–887 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 503], 1327 [Pg. 1327 is part of Doc. 846], 1338 [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 854 and Doc. 855]

Kullmann, G. G., 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 566 and Doc. 567], 1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 1024 [Pg. 1024 includes portions of Doc. 582 and Doc. 583], 1029–1030 [Pgs. 1029–1030 include portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587]

Kung, H. H., 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 718n [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 452]

Langenhove, Fernand van, 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 33], 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 33]

Lanz, General von, 547–548 [Pgs. 547–548 include portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319]

League of Nations, question of liquidation of, and transition to new international organization, 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 483], 857–858 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 490], 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 885–888 [Pgs. 885–888 include portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504], 915–921 [Pgs. 915–921 include portions of Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509]

Leahy, Adm. William D., 13n [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 6], 167–168 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 90], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 174], 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 180], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 187], 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 543–544 [Pgs. 543–544 include portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311], 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 1214n [Pg. 1214 is part of Doc. 751], 1495–1496 [Pgs. 1495–1496 include portions of Doc. 1008, Doc. 1009, and Doc. 1010]

Lebedev, V. Z., 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 35n [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 40]

Lequerica, José Felix, 1419–1420 [Pgs. 1419–1420 include portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929], 1426 [Pg. 1426 includes portions of Doc. 932 and Doc. 933], 1432–1433 [Pgs. 1432–1433 include portions of Doc. 940, Doc. 941, and Doc. 942], 1435 [Pg. 1435 includes portions of Doc. 943, Doc. 944, and Doc. 945]

Lescot, Elie, correspondence with President Roosevelt, 1420–1422 [Pgs. 1420–1422 include portions of Doc. 928 and Doc. 929], 1441 [Pg. 1441 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954]

Liang, Dr., 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 503], 1284 [Pg. 1284 is part of Doc. 827]

Lie, Trygve, 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 40]

Lipski, Josef, 944–945 [Pgs. 944–945 include portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521], 947–948 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 521]

Litvinov, M. M., 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 406], 827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 476]

Liu Chieh, 646n [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 397], 696–697 [Pgs. 696–697 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, and Doc. 408], 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 483], 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 490], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 497], 880 [Pg. 880 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498], 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 503]

Lockhard, Sir Robert Bruce, 1455n [Pg. 1455 is part of Doc. 974]

London Coordinating Committee for Political Warfare, successful Anglo-American effort to effect Soviet participation in work of, 1455–1465 [Pgs. 1455–1465 include portions of Doc. 974, Doc. 975, Doc. 976, Doc. 977, Doc. 978, Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, Doc. 982, Doc. 983, Doc. 984, Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987]

Long, Breckinridge, 502–505 [Pgs. 502–505 include portions of Doc. 273, Doc. 274, and Doc. 275], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 398], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 813–814 [Pgs. 813–814 include portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474], 1007 [Pg. 1007 is part of Doc. 570], 1476n [Pg. 1476 is part of Doc. 994]

López-Herrarte, Enrique, 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 520], 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521]

Lozovski, S. A., 1465 [Pg. 1465 includes portions of Doc. 986 and Doc. 987]

Luxembourg. See European Advisory Commission: Consultation with other Allied Governments.

Luxford, Ansel F., 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 224]

Maclean, Brig. Fitzroy H. R., 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319], 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586]

MacLeish, Archibald, 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 540]

Macmillan, Harold, 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 880 and Doc. 881], 1377 [Pg. 1377 includes portions of Doc. 881 and Doc. 882], 1473n [Pg. 1473 is part of Doc. 992], 1508 [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017], 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1020 and Doc. 1021], 1517 [Pg. 1517 includes portions of Doc. 1022 and Doc. 1023]

Macready, Gen. Gordon N., 361–362 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 178], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 197], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488]

Maffey, Sir John, 1427 [Pg. 1427 includes portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934], 1429 [Pg. 1429 includes portions of Doc. 936 and Doc. 937], 1430 [Pg. 1430 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939], 1437 [Pg. 1437 includes portions of Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948]

Magruder, Gen. John, 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

Malkin, Sir William, 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 507], 904 [Pg. 904 is part of Doc. 507], 905 [Pg. 905 is part of Doc. 507], 906 [Pg. 906 is part of Doc. 507]

Marshall, Gen. George C., 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 699–700 [Pgs. 699–700 include portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 479]

Martins, Carlos, 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 483], 924–925 [Pgs. 924–925 include portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 526], 956 [Pg. 956 is part of Doc. 526], 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 526]

Masaryk, Jan, 1253 [Pg. 1253 includes portions of Doc. 797 and Doc. 798]

Mason, Paul, 1151 [Pg. 1151 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], 1190 [Pg. 1190 includes portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724]

Massigli, René, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 55], 87–88 [Pgs. 87–88 include portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59], 88–89 [Pgs. 88–89 include portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 67], 100n [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 198, Doc. 199, and Doc. 200], 413–414 [Pgs. 413–414 include portions of Doc. 212, Doc. 213, and Doc. 214], 427–429 [Pgs. 427–429 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 1232 [Pg. 1232 is part of Doc. 773], 1239 [Pg. 1239 is part of Doc. 779], 1242 [Pg. 1242 includes portions of Doc. 782 and Doc. 783]

Matthews, H. Freeman, 20–21 [Pgs. 20–21 include portions of Doc. 11, Doc. 12, Doc. 13, and Doc. 14], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 178], 381–382 [Pgs. 381–382 include portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, and Doc. 191], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 421n [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 221], 1457n [Pg. 1457 is part of Doc. 975]

McClelland, Roswell, 1067n [Pg. 1067 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 1139–1140 [Pgs. 1139–1140 include portions of Doc. 677, Doc. 678, and Doc. 679], 1169 [Pg. 1169 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1180 [Pg. 1180 includes portions of Doc. 713, Doc. 714, and Doc. 715]

McCloy, John J., 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 178], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 178], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 178], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 197], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 406–407 [Pgs. 406–407 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, and Doc. 208], 410–411 [Pgs. 410–411 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 223], 1395 [Pg. 1395 includes portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900], 1466n [Pg. 1466 is part of Doc. 988], 1468 [Pg. 1468 is part of Doc. 989], 1469 [Pg. 1469 is part of Doc. 990]

McClure, Gen. Robert A., 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 326], 560n [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 326]

McDermott, Michael J., 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 445], 1457n [Pg. 1457 is part of Doc. 975]

McFarland, Gen. A. J., 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 241], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 308]

Menemencioğlu, Numan R., 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 1041n [Pg. 1041 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600]

Mexico, 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 518], 942–943 [Pg. 942 is part of Doc. 520], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 526], 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 526], 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1086 [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 637], 1130 [Pg. 1130 is part of Doc. 670], 1138 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 677], 1150 [Pg. 1150 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1176 [Pg. 1176 includes portions of Doc. 709 and Doc. 710], 1177 [Pg. 1177 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711]

Meyer, Gen. Vincent, 60n [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42], 62n [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 354n [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

Middle East Relief and Refugee Administration (MERRA), 994 [Pg. 994 includes portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, and Doc. 563], 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 1093 [Pg. 1093 is part of Doc. 642]

Mihailovich, Gen. Draža, 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 1508n [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017], 1509 [Pg. 1509 includes portions of Doc. 1017 and Doc. 1018]

Molotov, V. M., 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 9n [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 35–36 [Pgs. 35–36 include portions of Doc. 25, Doc. 26, and Doc. 27], 35n [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 50], 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265], 580–582 [Pgs. 580–582 include portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 384], 642n [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 395], 783n [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 452], 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 476], 888–889 [Pgs. 888–889 include portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506], 1461n [Pg. 1461 includes portions of Doc. 979, Doc. 980, and Doc. 981], 1463 [Pg. 1463 includes portions of Doc. 983 and Doc. 984]

Montini, Giovanni Battista, 960–961 [Pgs. 960–961 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, and Doc. 529]

Mora, Marcial, 943n [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 520], 956 [Pg. 956 is part of Doc. 526], 957 [Pg. 957 is part of Doc. 526]

Morgenthau, Henry, Jr., 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319], 988n [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 555], 1120n [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1123 [Pg. 1123 includes portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664]; proposal regarding postwar treatment of Germany, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 167], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 172], 425–426 [Pgs. 425–426 include portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]

Moscow Conference of Foreign Ministers (1943), documents cited, 110n [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 77], 114n [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 79], 115n [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 79], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 82], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 151], 614n [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 376], 622n [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 628–629 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 381], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 404], 691–692 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 404]

Moscow Declaration on Austria (1943), cited, 438–439 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 231], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

Moscow Declaration on General Security (1943), cited, 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 353], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 357]

Moscow Declaration of German Atrocities (1943), cited, 1233n [Pg. 1233 is part of Doc. 773], 1235 [Pg. 1235 is part of Doc. 775], 1242 [Pg. 1242 includes portions of Doc. 782 and Doc. 783], 1248 [Pg. 1248 includes portions of Doc. 789, Doc. 790, and Doc. 791], 1256 [Pg. 1256 includes portions of Doc. 803 and Doc. 804], 1279 [Pg. 1279 is part of Doc. 824], 1287 [Pg. 1287 includes portions of Doc. 829 and Doc. 830], 1288 [Pg. 1288 is part of Doc. 830], 1353 [Pg. 1353 includes portions of Doc. 866 and Doc. 867], 1361 [Pg. 1361 includes portions of Doc. 870, Doc. 871, and Doc. 872], 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 878 and Doc. 879], 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885], 1389 [Pg. 1389 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1397 [Pg. 1397 includes portions of Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, and Doc. 905]

Mosely, Philip E., 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 67], 97n [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127], 331–332 [Pgs. 331–332 include portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 359–364 [Pgs. 359–364 include portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 370–371 [Pgs. 370–371 include portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 388–389 [Pgs. 388–389 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197], 391–392 [Pgs. 391–392 include portions of Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, and Doc. 200], 394–395 [Pgs. 394–395 include portions of Doc. 201, Doc. 202, and Doc. 203], 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 429–434 [Pgs. 429–434 include portions of Doc. 226, Doc. 227, and Doc. 228], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 237]

Murphy, Robert D., 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 203], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 560–561 [Pgs. 560–561 include portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 607n [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369], 1052n [Pg. 1052 includes portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610], 1062–1064 [Pgs. 1062–1064 include portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, and Doc. 620], 1070n [Pg. 1070 includes portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627], 1080 [Pg. 1080 is part of Doc. 635], 1092–1094 [Pgs. 1092–1094 include portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, and Doc. 644], 1194n [Pg. 1194 includes portions of Doc. 726 and Doc. 727], 1472 [Pg. 1472 is part of Doc. 991], 1476n [Pg. 1476 is part of Doc. 994], 1484–1485 [Pgs. 1484–1485 include portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1489 [Pg. 1489 includes portions of Doc. 1003, Doc. 1004, and Doc. 1005], 1507n [Pg. 1507 includes portions of Doc. 1014, Doc. 1015, and Doc. 1016], 1507–1508 [Pgs. 1507–1508 include portions of Doc. 1014, Doc. 1015, Doc. 1016, and Doc. 1017], 1509n [Pg. 1509 includes portions of Doc. 1017 and Doc. 1018], 1512–1513 [Pgs. 1512–1513 include portions of Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, and Doc. 1022]

Murray, Wallace, 1436–1437 [Pgs. 1436–1437 include portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948]

Mussolini, Benito, 1298 [Pg. 1298 is part of Doc. 833], 1353 [Pg. 1353 includes portions of Doc. 866 and Doc. 867], 1416 [Pg. 1416 includes portions of Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 1425 [Pg. 1425 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932], 1474n [Pg. 1474 includes portions of Doc. 992 and Doc. 993]

Myrdal, Gunnar, 524–525 [Pgs. 524–525 include portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

Nazi atrocities, Allied warnings regarding, 1227–1264 [Pgs. 1227–1264 include portions of Doc. 766, Doc. 767, Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, Doc. 772, Doc. 773, Doc. 774, Doc. 775, Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, Doc. 788, Doc. 789, Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, and Doc. 815] Allied prisoners of war in Germany: German intention to try as war criminals, Anglo-American discussions regarding, and statements by President Roosevelt and Foreign Minister Eden, 1227–1231 [Pgs. 1227–1231 include portions of Doc. 766, Doc. 767, Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, and Doc. 772], 1233n [Pg. 1233 is part of Doc. 773]

Joint Anglo-American-Soviet warning against mistreatment of prisoners of war, British suggestion regarding, and draft text, 1258–1259 [Pgs. 1258–1259 include portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1263–1264 [Pgs. 1263–1264 include portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, and Doc. 815]

Czech appeal to United States to issue warning to Germans regarding the mistreatment of prisoners of war, 1253 [Pg. 1253 includes portions of Doc. 797 and Doc. 798], 1262 [Pg. 1262 includes portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812]

France: Allied parachutists treated as francs-tireurs by Germans, reports regarding, and Allied protests, 1249 [Pg. 1249 includes portions of Doc. 792 and Doc. 793], 1250–1251 [Pgs. 1250–1251 include portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796], 1254 [Pg. 1254 includes portions of Doc. 799, Doc. 800, and Doc. 801], 1260–1261 [Pgs. 1260–1261 include portions of Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, and Doc. 810], 1263 [Pg. 1263 includes portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, and Doc. 815]; German refusal to accept U. S. communications, 1178 [Pg. 1178 includes portions of Doc. 711 and Doc. 712], 1263 [Pg. 1263 includes portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, and Doc. 815]

Political prisoners forced by Germans to remove fuses from delayed action bombs, Allied reaction to, 1244–1246 [Pgs. 1244–1246 include portions of Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, and Doc. 787], 1251–1252 [Pgs. 1251–1252 include portions of Doc. 795, Doc. 796, and Doc. 797]

Request by French Committee of National Liberation for an Allied joint declaration against mass executions in German-occupied countries, and discussions regarding, 1232–1234 [Pgs. 1232–1234 include portions of Doc. 773, Doc. 774, and Doc. 775], 1234–1236 [Pgs. 1234–1236 include portions of Doc. 773, Doc. 774, Doc. 775, Doc. 776, and Doc. 777], 1237–1238 [Pgs. 1237–1238 include portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, and Doc. 779], 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 779 and Doc. 780], 1242–1243 [Pgs. 1242–1243 include portions of Doc. 782, Doc. 783, and Doc. 784], 1247–1248 [Pgs. 1247–1248 include portions of Doc. 787, Doc. 788, Doc. 789, Doc. 790, and Doc. 791], 1249 [Pg. 1249 includes portions of Doc. 792 and Doc. 793]

Retaliatory measures against six German prisoners of war, Anglo-American concern regarding, 1236–1240 [Pgs. 1236–1240 include portions of Doc. 775, Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, and Doc. 780], 1243–1244 [Pgs. 1243–1244 include portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785], 1248 [Pg. 1248 includes portions of Doc. 789, Doc. 790, and Doc. 791]

Hungary and Greece, 1242 [Pg. 1242 includes portions of Doc. 782 and Doc. 783]

Italian proposal for an Allied and Italian simultaneous warning against German atrocities in Northern Italy, 1254 [Pg. 1254 includes portions of Doc. 799, Doc. 800, and Doc. 801], 1256–1257 [Pgs. 1256–1257 include portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805], 1259–1260 [Pgs. 1259–1260 include portions of Doc. 806, Doc. 807, and Doc. 808]

Moscow Declaration of German Atrocities (1943), cited in connection with, 1233 [Pg. 1233 is part of Doc. 773], 1235 [Pg. 1235 is part of Doc. 775], 1242 [Pg. 1242 includes portions of Doc. 782 and Doc. 783], 1248 [Pg. 1248 includes portions of Doc. 789, Doc. 790, and Doc. 791], 1256 [Pg. 1256 includes portions of Doc. 803 and Doc. 804]

Polish appeal for, and issuance of warnings in effort to save Poles, other non-German nationals, and Jews from extermination in Polish concentration camps, 1234 [Pg. 1234 includes portions of Doc. 773, Doc. 774, and Doc. 775], 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 787, Doc. 788, and Doc. 789], 1250 [Pg. 1250 includes portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795], 1252–1253 [Pgs. 1252–1253 include portions of Doc. 796, Doc. 797, and Doc. 798], 1254–1255 [Pgs. 1254–1255 include portions of Doc. 799, Doc. 800, Doc. 801, and Doc. 802], 1255 [Pg. 1255 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802], 1261–1262 [Pgs. 1261–1262 include portions of Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812]

Statements by General Eisenhower, 1174 [Pg. 1174 includes portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708]; Governor Dewey, 1261–1262 [Pgs. 1261–1262 include portions of Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812]; President Roosevelt, 1230–1231 [Pgs. 1230–1231 include portions of Doc. 770, Doc. 771, and Doc. 772]

Netherlands (see also European Advisory Commission: Civil affairs arrangements for liberated areas, and Consultation with other Allied Governments): Censorship agreement with United States, 1510 [Pg. 1510 includes portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019], 1511n [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1019 and Doc. 1020], 1520 [Pg. 1520 is part of Doc. 1025]; Dumbarton Oaks Proposals, views regarding, 944–947 [Pgs. 944–947 include portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521], 953–954 [Pgs. 953–954 include portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526]; postwar boundaries with Germany, U. S. position, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 154], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 154]; representation on United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes, 1284 [Pg. 1284 is part of Doc. 827], 1299 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 834]

Neubacher, Herman, 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 553n [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

Nicaragua, 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 1021n [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1026n [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 584], 1027n [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1033n [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 1072 [Pg. 1072 is part of Doc. 628], 1084 [Pg. 1084 is part of Doc. 637], 1095 [Pg. 1095 is part of Doc. 644], 1115n [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 1116n [Pg. 1116 includes portions of Doc. 659 and Doc. 660], 1120n [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1150 [Pg. 1150 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1157n [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694]

Noble, Adm. Sir Percy, 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]

Norway (see also European Advisory Commission: Civil affairs arrangements for liberated areas, and Consultation with other Allied Governments): Censorship agreement with United States, 1510 [Pg. 1510 includes portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019], 1511n [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1019 and Doc. 1020], 1520 [Pg. 1520 is part of Doc. 1025]; representation on United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes, 1283 [Pg. 1283 is part of Doc. 827]

Notter, Harley A., 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 398], 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 503], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 507]

Office of Strategic Services (OSS), 567–570 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 333], 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 339], 580–581 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 340], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 374], 1266 [Pg. 1266 includes portions of Doc. 817 and Doc. 818], 1455n [Pg. 1455 is part of Doc. 974], 1460 [Pg. 1460 includes portions of Doc. 978 and Doc. 979]

Office of War Information (OWI), 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 569], 1016 [Pg. 1016 includes portions of Doc. 575 and Doc. 576], 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 602], 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 620 and Doc. 621], 1262 [Pg. 1262 includes portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812], 1455 [Pg. 1455 is part of Doc. 974], 1456 [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 974], 1457 [Pg. 1457 is part of Doc. 975], 1458 [Pg. 1458 includes portions of Doc. 976, Doc. 977, and Doc. 978], 1459 [Pg. 1459 is part of Doc. 978], 1461 [Pg. 1461 includes portions of Doc. 979, Doc. 980, and Doc. 981], 1463 [Pg. 1463 includes portions of Doc. 983 and Doc. 984], 1464 [Pg. 1464 includes portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, and Doc. 986]

Offie, Carmel, 547–548 [Pgs. 547–548 include portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315]

Olbricht, Gen. Friedrich, 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 280], 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 301]

Olsen, Iver, 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 593 and Doc. 594], 1039 [Pg. 1039 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 1049 [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607]

Overlord, 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 180–181 [Pgs. 180–181 include portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

Palestine. See under Refugees from Europe, etc.

Palestine White Paper of 1939, 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 1011–1013 [Pgs. 1011–1013 include portions of Doc. 572, Doc. 573, and Doc. 574]

Panama, 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 526], 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589]

Papen, Franz von, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 263], 535–536 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 303], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926]

Paraguay. See under Refugees from Europe, etc.

Paris, Jacques-Camille, 86–87 [Pgs. 86–87 include portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57], 97n [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 236]

Pasvolsky, Leo, 409–410 [Pgs. 409–410 include portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 614n [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 376], 620n [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 621n [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 377], 623–634 [Pgs. 623–634 include portions of Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384] passim, 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 398], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 713n [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 419], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 420], 716n [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 420], 730–742 [Pgs. 730–742 include portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, and Doc. 428] passim, 747n [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 430], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 433], 756–757 [Pgs. 756–757 include portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 437], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 445], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 447], 777n [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 448], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 792–793 [Pgs. 792–793 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 799 [Pg. 799 is part of Doc. 460], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 460], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 472], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 472], 825n [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 475], 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480], 846–849 [Pgs. 846–849 include portions of Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 851–860 [Pgs. 851–860 include portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497], 875–880 [Pgs. 875–880 include portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498] passim, 883–904 [Pgs. 883–904 include portions of Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507] passim, 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 507], 921–922 [Pgs. 921–922 include portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc. 510], 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521], 956 [Pg. 956 is part of Doc. 526], 957–958 [Pg. 957 is part of Doc. 526]

Patterson, Robert P., 1469n [Pg. 1469 is part of Doc. 990]

Peace feelers from Germany. See under German surrender, anticipation of.

Pehle, John W., 1005–1008 [Pgs. 1005–1008 include portions of Doc. 569, Doc. 570, and Doc. 571], 1048 [Pg. 1048 is part of Doc. 605], 1137 [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676], 1145n [Pg. 1145 is part of Doc. 683]

Pell, Herbert C., 1265 [Pg. 1265 includes portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817], 1274 [Pg. 1274 includes portions of Doc. 819, Doc. 820, and Doc. 821], 1275–1276 [Pgs. 1275–1276 include portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823], 1281 [Pg. 1281 includes portions of Doc. 825 and Doc. 826], 1282–1286 [Pgs. 1282–1286 include portions of Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, and Doc. 829], 1290 [Pg. 1290 includes portions of Doc. 832 and Doc. 833], 1299 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 834], 1319–1320 [Pgs. 1319–1320 include portions of Doc. 839 and Doc. 840], 1337 [Pg. 1337 is part of Doc. 853], 1338 [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 854 and Doc. 855], 1341 [Pg. 1341 is part of Doc. 858], 1343–1345 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 861], 1349 [Pg. 1349 includes portions of Doc. 862, Doc. 863, and Doc. 864], 1353–1354 [Pgs. 1353–1354 include portions of Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869], 1360–1361 [Pgs. 1360–1361 include portions of Doc. 869, Doc. 870, Doc. 871, and Doc. 872], 1362 [Pg. 1362 is part of Doc. 872], 1363–1364 [Pgs. 1363–1364 include portions of Doc. 873 and Doc. 874], 1367–1368 [Pgs. 1367–1368 include portions of Doc. 876 and Doc. 877], 1386–1388 [Pgs. 1386–1388 include portions of Doc. 890 and Doc. 891], 1391 [Pg. 1391 includes portions of Doc. 893 and Doc. 894], 1392 [Pg. 1392 includes portions of Doc. 895 and Doc. 896], 1395 [Pg. 1395 includes portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900], 1397–1399 [Pgs. 1397–1399 include portions of Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, Doc. 906, and Doc. 907], 1399–1400 [Pgs. 1399–1400 include portions of Doc. 905, Doc. 906, Doc. 907, and Doc. 908]

Peru, 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 566 and Doc. 567], 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 1021n [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1026n [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 584], 1030 [Pg. 1030 is part of Doc. 587], 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1033n [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1120n [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663]

Pétain, Henri Philippe, 1445 [Pg. 1445 is part of Doc. 959]

Philippines, 1392 [Pg. 1392 includes portions of Doc. 895 and Doc. 896], 1408 [Pg. 1408 includes portions of Doc. 913 and Doc. 914]

Phillips, William, 26n [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 255], 508–509 [Pgs. 508–509 include portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, and Doc. 279], 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 779 and Doc. 780], 1507n [Pg. 1507 includes portions of Doc. 1014, Doc. 1015, and Doc. 1016], 1507 [Pg. 1507 includes portions of Doc. 1014, Doc. 1015, and Doc. 1016], 1510–1511 [Pgs. 1510–1511 include portions of Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, and Doc. 1020], 1519–1520 [Pgs. 1519–1520 include portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025], 1521–1522 [Pgs. 1521–1522 include portions of Doc. 1026, Doc. 1027, and Doc. 1028]

Pilet-Golaz, Marcel, 1137 [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676], 1415–1416 [Pgs. 1415–1416 include portions of Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926], 1448 [Pg. 1448 includes portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965]

Pius XII. See Pope Pius XII.

Plaza, Galo, 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 520]

Poehl, Hjalmar, 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299]

Poland (see also European Advisory Commission: Consultation with other Allied Governments; and under Refugees from Europe): Dumbarton Oaks Proposals, views regarding, 947–948 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 521]; postwar boundary with Germany, U. S. position, 302–303 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 154], 309–310 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 154]; war crimes against Polish nationals, 1341 [Pg. 1341 is part of Doc. 858], 1394–1395 [Pgs. 1394–1395 include portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900]

Political Warfare Executive (PWE), 1455 [Pg. 1455 is part of Doc. 974], 1456 [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 974], 1457 [Pg. 1457 is part of Doc. 975], 1458 [Pg. 1458 includes portions of Doc. 976, Doc. 977, and Doc. 978], 1459 [Pg. 1459 is part of Doc. 978], 1461 [Pg. 1461 includes portions of Doc. 979, Doc. 980, and Doc. 981], 1464 [Pg. 1464 includes portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, and Doc. 986]

Pope Pius XII, 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 960–964 [Pgs. 960–964 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, and Doc. 532] passim, 1069n [Pg. 1069 includes portions of Doc. 624 and Doc. 625], 1123 [Pg. 1123 includes portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664], 1124 [Pg. 1124 is part of Doc. 664], 1140 [Pg. 1140 includes portions of Doc. 678 and Doc. 679], 1149 [Pg. 1149 includes portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, and Doc. 688]

Portugal. See under Refugees from Europe; and under War criminals, representations to neutral governments, etc.: U. S. and British representations.

Preuss, Lawrence, 1274 [Pg. 1274 includes portions of Doc. 819, Doc. 820, and Doc. 821], 1284 [Pg. 1284 is part of Doc. 827], 1285 [Pg. 1285 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1290 [Pg. 1290 includes portions of Doc. 832 and Doc. 833]

Price, Byron, 1511n [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1019 and Doc. 1020], 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1020 and Doc. 1021], 1513–1514 [Pgs. 1513–1514 include portions of Doc. 1021 and Doc. 1022], 1522n [Pg. 1522 includes portions of Doc. 1027 and Doc. 1028]

Prisoners of war. See Nazi atrocities; and under Germany.

Randall, A. W. G., 994 [Pg. 994 includes portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, and Doc. 563], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615], 1081 [Pg. 1081 includes portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636]

Rankin, 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 180–181 [Pgs. 180–181 include portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 104]

Reber, Samuel, 1482n [Pg. 1482 includes portions of Doc. 997 and Doc. 998], 1486 [Pg. 1486 includes portions of Doc. 1001 and Doc. 1002], 1492–1493 [Pgs. 1492–1493 include portions of Doc. 1006, Doc. 1007, and Doc. 1008]

Red Cross. See Hungarian Red Cross and Refugees from Europe: International Committee of the Red Cross.

Refugees from Europe and the Middle East, governmental efforts for relief of, 981–1191 [Pgs. 981–1191 include portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, Doc. 555, Doc. 556, Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, Doc. 683, Doc. 684, Doc. 685, Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, Doc. 716, Doc. 717, Doc. 718, Doc. 719, Doc. 720, Doc. 721, Doc. 722, Doc. 723, and Doc. 724] Armistice terms for Bulgaria, Hungary, and Rumania, provision for protection of refugees, 1158 [Pg. 1158 includes portions of Doc. 694 and Doc. 695], 1161–1162 [Pgs. 1161–1162 include portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, and Doc. 701], 1191 [Pg. 1191 is part of Doc. 724]

Baltic States, rescue of political and racial refugees from, 1049 [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607], 1160 [Pg. 1160 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698]

Bulgaria: Armistice terms fixing responsibility for protection of refugees, 1158 [Pg. 1158 includes portions of Doc. 694 and Doc. 695], 1161–1162 [Pgs. 1161–1162 include portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, and Doc. 701]

U. S. efforts on behalf of Jews in Bulgaria, 1001–1002 [Pgs. 1001–1002 include portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 569], 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 569], 1009 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 571], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 572], 1017 [Pg. 1017 is part of Doc. 576], 1027n [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 653], 1133 [Pg. 1133 includes portions of Doc. 673 and Doc. 674], 1133n [Pg. 1133 includes portions of Doc. 673 and Doc. 674]; approaches through Bulgarian Ministers in Sweden and Turkey, 1045 [Pg. 1045 includes portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, and Doc. 605], 1047–1048 [Pg. 1047 is part of Doc. 605], 1104–1105 [Pgs. 1104–1105 include portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 1109–1110 [Pg. 1109 is part of Doc. 655]

Children, attempts to evacuate from— Axis-controlled areas to Sweden, 985–986 [Pgs. 985–986 include portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554], 1104 [Pg. 1104 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651]; Switzerland, 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 550], 991 [Pg. 991 includes portions of Doc. 558, Doc. 559, and Doc. 560]

Bulgaria via Turkey to Palestine, 1105 [Pg. 1105 is part of Doc. 651]

France via Switzerland, Spain, or Portugal to United States or Latin America, 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 578], 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1032–1033 [Pgs. 1032–1033 include portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1033n [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1067n [Pg. 1067 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 1067–1068 [Pgs. 1067–1068 include portions of Doc. 622, Doc. 623, and Doc. 624], 1068n [Pg. 1068 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624], 1120 [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663]

Hungary to Canada, 1129 [Pg. 1129 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670]; Ireland, 1120n [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1150 [Pg. 1150 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707]; Latin America, 1120n [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1150 [Pg. 1150 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1155 [Pg. 1155 is part of Doc. 692], 1156 [Pg. 1156 includes portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707]; Palestine, 1099 [Pg. 1099 includes portions of Doc. 646 and Doc. 647], 1118 [Pg. 1118 is part of Doc. 660], 1129 [Pg. 1129 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 1168 [Pg. 1168 is part of Doc. 705], 1169 [Pg. 1169 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706]; Portugal, 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654], 1130 [Pg. 1130 is part of Doc. 670], 1155 [Pg. 1155 is part of Doc. 692]; Rumania, 1150 [Pg. 1150 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689]; Spain, 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1092 [Pg. 1092 includes portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642], 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654], 1150 [Pg. 1150 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1186 [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719]; Spanish Morocco, 1092 [Pg. 1092 includes portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642], 1151n [Pg. 1151 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], 1186 [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719]; Sweden, 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654], 1120n [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1143–1144 [Pgs. 1143–1144 include portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1150 [Pg. 1150 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707]; Switzerland, 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654], 1120n [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1143–1144 [Pgs. 1143–1144 include portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1172 [Pg. 1172 is part of Doc. 706]; Turkey, 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654]; undesignated destination, 1104 [Pg. 1104 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654], 1128 [Pg. 1128 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1155 [Pg. 1155 is part of Doc. 692]; United States, 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1129–1130 [Pgs. 1129–1130 include portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 1135 [Pg. 1135 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675], 1138 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 677], 1150 [Pg. 1150 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1170–1171 [Pg. 1170 is part of Doc. 706], 1172 [Pg. 1172 is part of Doc. 706]

Rumania to Turkey and Palestine, 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 569], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 572], 1046 [Pg. 1046 is part of Doc. 605]

Switzerland to Palestine, 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 1011–1013 [Pgs. 1011–1013 include portions of Doc. 572, Doc. 573, and Doc. 574]; to the Soviet Union, 1011 [Pg. 1011 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573]

Cyrenaica and Tripolitania, question of establishment of refugee camps, 1007–1008 [Pgs. 1007–1008 include portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571], 1018–1019 [Pgs. 1018–1019 include portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 610], 1058–1059 [Pgs. 1058–1059 include portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 1070 [Pg. 1070 includes portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627], 1130 [Pg. 1130 is part of Doc. 670]

Czechoslovakia, internment of Jews in (see also Slovakia, infra), 1041 [Pg. 1041 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600], 1147–1148 [Pgs. 1147–1148 include portions of Doc. 684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686]

Exchange of nationals between Germany and German-occupied Europe and the American Republics, See under Passports, infra.

Finland, rescue of Jews from, 1036–1037 [Pgs. 1036–1037 include portions of Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596], 1037–1039 [Pgs. 1037–1039 include portions of Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, and Doc. 598], 1065–1066 [Pgs. 1065–1066 include portions of Doc. 620, Doc. 621, and Doc. 622]

Fort Ontario, New York, refugee camp, 1059–1060 [Pgs. 1059–1060 include portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 1066–1067 [Pgs. 1066–1067 include portions of Doc. 621, Doc. 622, and Doc. 623], 1070 [Pg. 1070 includes portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627], 1152 [Pg. 1152 is part of Doc. 690], 1187 [Pg. 1187 is part of Doc. 720]

France, rescue of children and other refugees from, 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 993 [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 561], 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 578], 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1032–1033 [Pgs. 1032–1033 include portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1033n [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1037 [Pg. 1037 includes portions of Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596], 1067n [Pg. 1067 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 1067–1068 [Pgs. 1067–1068 include portions of Doc. 622, Doc. 623, and Doc. 624], 1068 [Pg. 1068 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624], 1120 [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1150 [Pg. 1150 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689]; refugee program following liberation, 1137n [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676]

French North Africa: Refugee camp Lyautey at Fedhala, 992n [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 993 [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 561], 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565], 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 565], 998 [Pg. 998 is part of Doc. 565], 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571], 1013 [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 573 and Doc. 574], 1034–1035 [Pgs. 1034–1035 include portions of Doc. 591, Doc. 592, and Doc. 593], 1035n [Pg. 1035 includes portions of Doc. 592 and Doc. 593], 1036n [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 593 and Doc. 594], 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 610], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 1079 [Pg. 1079 is part of Doc. 634], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637], 1092 [Pg. 1092 includes portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642], 1130 [Pg. 1130 is part of Doc. 670], 1162 [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 699, Doc. 700, and Doc. 701]; U. S. requests for additional refugee camps, and French approval, 1063–1064 [Pgs. 1063–1064 include portions of Doc. 619 and Doc. 620], 1080–1081 [Pgs. 1080–1081 include portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636], 1093 [Pg. 1093 is part of Doc. 642], 1094 [Pg. 1094 includes portions of Doc. 642, Doc. 643, and Doc. 644]

Transfer of refugees to North Africa from Italy, 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 610], 1063 [Pg. 1063 is part of Doc. 619], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]; from Spain, 992–994 [Pgs. 992–994 include portions of Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, and Doc. 563], 996–999 [Pgs. 996–999 include portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 572], 1013–1015 [Pgs. 1013–1015 include portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, and Doc. 575], 1079 [Pg. 1079 is part of Doc. 634], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637], 1092 [Pg. 1092 includes portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642]

Germany: Military deterioration and retreat, fear of massacre of Jews and Allied nationals as prelude to, 1147–1148 [Pgs. 1147–1148 include portions of Doc. 684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686], 1160–1161 [Pgs. 1160–1161 include portions of Doc. 697, Doc. 698, and Doc. 699], 1174–1175 [Pgs. 1174–1175 include portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709]; warning issued by Gen. Eisenhower, 1174–1175 [Pgs. 1174–1175 include portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709]

Proposal for barter of various goods for release of Jews, and Allied discussions concerning, 537–538 [Pgs. 537–538 include portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, and Doc. 305], 1050–1051 [Pgs. 1050–1051 include portions of Doc. 607, Doc. 608, and Doc. 609], 1056–1058 [Pgs. 1056–1058 include portions of Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615], 1061–1062 [Pgs. 1061–1062 include portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1074–1075 [Pgs. 1074–1075 include portions of Doc. 629, Doc. 630, and Doc. 631], 1089–1091 [Pgs. 1089–1091 include portions of Doc. 639, Doc. 640, and Doc. 641], 1138 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 677]; proposals regarding ransom money payments and relief supplies, 1144n [Pg. 1144 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1144 [Pg. 1144 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1160n [Pg. 1160 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698]

Refusal to release Hungarian Jews to emigrate to Palestine, 1139 [Pg. 1139 includes portions of Doc. 677 and Doc. 678], 1151–1153 [Pgs. 1151–1153 include portions of Doc. 689, Doc. 690, and Doc. 691], 1156–1157 [Pgs. 1156–1157 include portions of Doc. 692, Doc. 693, and Doc. 694], 1159 [Pg. 1159 includes portions of Doc. 696 and Doc. 697], 1168 [Pg. 1168 is part of Doc. 705], 1169–1173 [Pgs. 1169–1173 include portions of Doc. 705, Doc. 706, and Doc. 707]; to Portugal, 1155 [Pg. 1155 is part of Doc. 692]

Greece, deportation, evacuation, and repatriation of Jews from Greece, 1035–1036 [Pgs. 1035–1036 include portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594], 1041–1042 [Pgs. 1041–1042 include portions of Doc. 599, Doc. 600, and Doc. 601], 1042n [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 602], 1067n [Pg. 1067 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623]

Hungary (see also under Children, etc., supra): Armistice terms fixing responsibility for protection of refugees, 1158 [Pg. 1158 includes portions of Doc. 694 and Doc. 695], 1161–1162 [Pgs. 1161–1162 include portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, and Doc. 701]

Deportation and extermination of Jews, efforts to prevent (see also Emigration and Evacuation, infra): Red Cross supervision of labor camps, 1119 [Pg. 1119 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1128–1129 [Pgs. 1128–1129 include portions of Doc. 668, Doc. 669, and Doc. 670], 1134 [Pg. 1134 is part of Doc. 674], 1165 [Pg. 1165 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1181 [Pg. 1181 includes portions of Doc. 715 and Doc. 716]

U. S. appeals to the International Committee of the Red Cross, and replies, 1021 [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1021n [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1039–1040 [Pgs. 1039–1040 include portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599], 1040n [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599]

U. S. efforts, 1001–1002 [Pgs. 1001–1002 include portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 602], 1049–1051 [Pgs. 1049–1051 include portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, and Doc. 609], 1068–1069 [Pgs. 1068–1069 include portions of Doc. 623, Doc. 624, and Doc. 625], 1088–1089 [Pgs. 1088–1089 include portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640], 1096–1097 [Pgs. 1096–1097 include portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1102 [Pg. 1102 is part of Doc. 648], 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 656], 1129 [Pg. 1129 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 1133–1135 [Pgs. 1133–1135 include portions of Doc. 673, Doc. 674, and Doc. 675], 1159–1161 [Pgs. 1159–1161 include portions of Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, and Doc. 699], 1163–1164 [Pgs. 1163–1164 include portions of Doc. 701, Doc. 702, and Doc. 703], 1165 [Pg. 1165 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705]

Emigration of certain categories of Jews and temporary suspension of deportations to German camps: German refusal to permit emigration to Palestine, 1139 [Pg. 1139 includes portions of Doc. 677 and Doc. 678], 1151–1153 [Pgs. 1151–1153 include portions of Doc. 689, Doc. 690, and Doc. 691], 1156–1157 [Pgs. 1156–1157 include portions of Doc. 692, Doc. 693, and Doc. 694], 1159 [Pg. 1159 includes portions of Doc. 696 and Doc. 697], 1168 [Pg. 1168 is part of Doc. 705], 1169–1173 [Pgs. 1169–1173 include portions of Doc. 705, Doc. 706, and Doc. 707]; to Portugal, 1155 [Pg. 1155 is part of Doc. 692]

Hungarian proposal, 1099–1100 [Pgs. 1099–1100 include portions of Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648], 1103 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 649], 1104 [Pg. 1104 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654], 1118 [Pg. 1118 is part of Doc. 660], 1167 [Pg. 1167 is part of Doc. 705], 1182 [Pg. 1182 includes portions of Doc. 716 and Doc. 717]

U. S. and British acceptance of proposal and issuance of joint statement, 1112–1115 [Pgs. 1112–1115 include portions of Doc. 657, Doc. 658, and Doc. 659], 1120–1123 [Pgs. 1120–1123 include portions of Doc. 662, Doc. 663, and Doc. 664], 1125–1128 [Pgs. 1125–1128 include portions of Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669], 1142 [Pg. 1142 includes portions of Doc. 681 and Doc. 682]; problems involved in implementation, 1106–1108 [Pgs. 1106–1108 include portions of Doc. 652, Doc. 653, and Doc. 654], 1111–1115 [Pgs. 1111–1115 include portions of Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, and Doc. 659], 1121–1123 [Pgs. 1121–1123 include portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664], 1129–1131 [Pgs. 1129–1131 include portions of Doc. 669, Doc. 670, and Doc. 671], 1138–1140 [Pgs. 1138–1140 include portions of Doc. 677, Doc. 678, and Doc. 679], 1149–1150 [Pgs. 1149–1150 include portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 1159 [Pg. 1159 includes portions of Doc. 696 and Doc. 697]

Evacuation of Jews to or through Bulgaria, 1133 [Pg. 1133 includes portions of Doc. 673 and Doc. 674]; Palestine, 1130 [Pg. 1130 is part of Doc. 670], 1143 [Pg. 1143 is part of Doc. 682], 1144 [Pg. 1144 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1167–1168 [Pg. 1167 is part of Doc. 705]; 1099–1100 [Pgs. 1099–1100 include portions of Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648], 1118 [Pg. 1118 is part of Doc. 660], 1128 [Pg. 1128 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1129 [Pg. 1129 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], Portugal, 1155 [Pg. 1155 is part of Doc. 692], 1168 [Pg. 1168 is part of Doc. 705]; Rumania, 1120–1121 [Pgs. 1120–1121 include portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663]; Spain, 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1091–1092 [Pgs. 1091–1092 include portions of Doc. 640, Doc. 641, and Doc. 642], 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654], 1150 [Pg. 1150 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1151 [Pg. 1151 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], 1168 [Pg. 1168 is part of Doc. 705], 1169 [Pg. 1169 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1186 [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719]; Sweden, 1044n [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 1049n [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607], 1050n [Pg. 1050 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608], 1099 [Pg. 1099 includes portions of Doc. 646 and Doc. 647], 1104 [Pg. 1104 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 653], 1118 [Pg. 1118 is part of Doc. 660], 1136 [Pg. 1136 is part of Doc. 675], 1143–1144 [Pgs. 1143–1144 include portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1167 [Pg. 1167 is part of Doc. 705], 1168 [Pg. 1168 is part of Doc. 705], 1186 [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719]; Switzerland, 1168 [Pg. 1168 is part of Doc. 705], 1172–1173 [Pgs. 1172–1173 include portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1180 [Pg. 1180 includes portions of Doc. 713, Doc. 714, and Doc. 715]; United States, 1103 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 649], 1121 [Pg. 1121 is part of Doc. 663], 1135 [Pg. 1135 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675], 1138 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 677], 1139 [Pg. 1139 includes portions of Doc. 677 and Doc. 678], 1151–1153 [Pgs. 1151–1153 include portions of Doc. 689, Doc. 690, and Doc. 691], 1171 [Pg. 1171 is part of Doc. 706], 1172–1173 [Pgs. 1172–1173 include portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707]; Yugoslavia, 1028–1029 [Pgs. 1028–1029 include portions of Doc. 585, Doc. 586, and Doc. 587], 1029n [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 610]

German note regarding Hungarian Jews, 1165–1169 [Pgs. 1165–1169 include portions of Doc. 704, Doc. 705, and Doc. 706]

Hungarian statements regarding treatment of Jews, 1116–1119 [Pgs. 1116–1119 include portions of Doc. 659, Doc. 660, and Doc. 661], 1181–1182 [Pgs. 1181–1182 include portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717]; U. S. views, 1133–1135 [Pgs. 1133–1135 include portions of Doc. 673, Doc. 674, and Doc. 675]

Latin American documents, protection of holders of, 1115–1116 [Pgs. 1115–1116 include portions of Doc. 658, Doc. 659, and Doc. 660], 1162n [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 699, Doc. 700, and Doc. 701], 1162–1163 [Pgs. 1162–1163 include portions of Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702], 1167 [Pg. 1167 is part of Doc. 705]

Polish Jews, evacuation to Hungary, and later danger of deportation, 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 578], 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 602], 1050 [Pg. 1050 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608]

Release of Jews charged with aiding escapees, 1043–1044 [Pgs. 1043–1044 include portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603]

Removal of Jews from Budapest, 1163–1164 [Pgs. 1163–1164 include portions of Doc. 701, Doc. 702, and Doc. 703], 1166 [Pg. 1166 is part of Doc. 705], 1167 [Pg. 1167 is part of Doc. 705], 1168 [Pg. 1168 is part of Doc. 705]

U. S. warnings regarding persecution of Jews in Hungary, 1001–1002 [Pgs. 1001–1002 include portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 1027n [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1027–1028 [Pgs. 1027–1028 include portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586], 1033 [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 602], 1064–1065 [Pgs. 1064–1065 include portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621], 1088–1089 [Pgs. 1088–1089 include portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640], 1110 [Pg. 1110 is part of Doc. 655], 1116n [Pg. 1116 includes portions of Doc. 659 and Doc. 660], 1134 [Pg. 1134 is part of Doc. 674], 1140 [Pg. 1140 includes portions of Doc. 678 and Doc. 679], 1159 [Pg. 1159 includes portions of Doc. 696 and Doc. 697], 1163–1164 [Pgs. 1163–1164 include portions of Doc. 701, Doc. 702, and Doc. 703]; Senate Foreign Relations Committee statement, 1064–1065 [Pgs. 1064–1065 include portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621], 1069 [Pg. 1069 includes portions of Doc. 624 and Doc. 625], 1110 [Pg. 1110 is part of Doc. 655]

Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees, 981n [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 549], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 549], 983–984 [Pgs. 983–984 include portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 555], 990–991 [Pgs. 990–991 include portions of Doc. 556, Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, and Doc. 560], 994–995 [Pgs. 994–995 include portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, and Doc. 564], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 566 and Doc. 567], 1006 [Pg. 1006 is part of Doc. 570], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 573], 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 578], 1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615], 1097 [Pg. 1097 includes portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1098 [Pg. 1098 is part of Doc. 645], 1103 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 649], 1106 [Pg. 1106 includes portions of Doc. 652 and Doc. 653], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 653], 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 656], 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 657], 1123–1124 [Pgs. 1123–1124 include portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664], 1129–1131 [Pgs. 1129–1131 include portions of Doc. 669, Doc. 670, and Doc. 671], 1138–1139 [Pgs. 1138–1139 include portions of Doc. 677 and Doc. 678], 1142–1144 [Pgs. 1142–1144 include portions of Doc. 681, Doc. 682, and Doc. 683], 1149 [Pg. 1149 includes portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, and Doc. 688], 1185 [Pg. 1185 includes portions of Doc. 717 and Doc. 718], 1187 [Pg. 1187 is part of Doc. 720], 1190 [Pg. 1190 includes portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724]; relationship to War Refugee Board, 1006–1007 [Pg. 1006 is part of Doc. 570]

International Committee of the Red Cross, activities on behalf of refugees, 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 566 and Doc. 567], 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 578], 1021 [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1021n [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1039–1040 [Pgs. 1039–1040 include portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599], 1040n [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599], 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1046 [Pg. 1046 is part of Doc. 605], 1077–1078 [Pgs. 1077–1078 include portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637], 1099 [Pg. 1099 includes portions of Doc. 646 and Doc. 647], 1099n [Pg. 1099 includes portions of Doc. 646 and Doc. 647], 1103 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 649], 1104 [Pg. 1104 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 1106 [Pg. 1106 includes portions of Doc. 652 and Doc. 653], 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654], 1112–1114 [Pgs. 1112–1114 include portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1114–1115 [Pgs. 1114–1115 include portions of Doc. 657, Doc. 658, and Doc. 659], 1118 [Pg. 1118 is part of Doc. 660], 1121 [Pg. 1121 is part of Doc. 663], 1122 [Pg. 1122 is part of Doc. 663], 1126 [Pg. 1126 is part of Doc. 666], 1127 [Pg. 1127 includes portions of Doc. 667 and Doc. 668], 1128 [Pg. 1128 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1129 [Pg. 1129 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 1138 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 677], 1139 [Pg. 1139 includes portions of Doc. 677 and Doc. 678], 1142–1144 [Pgs. 1142–1144 include portions of Doc. 681, Doc. 682, and Doc. 683], 1147–1148 [Pgs. 1147–1148 include portions of Doc. 684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686], 1149–1150 [Pgs. 1149–1150 include portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 1160 [Pg. 1160 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 1165 [Pg. 1165 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1170 [Pg. 1170 is part of Doc. 706], 1181 [Pg. 1181 includes portions of Doc. 715 and Doc. 716], 1189 [Pg. 1189 includes portions of Doc. 722 and Doc. 723]; U. S. requests on behalf of victims of Nazi oppression, and replies, 1021 [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1021n [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1039–1040 [Pgs. 1039–1040 include portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599], 1040n [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599]

Italy: Care and evacuation of refugees arriving in Italy from the Balkans and elsewhere, 1052–1056 [Pgs. 1052–1056 include portions of Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, and Doc. 613], 1059–1060 [Pgs. 1059–1060 include portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 1062–1064 [Pgs. 1062–1064 include portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, and Doc. 620], 1066–1067 [Pgs. 1066–1067 include portions of Doc. 621, Doc. 622, and Doc. 623], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 1078–1079 [Pgs. 1078–1079 include portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634], 1080 [Pg. 1080 is part of Doc. 635], 1081–1082 [Pgs. 1081–1082 include portions of Doc. 635, Doc. 636, and Doc. 637], 1092–1094 [Pgs. 1092–1094 include portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, and Doc. 644], 1097–1098 [Pgs. 1097–1098 include portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1123–1125 [Pgs. 1123–1125 include portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, and Doc. 666], 1132 [Pg. 1132 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 1149 [Pg. 1149 includes portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, and Doc. 688], 1187 [Pg. 1187 is part of Doc. 720]; position of Allied military authorities, 1062 [Pg. 1062 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1078–1079 [Pgs. 1078–1079 include portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634], 1092–1094 [Pgs. 1092–1094 include portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, and Doc. 644], 1097–1098 [Pgs. 1097–1098 include portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1124 [Pg. 1124 is part of Doc. 664], 1125 [Pg. 1125 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666]

Evacuation of refugees to United States, 1059–1060 [Pgs. 1059–1060 include portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 1066–1067 [Pgs. 1066–1067 include portions of Doc. 621, Doc. 622, and Doc. 623], 1187 [Pg. 1187 is part of Doc. 720]

German-controlled Northern Italy, Allied efforts and Papal intervention to prevent deportation of Jews from, 1123–1124 [Pgs. 1123–1124 include portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664], 1132 [Pg. 1132 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 1140–1141 [Pgs. 1140–1141 include portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680], 1149 [Pg. 1149 includes portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, and Doc. 688]

Liberated areas, care of refugees in, 1137n [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676], 1148–1149 [Pgs. 1148–1149 include portions of Doc. 685, Doc. 686, Doc. 687, and Doc. 688], 1158 [Pg. 1158 includes portions of Doc. 694 and Doc. 695], 1161–1162 [Pgs. 1161–1162 include portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, and Doc. 701], 1190–1191 [Pgs. 1190–1191 include portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724]; postwar refugee relief, 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615], 1185–1186 [Pgs. 1185–1186 include portions of Doc. 717, Doc. 718, and Doc. 719], 1187–1188 [Pgs. 1187–1188 include portions of Doc. 720 and Doc. 721]

Licenses granted by United States for purchase and export of relief supplies, 1004–1005 [Pgs. 1004–1005 include portions of Doc. 569 and Doc. 570], 1019–1021 [Pgs. 1019–1021 include portions of Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1144–1146 [Pgs. 1144–1146 include portions of Doc. 682, Doc. 683, and Doc. 684]

North Africa. See French North Africa, supra.

Palestine: Evacuation to Palestine of Jews from Bulgaria, 1048 [Pg. 1048 is part of Doc. 605], 1105 [Pg. 1105 is part of Doc. 651]; Greece, 1042n [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601]; Hungary, 1099–1100 [Pgs. 1099–1100 include portions of Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648], 1118 [Pg. 1118 is part of Doc. 660], 1128 [Pg. 1128 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1129 [Pg. 1129 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 1130 [Pg. 1130 is part of Doc. 670], 1143 [Pg. 1143 is part of Doc. 682], 1144 [Pg. 1144 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1167–1168 [Pg. 1167 is part of Doc. 705]; Italy, 1055–1056 [Pgs. 1055–1056 include portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, and Doc. 613], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]; Rumania, 1046 [Pg. 1046 is part of Doc. 605]; Turkey, 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 572], 1042n [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 610], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 653]

Exchange of nationals with Germany, 1076 [Pg. 1076 is part of Doc. 632], 1083 [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 637]

Palestine certificates, 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 1011–1013 [Pgs. 1011–1013 include portions of Doc. 572, Doc. 573, and Doc. 574], 1055–1056 [Pgs. 1055–1056 include portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, and Doc. 613], 1076 [Pg. 1076 is part of Doc. 632], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 653], 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 656], 1118 [Pg. 1118 is part of Doc. 660], 1129 [Pg. 1129 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 1139 [Pg. 1139 includes portions of Doc. 677 and Doc. 678], 1143 [Pg. 1143 is part of Doc. 682], 1148 [Pg. 1148 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686], 1149–1150 [Pgs. 1149–1150 include portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 1151–1153 [Pgs. 1151–1153 include portions of Doc. 689, Doc. 690, and Doc. 691], 1168 [Pg. 1168 is part of Doc. 705], 1169–1173 [Pgs. 1169–1173 include portions of Doc. 705, Doc. 706, and Doc. 707], 1180 [Pg. 1180 includes portions of Doc. 713, Doc. 714, and Doc. 715]

Paraguay: Passport holders, efforts to protect, and inclusion in exchange of nationals, 981n [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 549], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 549], 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 566 and Doc. 567], 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 1026n [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 584], 1027n [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 1030 [Pg. 1030 is part of Doc. 587], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 1083–1084 [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 637], 1084 [Pg. 1084 is part of Doc. 637], 1086 [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 637], 1095 [Pg. 1095 is part of Doc. 644], 1115 [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 1157–1158 [Pgs. 1157–1158 include portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 1174 [Pg. 1174 includes portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708], 1177 [Pg. 1177 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], 1178 [Pg. 1178 includes portions of Doc. 711 and Doc. 712], 1179–1180 [Pgs. 1179–1180 include portions of Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, and Doc. 715], 1190 [Pg. 1190 includes portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724]; visas for refugee children, 1033n [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1120n [Pg. 1120 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663]

Passports of doubtful validity, efforts to save lives of holders interned in Axis territory: Exchange of nationals, inclusion in, 1024–1027 [Pgs. 1024–1027 include portions of Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, and Doc. 585], 1051–1052 [Pgs. 1051–1052 include portions of Doc. 608, Doc. 609, and Doc. 610], 1054–1055 [Pgs. 1054–1055 include portions of Doc. 610, Doc. 611, and Doc. 612], 1072–1074 [Pgs. 1072–1074 include portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, and Doc. 631], 1086 [Pg. 1086 is part of Doc. 637], 1095–1096 [Pg. 1095 is part of Doc. 644], 1102 [Pg. 1102 is part of Doc. 648], 1116 [Pg. 1116 includes portions of Doc. 659 and Doc. 660], 1131 [Pg. 1131 includes portions of Doc. 670 and Doc. 671], 1154 [Pg. 1154 is part of Doc. 692], 1175–1176 [Pgs. 1175–1176 include portions of Doc. 708, Doc. 709, and Doc. 710], 1177 [Pg. 1177 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], 1178 [Pg. 1178 includes portions of Doc. 711 and Doc. 712], 1179–1180 [Pgs. 1179–1180 include portions of Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, and Doc. 715], 1188 [Pg. 1188 includes portions of Doc. 720 and Doc. 721], 1189–1190 [Pgs. 1189–1190 include portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, and Doc. 724]

Protecting powers, suggested efforts by, 1173–1174 [Pgs. 1173–1174 include portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, and Doc. 708], 1182–1185 [Pgs. 1182–1185 include portions of Doc. 716, Doc. 717, and Doc. 718]; extension of protection to internees in Hungary, 1115–1116 [Pgs. 1115–1116 include portions of Doc. 658, Doc. 659, and Doc. 660], 1162n [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 699, Doc. 700, and Doc. 701], 1162–1163 [Pgs. 1162–1163 include portions of Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702], 1167 [Pg. 1167 is part of Doc. 705]

Swiss and German positions, and U. S. responses, 1023–1024 [Pgs. 1023–1024 include portions of Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583], 1025 [Pg. 1025 is part of Doc. 583], 1030–1031 [Pgs. 1030–1031 include portions of Doc. 587 and Doc. 588], 1045 [Pg. 1045 includes portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, and Doc. 605], 1051 [Pg. 1051 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609], 1071–1073 [Pgs. 1071–1073 include portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629], 1082–1087 [Pgs. 1082–1087 include portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637, and Doc. 638], 1100–1102 [Pgs. 1100–1102 include portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648], 1131–1132 [Pgs. 1131–1132 include portions of Doc. 670, Doc. 671, and Doc. 672], 1141 [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 679 and Doc. 680], 1154–1155 [Pg. 1154 is part of Doc. 692], 1159–1160 [Pgs. 1159–1160 include portions of Doc. 696, Doc. 697, and Doc. 698], 1161 [Pg. 1161 includes portions of Doc. 698 and Doc. 699], 1167 [Pg. 1167 is part of Doc. 705], 1169 [Pg. 1169 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1173–1174 [Pgs. 1173–1174 include portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, and Doc. 708], 1178–1179 [Pgs. 1178–1179 include portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713]

Validation by issuing governments, U. S. efforts to secure, 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 549], 991–992 [Pgs. 991–992 include portions of Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, and Doc. 561], 1000–1001 [Pgs. 1000–1001 include portions of Doc. 566, Doc. 567, and Doc. 568], 1021–1022 [Pgs. 1021–1022 include portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1023–1027 [Pgs. 1023–1027 include portions of Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, and Doc. 585], 1029–1031 [Pgs. 1029–1031 include portions of Doc. 586, Doc. 587, and Doc. 588], 1051–1052 [Pgs. 1051–1052 include portions of Doc. 608, Doc. 609, and Doc. 610], 1071–1073 [Pgs. 1071–1073 include portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629], 1094–1097 [Pgs. 1094–1097 include portions of Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, and Doc. 645], 1100–1102 [Pgs. 1100–1102 include portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648], 1131–1132 [Pgs. 1131–1132 include portions of Doc. 670, Doc. 671, and Doc. 672], 1154 [Pg. 1154 is part of Doc. 692], 1156 [Pg. 1156 includes portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693], 1157–1158 [Pgs. 1157–1158 include portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 1161 [Pg. 1161 includes portions of Doc. 698 and Doc. 699], 1174 [Pg. 1174 includes portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708]

Poland: Deportation of Jews from German-occupied Europe to extermination camps in Poland, 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555], 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 568], 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 578], 1022 [Pg. 1022 is part of Doc. 580], 1035 [Pg. 1035 includes portions of Doc. 592 and Doc. 593], 1050 [Pg. 1050 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608], 1069 [Pg. 1069 includes portions of Doc. 624 and Doc. 625], 1088 [Pg. 1088 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 1091 [Pg. 1091 includes portions of Doc. 640 and Doc. 641], 1160 [Pg. 1160 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698]

Evacuation of Polish Jews to Hungary, and later danger of deportation from Hungary, 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 578], 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 602], 1050 [Pg. 1050 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608]

Latin American passports of doubtful validity, efforts on behalf of Polish holders of, 981n [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 549], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 549], 991–992 [Pgs. 991–992 include portions of Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, and Doc. 561], 1023–1025 [Pgs. 1023–1025 include portions of Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583], 1083 [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 637], 1084 [Pg. 1084 is part of Doc. 637], 1085 [Pg. 1085 is part of Doc. 637], 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648], 1161 [Pg. 1161 includes portions of Doc. 698 and Doc. 699]

Portugal, admission of refugees, U. S. assurances regarding provision of supplies, and later evacuation, 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 613], 1059 [Pg. 1059 includes portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 1087 [Pg. 1087 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 653], 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 656], 1136 [Pg. 1136 is part of Doc. 675], 1153 [Pg. 1153 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691], 1162 [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 699, Doc. 700, and Doc. 701], 1168 [Pg. 1168 is part of Doc. 705]; other U. S. efforts on behalf of Jews, 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1044n [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 1049n [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607]

Postwar refugee relief, 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615], 1185–1186 [Pgs. 1185–1186 include portions of Doc. 717, Doc. 718, and Doc. 719], 1187–1188 [Pgs. 1187–1188 include portions of Doc. 720 and Doc. 721]; care of refugees in liberated areas, 1137n [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676], 1148–1149 [Pgs. 1148–1149 include portions of Doc. 685, Doc. 686, Doc. 687, and Doc. 688], 1158 [Pg. 1158 includes portions of Doc. 694 and Doc. 695], 1161–1162 [Pgs. 1161–1162 include portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, and Doc. 701], 1190–1191 [Pgs. 1190–1191 include portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724]

Publicity regarding treatment of Jews by Germany and her satellites, and Allied rescue attempts (see also Warnings, etc., infra), 986 [Pg. 986 includes portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554], 998 [Pg. 998 is part of Doc. 565], 1015–1016 [Pgs. 1015–1016 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576], 1067 [Pg. 1067 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 1088–1089 [Pgs. 1088–1089 include portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640], 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 657], 1121 [Pg. 1121 is part of Doc. 663], 1125–1128 [Pgs. 1125–1128 include portions of Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669], 1139–1140 [Pgs. 1139–1140 include portions of Doc. 677, Doc. 678, and Doc. 679]

Roosevelt, Franklin D.: Announcement of U. S. refugee policy and establishment of War Refugee Board, 987–989 [Pgs. 987–989 include portions of Doc. 554, Doc. 555, and Doc. 556], 988n [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 555], 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564], 999 [Pg. 999 includes portions of Doc. 565 and Doc. 566], 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 568], 1006 [Pg. 1006 is part of Doc. 570], 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571], 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 1062n [Pg. 1062 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619]; attempts to find havens and establishment of refugee camps, 981n [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 549], 1007 [Pg. 1007 is part of Doc. 570], 1018 [Pg. 1018 is part of Doc. 577], 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 610], 1059–1060 [Pgs. 1059–1060 include portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 1066–1067 [Pgs. 1066–1067 include portions of Doc. 621, Doc. 622, and Doc. 623], 1070 [Pg. 1070 includes portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627], 1098 [Pg. 1098 is part of Doc. 645]; warnings to Axis, 1015–1016 [Pgs. 1015–1016 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576], 1161 [Pg. 1161 includes portions of Doc. 698 and Doc. 699]

Rumania: Armistice terms fixing responsibility for protection of refugees, 1158 [Pg. 1158 includes portions of Doc. 694 and Doc. 695], 1161–1162 [Pgs. 1161–1162 include portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, and Doc. 701]

Evacuation of Hungarian Jews through Rumania, 1139 [Pg. 1139 includes portions of Doc. 677 and Doc. 678], 1150 [Pg. 1150 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689]

Feeding of internees in Rumania, 1120–1121 [Pgs. 1120–1121 include portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663]

Persecution of Jews, U. S. warnings against, and efforts to aid and evacuate, 1001–1002 [Pgs. 1001–1002 include portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 569], 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 569], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 572], 1017 [Pg. 1017 is part of Doc. 576], 1027n [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 1033 [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599], 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 602], 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 1045–1047 [Pgs. 1045–1047 include portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, and Doc. 605], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 653]

Slovakia, persecution of Jews, and U. S. efforts to aid, 995–996 [Pgs. 995–996 include portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565], 1050 [Pg. 1050 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 653], 1159–1161 [Pgs. 1159–1161 include portions of Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, and Doc. 699], 1173n [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1173–1174 [Pgs. 1173–1174 include portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, and Doc. 708], 1189 [Pg. 1189 includes portions of Doc. 722 and Doc. 723]; deportation of U. S. and Latin American nationals, 1160 [Pg. 1160 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 1176 [Pg. 1176 includes portions of Doc. 709 and Doc. 710], 1176–1177 [Pgs. 1176–1177 include portions of Doc. 709, Doc. 710, and Doc. 711], 1184–1185 [Pgs. 1184–1185 include portions of Doc. 717 and Doc. 718], 1185n [Pg. 1185 includes portions of Doc. 717 and Doc. 718], 1189 [Pg. 1189 includes portions of Doc. 722 and Doc. 723]

Soviet Union, U. S. requests for cooperation in attempts to rescue the persecuted Jews of Europe, and Soviet replies, 1008–1011 [Pgs. 1008–1011 include portions of Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, and Doc. 573], 1016–1017 [Pgs. 1016–1017 include portions of Doc. 575 and Doc. 576], 1033–1034 [Pgs. 1033–1034 include portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592], 1037 [Pg. 1037 includes portions of Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596], 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 602], 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 620 and Doc. 621], 1069–1070 [Pgs. 1069–1070 include portions of Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627], 1074 [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 629, Doc. 630, and Doc. 631], 1089–1091 [Pgs. 1089–1091 include portions of Doc. 639, Doc. 640, and Doc. 641], 1119 [Pg. 1119 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1175 [Pg. 1175 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709]; gestures of U. S. cooperation with Soviet Union, 1062n [Pg. 1062 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1074 [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 629, Doc. 630, and Doc. 631], 1090–1091 [Pgs. 1090–1091 include portions of Doc. 640 and Doc. 641]

Spain: Efforts to rescue Jews from German-occupied Europe, 1015n [Pg. 1015 includes portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575], 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1035–1036 [Pgs. 1035–1036 include portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 573], 1091–1092 [Pgs. 1091–1092 include portions of Doc. 640, Doc. 641, and Doc. 642], 1150 [Pg. 1150 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1168 [Pg. 1168 is part of Doc. 705], 1169 [Pg. 1169 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1186 [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719]; approaches to German Government, 998–999 [Pgs. 998–999 include portions of Doc. 565 and Doc. 566], 1091–1092 [Pgs. 1091–1092 include portions of Doc. 640, Doc. 641, and Doc. 642]

Evacuation of refugees from Spain and from Axis-held areas through Spain, 992–994 [Pgs. 992–994 include portions of Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, and Doc. 563], 996–999 [Pgs. 996–999 include portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 572], 1013–1015 [Pgs. 1013–1015 include portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, and Doc. 575], 1044–1045 [Pgs. 1044–1045 include portions of Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, and Doc. 605], 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 613], 1137 [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676], 1150–1151 [Pgs. 1150–1151 include portions of Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690]

U. S. requests to Spain on behalf of refugees, 1025n [Pg. 1025 is part of Doc. 583], 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1044n [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 1049n [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607], 1059 [Pg. 1059 includes portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 1087 [Pg. 1087 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 653], 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654], 1136 [Pg. 1136 is part of Doc. 675], 1150 [Pg. 1150 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689]

Sweden: Postwar refugee relief, 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615]

Question of giving refuge and relief to Jewish children and other refugees from the Baltic States, 1049 [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607]; Denmark, 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 263], 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 556, Doc. 557, and Doc. 558], 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 593 and Doc. 594], 1037 [Pg. 1037 includes portions of Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596]; Finland, 1036–1037 [Pgs. 1036–1037 include portions of Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596], 1037–1039 [Pgs. 1037–1039 include portions of Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, and Doc. 598], 1065–1066 [Pgs. 1065–1066 include portions of Doc. 620, Doc. 621, and Doc. 622]; Germany and unspecified areas of Europe, 985–986 [Pgs. 985–986 include portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554], 1087–1088 [Pgs. 1087–1088 include portions of Doc. 637, Doc. 638, and Doc. 639], 1104 [Pg. 1104 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651]; Hungary, 1041n [Pg. 1041 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600], 1049n [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607], 1050n [Pg. 1050 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608], 1099 [Pg. 1099 includes portions of Doc. 646 and Doc. 647], 1104 [Pg. 1104 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 653], 1118 [Pg. 1118 is part of Doc. 660], 1136 [Pg. 1136 is part of Doc. 675], 1143–1144 [Pgs. 1143–1144 include portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1167 [Pg. 1167 is part of Doc. 705], 1168 [Pg. 1168 is part of Doc. 705], 1186 [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719]; Norway, 985–986 [Pgs. 985–986 include portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554], 1104 [Pg. 1104 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651]

Switzerland: Admission and care of refugees, 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 550], 983–984 [Pgs. 983–984 include portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 991 [Pg. 991 includes portions of Doc. 558, Doc. 559, and Doc. 560], 1011 [Pg. 1011 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573], 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 578], 1044–1045 [Pgs. 1044–1045 include portions of Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, and Doc. 605], 1059 [Pg. 1059 includes portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 1136 [Pg. 1136 is part of Doc. 675], 1168 [Pg. 1168 is part of Doc. 705], 1172–1173 [Pgs. 1172–1173 include portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1180 [Pg. 1180 includes portions of Doc. 713, Doc. 714, and Doc. 715]

Evacuation of refugee children from Switzerland to western hemisphere nations, 1011 [Pg. 1011 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573], 1032–1033 [Pgs. 1032–1033 include portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1033n [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1067–1068 [Pgs. 1067–1068 include portions of Doc. 622, Doc. 623, and Doc. 624], 1172–1173 [Pgs. 1172–1173 include portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707]

Transnistria, evacuation of refugees from, 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 569], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 572], 1046 [Pg. 1046 is part of Doc. 605]

Turkey: Turkish nationals in France, protection of, 986–987 [Pgs. 986–987 include portions of Doc. 553, Doc. 554, and Doc. 555], 1010–1041 [Pgs. 1010–1041 include portions of Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, and Doc. 600]; in Greece, 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601]

U. S. efforts to secure cooperation in rescue of refugees, and responses, 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 569], 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 569], 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571], 1009 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 571], 1010–1011 [Pgs. 1010–1011 include portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573], 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 1042n [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 602], 1044n [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 1044–1045 [Pgs. 1044–1045 include portions of Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, and Doc. 605], 1048 [Pg. 1048 is part of Doc. 605], 1049n [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607], 1050 [Pg. 1050 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608], 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 610], 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613], 1059 [Pg. 1059 includes portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637], 1087 [Pg. 1087 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 653], 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 656], 1136 [Pg. 1136 is part of Doc. 675], 1180–1181 [Pgs. 1180–1181 include portions of Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, and Doc. 716]

United Kingdom. See Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees, and Palestine, supra; and U. S.-British cooperation, etc., infra.

United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, role in care of refugees, 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 988n [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 555], 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 555], 994 [Pg. 994 includes portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, and Doc. 563], 1015 [Pg. 1015 includes portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575], 1034–1035 [Pgs. 1034–1035 include portions of Doc. 591, Doc. 592, and Doc. 593], 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 610], 1054 [Pg. 1054 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615], 1064 [Pg. 1064 includes portions of Doc. 619 and Doc. 620], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 1079 [Pg. 1079 is part of Doc. 634], 1081 [Pg. 1081 includes portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636], 1093 [Pg. 1093 is part of Doc. 642], 1094 [Pg. 1094 includes portions of Doc. 642, Doc. 643, and Doc. 644], 1125 [Pg. 1125 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666], 1185 [Pg. 1185 includes portions of Doc. 717 and Doc. 718]

U. S.-British cooperation in rescue and relief of refugees, 989–990 [Pgs. 989–990 include portions of Doc. 555, Doc. 556, Doc. 557, and Doc. 558], 991 [Pg. 991 includes portions of Doc. 558, Doc. 559, and Doc. 560], 994–995 [Pgs. 994–995 include portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, and Doc. 564], 999–1000 [Pgs. 999–1000 include portions of Doc. 565, Doc. 566, and Doc. 567], 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 569], 1005–1008 [Pgs. 1005–1008 include portions of Doc. 569, Doc. 570, and Doc. 571], 1011–1013 [Pgs. 1011–1013 include portions of Doc. 572, Doc. 573, and Doc. 574], 1019–1021 [Pgs. 1019–1021 include portions of Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1028–1029 [Pgs. 1028–1029 include portions of Doc. 585, Doc. 586, and Doc. 587], 1033 [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1034–1035 [Pgs. 1034–1035 include portions of Doc. 591, Doc. 592, and Doc. 593], 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 602], 1044–1045 [Pgs. 1044–1045 include portions of Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, and Doc. 605], 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 613], 1059 [Pg. 1059 includes portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 1067 [Pg. 1067 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 1075 [Pg. 1075 is part of Doc. 631], 1081–1082 [Pgs. 1081–1082 include portions of Doc. 635, Doc. 636, and Doc. 637], 1087–1088 [Pgs. 1087–1088 include portions of Doc. 637, Doc. 638, and Doc. 639], 1089–1091 [Pgs. 1089–1091 include portions of Doc. 639, Doc. 640, and Doc. 641], 1097–1098 [Pgs. 1097–1098 include portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 653], 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654], 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 656], 1113–1114 [Pgs. 1113–1114 include portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1114–1115 [Pgs. 1114–1115 include portions of Doc. 657, Doc. 658, and Doc. 659], 1120–1123 [Pgs. 1120–1123 include portions of Doc. 662, Doc. 663, and Doc. 664], 1125–1128 [Pgs. 1125–1128 include portions of Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707]; question of establishment of refugee camps in Cyrenaica and Tripolitania, 1007–1008 [Pgs. 1007–1008 include portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571], 1018–1019 [Pgs. 1018–1019 include portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 610], 1058–1059 [Pgs. 1058–1059 include portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 1070–1071 [Pgs. 1070–1071 include portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, and Doc. 628], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]

U. S. citizens, requests relating to Swiss protection of, 1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 1077–1078 [Pgs. 1077–1078 include portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634], 1082–1083 [Pgs. 1082–1083 include portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637], 1085 [Pg. 1085 is part of Doc. 637], 1101 [Pg. 1101 is part of Doc. 648], 1147–1148 [Pgs. 1147–1148 include portions of Doc. 684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686], 1176 [Pg. 1176 includes portions of Doc. 709 and Doc. 710], 1176–1177 [Pgs. 1176–1177 include portions of Doc. 709, Doc. 710, and Doc. 711], 1183 [Pg. 1183 is part of Doc. 717]

U. S. visas, instructions regarding, 1106–1107 [Pgs. 1106–1107 include portions of Doc. 652 and Doc. 653], 1135–1137 [Pgs. 1135–1137 include portions of Doc. 674, Doc. 675, and Doc. 676], 1149–1150 [Pgs. 1149–1150 include portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 1153 [Pg. 1153 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691], 1171 [Pg. 1171 is part of Doc. 706], 1172 [Pg. 1172 is part of Doc. 706]

Vatican intervention on behalf of refugees, and U. S. requests, 995–996 [Pgs. 995–996 include portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565], 1031 [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 587 and Doc. 588], 1035 [Pg. 1035 includes portions of Doc. 592 and Doc. 593], 1041 [Pg. 1041 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600], 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1043 [Pg. 1043 is part of Doc. 602], 1044n [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 1068–1069 [Pgs. 1068–1069 include portions of Doc. 623, Doc. 624, and Doc. 625], 1123–1124 [Pgs. 1123–1124 include portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664], 1132 [Pg. 1132 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 1140–1141 [Pgs. 1140–1141 include portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680], 1149 [Pg. 1149 includes portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, and Doc. 688], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1176 [Pg. 1176 includes portions of Doc. 709 and Doc. 710], 1189 [Pg. 1189 includes portions of Doc. 722 and Doc. 723]

Warnings to Germany and her satellites on treatment of Jews and refugees (see also Publicity, etc., supra), 1001–1002 [Pgs. 1001–1002 include portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 569], 1015–1016 [Pgs. 1015–1016 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576], 1027–1028 [Pgs. 1027–1028 include portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586], 1033 [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1037 [Pg. 1037 includes portions of Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596], 1043–1044 [Pgs. 1043–1044 include portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 1064–1065 [Pgs. 1064–1065 include portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621], 1069–1070 [Pgs. 1069–1070 include portions of Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627], 1100–1102 [Pgs. 1100–1102 include portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648], 1110 [Pg. 1110 is part of Doc. 655], 1133–1135 [Pgs. 1133–1135 include portions of Doc. 673, Doc. 674, and Doc. 675], 1154 [Pg. 1154 is part of Doc. 692], 1159–1160 [Pgs. 1159–1160 include portions of Doc. 696, Doc. 697, and Doc. 698], 1160–1161 [Pgs. 1160–1161 include portions of Doc. 697, Doc. 698, and Doc. 699], 1163 [Pg. 1163 includes portions of Doc. 701 and Doc. 702], 1163–1164 [Pgs. 1163–1164 include portions of Doc. 701, Doc. 702, and Doc. 703], 1164 [Pg. 1164 includes portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703], 1174–1175 [Pgs. 1174–1175 include portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709], 1178–1179 [Pgs. 1178–1179 include portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713], 1182 [Pg. 1182 includes portions of Doc. 716 and Doc. 717]

War Refugee Board: Activities of, 992–1190 [Pgs. 992–1190 include portions of Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, Doc. 683, Doc. 684, Doc. 685, Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, Doc. 716, Doc. 717, Doc. 718, Doc. 719, Doc. 720, Doc. 721, Doc. 722, Doc. 723, and Doc. 724] passim, 1261 [Pg. 1261 includes portions of Doc. 809 and Doc. 810]; establishment and relationship to Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees, 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 555], 989–990 [Pgs. 989–990 include portions of Doc. 555, Doc. 556, Doc. 557, and Doc. 558], 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 568], 1006–1007 [Pg. 1006 is part of Doc. 570], 1101 [Pg. 1101 is part of Doc. 648]; termination of, 1185–1186 [Pgs. 1185–1186 include portions of Doc. 717, Doc. 718, and Doc. 719], 1187–1188 [Pgs. 1187–1188 include portions of Doc. 720 and Doc. 721]

Yugoslavia: Passage of refugees through Yugoslavia to Italy, and care of Yugoslav refugees, 1028–1029 [Pgs. 1028–1029 include portions of Doc. 585, Doc. 586, and Doc. 587], 1029n [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 1052–1053 [Pgs. 1052–1053 include portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610], 1059–1060 [Pgs. 1059–1060 include portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 1062–1064 [Pgs. 1062–1064 include portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, and Doc. 620], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 1078–1079 [Pgs. 1078–1079 include portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634], 1080 [Pg. 1080 is part of Doc. 635], 1081 [Pg. 1081 includes portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637], 1092–1094 [Pgs. 1092–1094 include portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, and Doc. 644]; cooperation of Tito in rescue of Balkan Jews, 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 610], 1063 [Pg. 1063 is part of Doc. 619], 1079 [Pg. 1079 is part of Doc. 634], 1081 [Pg. 1081 includes portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636]

Reiff, Henry, 915 [Pg. 915 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508]

Reparations. See Germany: Reparation and restitution.

Reventlow, Count Eduard, 1475n [Pg. 1475 is part of Doc. 993]

Ribbentrop, Joachim von, 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 337], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926]

Riddleberger, James W., 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 419–422 [Pgs. 419–422 include portions of Doc. 220, Doc. 221, and Doc. 222], 423–424 [Pgs. 423–424 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 224], 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

Robertson, Norman, 933–936 [Pgs. 933–936 include portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518]

Rockefeller, Nelson A., 954 [Pg. 954 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526], 956 [Pg. 956 is part of Doc. 526], 957 [Pg. 957 is part of Doc. 526], 958–959 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 526]

Romer, Tadeusz, 453n [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 236], 1234 [Pg. 1234 includes portions of Doc. 773, Doc. 774, and Doc. 775]

Rommel, Field Marshal Erwin, 485–486 [Pgs. 485–486 include portions of Doc. 258, Doc. 259, and Doc. 260], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 280]

Roosevelt, Franklin D.: Correspondence with— Chiang Kai-shek, 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

Churchill, 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 180–182 [Pgs. 180–182 include portions of Doc. 94, Doc. 95, and Doc. 96], 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, and Doc. 100], 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 117], 513–515 [Pgs. 513–515 include portions of Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 517–518 [Pgs. 517–518 include portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287], 564–566 [Pgs. 564–566 include portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332], 836–838 [Pgs. 836–838 include portions of Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482], 849–850 [Pgs. 849–850 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, and Doc. 489]

Lescot, Elie, 1420–1422 [Pgs. 1420–1422 include portions of Doc. 928 and Doc. 929], 1441 [Pg. 1441 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954]

Murphy, Robert D., 1059–1060 [Pgs. 1059–1060 include portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617]

Stalin, 513n [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 782–783 [Pgs. 782–783 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, and Doc. 451], 788–789 [Pgs. 788–789 include portions of Doc. 452, Doc. 453, and Doc. 454], 806–807 [Pgs. 806–807 include portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, and Doc. 464]

Taylor, Myron C., 960 [Pg. 960 is part of Doc. 527]

Dumbarton Oaks Conversations (see also International Security Organization, infra), 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 713n [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 717n [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 421], 730–732 [Pgs. 730–732 include portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 427], 743–746 [Pgs. 743–746 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430], 758–759 [Pgs. 758–759 include portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437], 761n [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 440], 772–776 [Pgs. 772–776 include portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448], 780–783 [Pgs. 780–783 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, and Doc. 451], 784–787 [Pgs. 784–787 include portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 788–789 [Pgs. 788–789 include portions of Doc. 452, Doc. 453, and Doc. 454], 814–815 [Pgs. 814–815 include portions of Doc. 468, Doc. 469, and Doc. 470], 816 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 471], 831–834 [Pgs. 831–834 include portions of Doc. 478, Doc. 479, and Doc. 480], 836–838 [Pgs. 836–838 include portions of Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482], 839n [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 482], 842–843 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 483], 849–850 [Pgs. 849–850 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, and Doc. 489], 931 [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515], 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516]

European Advisory Commission, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 6], 67n [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 47], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 101], 196n [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 104], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 108], 208n [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 108], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 137], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, and Doc. 140], 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 151], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 340n [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 165], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 167], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 174], 358–359 [Pgs. 358–359 include portions of Doc. 176, Doc. 177, and Doc. 178], 409–410 [Pgs. 409–410 include portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 223], 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

International Security Organization (see also Dumbarton Oaks Conversations, supra), 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 376], 614n [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 376], 620–622 [Pgs. 620–622 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378], 621n [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 377], 622n [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 381], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 642–643 [Pgs. 642–643 include portions of Doc. 392, Doc. 393, and Doc. 394], 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 700n [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 410].

Jews of Europe, leadership and direction of U. S. efforts to rescue from Nazi persecution (see also Nazi atrocities, infra): Announcement of U. S. policy and establishment of War Refugee Board, Jan. 22, 1944, 987–988 [Pgs. 987–988 include portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555], 988n [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 555], 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564], 999 [Pg. 999 includes portions of Doc. 565 and Doc. 566], 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 568], 1006 [Pg. 1006 is part of Doc. 570], 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571]

Attempts to find havens, and establishment of refugee camps, 981n [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 549], 1007 [Pg. 1007 is part of Doc. 570], 1018 [Pg. 1018 is part of Doc. 577], 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 610], 1059–1060 [Pgs. 1059–1060 include portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 1066–1067 [Pgs. 1066–1067 include portions of Doc. 621, Doc. 622, and Doc. 623], 1070 [Pg. 1070 includes portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627], 1098 [Pg. 1098 is part of Doc. 645]

Miscellaneous, 966 [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 534], 968n [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536], 1017 [Pg. 1017 is part of Doc. 576], 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 610], 1395 [Pg. 1395 includes portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900], 1421 [Pg. 1421 is part of Doc. 929]

Nazi atrocities and war crimes, declarations and warnings regarding: Oct. 7, 1942, 1345 [Pg. 1345 is part of Doc. 861]; July 30, 1943, 1410 [Pg. 1410 is part of Doc. 915], 1431 [Pg. 1431 is part of Doc. 940]; Mar. 24, 1944, 1015–1016 [Pgs. 1015–1016 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576], 1033 [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1069 [Pg. 1069 includes portions of Doc. 624 and Doc. 625], 1088 [Pg. 1088 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 1089 [Pg. 1089 includes portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640], 1101 [Pg. 1101 is part of Doc. 648], 1110 [Pg. 1110 is part of Doc. 655], 1161 [Pg. 1161 includes portions of Doc. 698 and Doc. 699], 1163 [Pg. 1163 includes portions of Doc. 701 and Doc. 702], 1230–1231 [Pgs. 1230–1231 include portions of Doc. 770, Doc. 771, and Doc. 772], 1233 [Pg. 1233 is part of Doc. 773], 1235 [Pg. 1235 is part of Doc. 775], 1379–1380 [Pgs. 1379–1380 include portions of Doc. 883 and Doc. 884]; Nov. 7, 1944 (statement by Gen. Eisenhower at Roosevelt’s request), 1174–1175 [Pgs. 1174–1175 include portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709]

Surrender terms for Germany, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 137], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, and Doc. 140], 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 493–494 [Pgs. 493–494 include portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 501–502 [Pgs. 501–502 include portions of Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274], 502–503 [Pgs. 502–503 include portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, and Doc. 279], 509n [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, and Doc. 279], 509–510 [Pgs. 509–510 include portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280], 520–522 [Pgs. 520–522 include portions of Doc. 290, Doc. 291, and Doc. 292], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 528–529 [Pgs. 528–529 include portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, and Doc. 301], 544–546 [Pgs. 544–546 include portions of Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]; for Bulgaria, Hungary, and Rumania, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 340], 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 585n [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 588–589 [Pgs. 588–589 include portions of Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, and Doc. 348], 589n [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, and Doc. 348], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, and Doc. 372], 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 373]

Roosevelt, Mrs. Franklin D., 977 [Pg. 977 includes portions of Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545]

Rothwell, C. Easton, 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

Rumania (see also Unconditional surrender principle, question of application to Bulgaria, Finland, Hungary, and Rumania; and under Refugees from Europe): Liberation of Bucharest by Soviet forces, Aug. 31, 1944, 1203 [Pg. 1203 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736]; repatriation and relief of American nationals, 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763], 1226 [Pg. 1226 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765]; surrender terms for, preparation of, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 28], 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 82]

Rundstedt, Field Marshal Karl Rudolf von, 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 280], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 280]

Saksin, G. F., 1465 [Pg. 1465 includes portions of Doc. 986 and Doc. 987]

Salazar, Antonio de Oliveira, 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 1413n [Pg. 1413 includes portions of Doc. 917 and Doc. 918], 1413–1414 [Pgs. 1413–1414 include portions of Doc. 917, Doc. 918, and Doc. 919], 1419 [Pg. 1419 includes portions of Doc. 927 and Doc. 928], 1425 [Pg. 1425 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932], 1428 [Pg. 1428 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936], 1435 [Pg. 1435 includes portions of Doc. 943, Doc. 944, and Doc. 945], 1437 [Pg. 1437 includes portions of Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948], 1439 [Pg. 1439 includes portions of Doc. 950 and Doc. 951]

Sampaio (Sampayo), L. Teifeira de, 1412n [Pg. 1412 includes portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, and Doc. 917], 1412–1413 [Pgs. 1412–1413 include portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926], 1428 [Pg. 1428 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936], 1430 [Pg. 1430 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939], 1439–1440 [Pgs. 1439–1440 include portions of Doc. 950, Doc. 951, and Doc. 952]

Sanson, Sir George, 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 490]

Sargent, Sir Orme, 596n [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 1455 [Pg. 1455 is part of Doc. 974], 1455n [Pg. 1455 is part of Doc. 974], 1458–1460 [Pgs. 1458–1460 include portions of Doc. 976, Doc. 977, Doc. 978, and Doc. 979], 1461 [Pg. 1461 includes portions of Doc. 979, Doc. 980, and Doc. 981], 1462 [Pg. 1462 is part of Doc. 982]

Sargent, Lt. Comdr. Willis, 159–160 [Pgs. 159–160 include portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82]

Scheynius, Ignas, 554–556 [Pgs. 554–556 include portions of Doc. 322, Doc. 323, and Doc. 324], 557–559 [Pgs. 557–559 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 563–564 [Pgs. 563–564 include portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

Selborne, Lord, 985–986 [Pgs. 985–986 include portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554], 986 [Pg. 986 includes portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554]

Seydlitz-Kurzbach, Gen. Walther von, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 303], 533n [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 303], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 303]

Seyss-Inquart, Arthur, 1353 [Pg. 1353 includes portions of Doc. 866 and Doc. 867]

Shang Chen, Gen., 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 865n [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 495]

Sherwood, Robert E., 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 290], 1455n [Pg. 1455 is part of Doc. 974], 1457n [Pg. 1457 is part of Doc. 975]

Simeon II, Tsar of Bulgaria, 1456n [Pg. 1456 is part of Doc. 974]

Simon, Lord, 1345 [Pg. 1345 is part of Doc. 861], 1346 [Pg. 1346 is part of Doc. 861], 1401 [Pg. 1401 is part of Doc. 909], 1402 [Pg. 1402 is part of Doc. 909], 1403–1405 [Pgs. 1403–1405 include portions of Doc. 909 and Doc. 910]

Simond, Gilbert, 1044n [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 1104 [Pg. 1104 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 1105 [Pg. 1105 is part of Doc. 651]

Smith, Gen. Walter Bedell, 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 276], 544n [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Smuts, Jan Christian, 517 [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 836–838 [Pgs. 836–838 include portions of Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482], 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488]

Sobolev, A. A., 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 716n [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 420], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 428], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 428], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 798 [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 460], 803 [Pg. 803 is part of Doc. 460], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 507], 902 [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 507], 1465 [Pg. 1465 includes portions of Doc. 986 and Doc. 987]; conversation with Leo Pasvolsky, 846–849 [Pgs. 846–849 include portions of Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488]

Soviet Union (see also Dumbarton Oaks Conversations; Emergency measures, etc.; European Advisory Commission; Germany; Nazi atrocities; Refugees from Europe: Soviet Union; Stalin, I. V.; Unconditional surrender principle; and War criminals, etc.): Interest in peace feelers from Germany, 494–495 [Pgs. 494–495 include portions of Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267], 498–499 [Pgs. 498–499 include portions of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, and Doc. 271], 538–539 [Pgs. 538–539 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306], 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]; in unconditional surrender terms for Germany, 484–485 [Pgs. 484–485 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259], 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265]

Participation in work of London Coordinating Committee for Political Warfare, 1455–1465 [Pgs. 1455–1465 include portions of Doc. 974, Doc. 975, Doc. 976, Doc. 977, Doc. 978, Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, Doc. 982, Doc. 983, Doc. 984, Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987]

Rumors regarding Soviet intentions in connection with anticipated German surrender, 494–495 [Pgs. 494–495 include portions of Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 303]

Spaak, Paul-Henri, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 40], 940–941 [Pgs. 940–941 include portions of Doc. 518, Doc. 519, and Doc. 520]

Spain (see also under Refugees from Europe, etc.), position regarding asylum for war criminals, 1416–1417 [Pgs. 1416–1417 include portions of Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, and Doc. 923], 1419–1420 [Pgs. 1419–1420 include portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929], 1423 [Pg. 1423 includes portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931], 1432–1433 [Pgs. 1432–1433 include portions of Doc. 940, Doc. 941, and Doc. 942], 1435–1436 [Pgs. 1435–1436 include portions of Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, and Doc. 946], 1451 [Pg. 1451 includes portions of Doc. 968, Doc. 969, and Doc. 970]

Spellman, Archbishop Francis J., 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 531]

Stalin, I. V., 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 50], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 517 [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 290], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 290], 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 449], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 449], 782–783 [Pgs. 782–783 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, and Doc. 451], 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 452], 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 479], 937n [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 518]; exchange of messages with Roosevelt, 513n [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 782–783 [Pgs. 782–783 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, and Doc. 451], 788–789 [Pgs. 788–789 include portions of Doc. 452, Doc. 453, and Doc. 454], 806–807 [Pgs. 806–807 include portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, and Doc. 464]

Stark, Adm. Harold R., 160n [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 82], 1455n [Pg. 1455 is part of Doc. 974]

State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee, establishment of, 1466–1470 [Pgs. 1466–1470 include portions of Doc. 988, Doc. 989, and Doc. 990]

Stegmann, Mr., 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 337], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 337], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 337]

Sternbuch, Isaac, 1096 [Pg. 1096 is part of Doc. 644], 1144 [Pg. 1144 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683]

Stettinius, Edward R., Jr.: Appointment as Secretary of State, 1525 [Pg. 1525 is part of Appendix: Reorganization of the Department of State]

Communication of views and recommendations to President Roosevelt, 179–180 [Pgs. 179–180 include portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95], 395–398 [Pgs. 395–398 include portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 409–410 [Pgs. 409–410 include portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 411–413 [Pgs. 411–413 include portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 520–522 [Pgs. 520–522 include portions of Doc. 290, Doc. 291, and Doc. 292], 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 713–718 [Pgs. 713–718 include portions of Doc. 418, Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422], 730–732 [Pgs. 730–732 include portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425], 737–738 [Pgs. 737–738 include portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 743–746 [Pgs. 743–746 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430], 758–759 [Pgs. 758–759 include portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437], 772–776 [Pgs. 772–776 include portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 449], 812–813 [Pgs. 812–813 include portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 816–817 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 471], 831–836 [Pgs. 831–836 include portions of Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, and Doc. 481], 838–840 [Pgs. 838–840 include portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482], 842–843 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 483], 966–967 [Pgs. 966–967 include portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535]

Discussions and activities relative to— Asylum for war criminals, 1446–1447 [Pgs. 1446–1447 include portions of Doc. 960, Doc. 961, Doc. 962, and Doc. 963]

European Advisory Commission, 27–31 [Pgs. 27–31 include portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 90], 179–180 [Pgs. 179–180 include portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 137], 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 395–398 [Pgs. 395–398 include portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 406–407 [Pgs. 406–407 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, and Doc. 208]

Governmental assistance to persons forced to emigrate, 1185–1186 [Pgs. 1185–1186 include portions of Doc. 717, Doc. 718, and Doc. 719]

Intellectual rehabilitation of Europe, 966–967 [Pgs. 966–967 include portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535], 977–978 [Pgs. 977–978 include portions of Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545]

International trusteeship, 922–923 [Pgs. 922–923 include portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510]

Invasion of Europe, question of appeal to German people to surrender, 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 520–522 [Pgs. 520–522 include portions of Doc. 290, Doc. 291, and Doc. 292]

Repatriation of American citizens from Europe, 1213–1214 [Pg. 1213 is part of Doc. 751]

State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee, establishment of, 1466–1467 [Pg. 1466 is part of Doc. 988]

Surrender terms for Germany, 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 90], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]

Treatment of enemy consular and diplomatic property, 1499–1500 [Pgs. 1499–1500 include portions of Doc. 1010 and Doc. 1011]

Zones of occupation in Germany, 179–180 [Pgs. 179–180 include portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 137]

International Security Organization, preliminaries to establishment of: Minutes of meetings and miscellaneous references, 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 636n [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 398], 698–699 [Pgs. 698–699 include portions of Doc. 408, Doc. 409, and Doc. 410], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413], 706n [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 734–883 [Pgs. 734–883 include portions of Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502] passim

Reactions of other nations to Dumbarton Oaks Proposals, 937–939 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 518], 941–944 [Pgs. 941–944 include portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521], 949–951 [Pgs. 949–951 include portions of Doc. 521 and Doc. 522]

Reports to Roosevelt and Hull, and extracts from Diary, 713–718 [Pgs. 713–718 include portions of Doc. 418, Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422], 728–734 [Pgs. 728–734 include portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, and Doc. 426], 737–738 [Pgs. 737–738 include portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 743–750 [Pgs. 743–750 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432], 753–756 [Pgs. 753–756 include portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, and Doc. 436], 758–759 [Pgs. 758–759 include portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437], 761–782 [Pgs. 761–782 include portions of Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, and Doc. 450], 783–788 [Pgs. 783–788 include portions of Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 789–791 [Pgs. 789–791 include portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, and Doc. 455], 793–797 [Pgs. 793–797 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, and Doc. 459], 804–805 [Pgs. 804–805 include portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462], 807–814 [Pgs. 807–814 include portions of Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470], 816–817 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 471], 821–826 [Pgs. 821–826 include portions of Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, and Doc. 476], 828–836 [Pgs. 828–836 include portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, and Doc. 481], 841–846 [Pgs. 841–846 include portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, and Doc. 486]; Chinese phase of conversations, 850–851 [Pgs. 850–851 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 861–862 [Pgs. 861–862 include portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491], 863–867 [Pgs. 863–867 include portions of Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, and Doc. 495], 869–871 [Pgs. 869–871 include portions of Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497], 881–882 [Pgs. 881–882 include portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc. 501], 883–884 [Pgs. 883–884 include portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502]

Stimson, Henry L., 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, and Doc. 279], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 1392 [Pg. 1392 includes portions of Doc. 895 and Doc. 896], 1468 [Pg. 1468 is part of Doc. 989], 1480–1481 [Pgs. 1480–1481 include portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, and Doc. 997]

Strang, Sir William, activities as British representative on European Advisory Commission, 8–9 [Pgs. 8–9 include portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 19–20 [Pgs. 19–20 include portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 21–22 [Pgs. 21–22 include portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, Doc. 15, and Doc. 16], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 41–42 [Pgs. 41–42 include portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 42n [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 45–46 [Pgs. 45–46 include portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 52–53 [Pgs. 52–53 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 55–56 [Pgs. 55–56 include portions of Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39], 60–62 [Pgs. 60–62 include portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, Doc. 42, and Doc. 43], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 67], 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 139–140 [Pgs. 139–140 include portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 161–162 [Pgs. 161–162 include portions of Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, and Doc. 85], 163–164 [Pgs. 163–164 include portions of Doc. 85, Doc. 86, and Doc. 87], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 199–200 [Pgs. 199–200 include portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 201–202 [Pgs. 201–202 include portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 211–212 [Pgs. 211–212 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 217–218 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 112], 224–225 [Pgs. 224–225 include portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 123], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 127], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 134], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 134], 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 266–267 [Pgs. 266–267 include portions of Doc. 140, Doc. 141, and Doc. 142], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 145], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 155], 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 165], 359–364 [Pgs. 359–364 include portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 182], 388–389 [Pgs. 388–389 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197], 391–392 [Pgs. 391–392 include portions of Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, and Doc. 200], 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 236], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 237], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 238], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, and Doc. 247], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 1484n [Pg. 1484 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1490 [Pg. 1490 is part of Doc. 1005], 1490n [Pg. 1490 is part of Doc. 1005]

Strong, Gen. George V., 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 398], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 398], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 865n [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 507], 937 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 518], 939–940 [Pgs. 939–940 include portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519]

Studebaker, John W., 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 540]

Supreme Allied Commander, Mediterranean Theater (SACMED), 1062 [Pg. 1062 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1078 [Pg. 1078 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634], 1092–1094 [Pgs. 1092–1094 include portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, and Doc. 644], 1097 [Pg. 1097 includes portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1125 [Pg. 1125 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666]

Sweden (see also under Refugees from Europe, etc.), position regarding asylum for war criminals, 1414–1415 [Pgs. 1414–1415 include portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, and Doc. 920], 1416 [Pg. 1416 includes portions of Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 1431–1432 [Pgs. 1431–1432 include portions of Doc. 940 and Doc. 941]

Switzerland: Protection of American interests in enemy or enemy-occupied territory (see also Emergency measures, etc.; Nazi atrocities; and Refugees from Europe, etc.), 1199–1200 [Pgs. 1199–1200 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733], 1200 [Pg. 1200 includes portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733], 1203 [Pg. 1203 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 1207 [Pg. 1207 includes portions of Doc. 743 and Doc. 744], 1207n [Pg. 1207 includes portions of Doc. 743 and Doc. 744], 1216n [Pg. 1216 includes portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753]

Protection of Belgian interests in Rumania, 1202–1203 [Pgs. 1202–1203 include portions of Doc. 734, Doc. 735, and Doc. 736]

U. S. representations concerning granting of asylum to war criminals, 1410–1412 [Pgs. 1410–1412 include portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, and Doc. 917], 1412 [Pg. 1412 includes portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, and Doc. 917], 1415–1416 [Pgs. 1415–1416 include portions of Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926], 1432 [Pg. 1432 includes portions of Doc. 940 and Doc. 941], 1448 [Pg. 1448 includes portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965]

Taylor, Myron C., 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 960–964 [Pgs. 960–964 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, and Doc. 532] passim, 1036n [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 593 and Doc. 594], 1123 [Pg. 1123 includes portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664], 1141 [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 679 and Doc. 680], 1185 [Pg. 1185 includes portions of Doc. 717 and Doc. 718], 1187 [Pg. 1187 is part of Doc. 720]

Teheran Conference (1943), 484–485 [Pgs. 484–485 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259], 517 [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 340], 1228 [Pg. 1228 includes portions of Doc. 767, Doc. 768, and Doc. 769]

Thompson, C. Mildred, 969n [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 540]

Tito, Marshal (Josip Broz), 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 1028n [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 1053 [Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 610], 1063 [Pg. 1063 is part of Doc. 619], 1079 [Pg. 1079 is part of Doc. 634], 1092 [Pg. 1092 includes portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642], 1093 [Pg. 1093 is part of Doc. 642], 1508n [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017], 1508–1509 [Pgs. 1508–1509 include portions of Doc. 1016, Doc. 1017, and Doc. 1018]

Tittmann, Harold H., Jr., 1036n [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 593 and Doc. 594]

Train, Adm. Harold C., 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 398], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 865n [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494]

Transnistria, 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 569], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 572], 1046 [Pg. 1046 is part of Doc. 605]

Treaties, conventions, etc.: Atlantic Charter, 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

Geneva Prisoners of War Convention of 1929, cited, 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 1027 [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1039 [Pg. 1039 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 1072 [Pg. 1072 is part of Doc. 628], 1077 [Pg. 1077 is part of Doc. 633], 1228 [Pg. 1228 includes portions of Doc. 767, Doc. 768, and Doc. 769], 1229 [Pg. 1229 is part of Doc. 770], 1230 [Pg. 1230 includes portions of Doc. 770 and Doc. 771], 1269 [Pg. 1269 is part of Doc. 818]

Hague Convention of 1907, 1237 [Pg. 1237 includes portions of Doc. 777 and Doc. 778], 1244 [Pg. 1244 includes portions of Doc. 784 and Doc. 785], 1245 [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786]

Soviet Union–Czechoslovakia, treaty of friendship, mutual assistance and postwar collaboration, 1943, cited, 1217 [Pg. 1217 includes portions of Doc. 753 and Doc. 754]

Treaty of Versailles, cited, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 80], 1388 [Pg. 1388 is part of Doc. 891]

Vienna Award of 1940, cited, 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 357]

Trott zu Solz, Priedrich Adam von, 523–525 [Pgs. 523–525 include portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295], 550–552 [Pgs. 550–552 include portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, and Doc. 320]

Tsarapkin, S. K., 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

Turbay, Gabriel, 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 518], 942, 943–944 [Pgs. 943–944 include portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521]

Turkey (see also under Refugees from Europe, etc.), 1432 [Pg. 1432 includes portions of Doc. 940 and Doc. 941], 1436–1437 [Pgs. 1436–1437 include portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948]

Turner, Ralph E., 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 973–974 [Pgs. 973–974 include portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541]

Unconditional surrender principle, question of application to Bulgaria, Finland, Hungary, and Rumania, 580–613 [Pgs. 580–613 include portions of Doc. 340, Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, and Doc. 375] Abandonment or modification of principle in the case of Axis satellite states, question of: British proposal to Soviet Union and United States, and discussions concerning, 584–585 [Pgs. 584–585 include portions of Doc. 342, Doc. 343, and Doc. 344], 586–588 [Pgs. 586–588 include portions of Doc. 344, Doc. 345, and Doc. 346], 589–591 [Pgs. 589–591 include portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, and Doc. 351], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 353], 594–595 [Pgs. 594–595 include portions of Doc. 354, Doc. 355, and Doc. 356], 603–604 [Pgs. 603–604 include portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365], 606–607 [Pgs. 606–607 include portions of Doc. 367, Doc. 368, and Doc. 369], 608–609 [Pgs. 608–609 include portions of Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, and Doc. 372]

Definition of principle, discussions concerning, 581–582 [Pgs. 581–582 include portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]

Soviet peace terms for Finland and Rumania, relation to, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 340], 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 345], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, and Doc. 372]

Views of President Roosevelt, 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 585n [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 588–589 [Pgs. 588–589 include portions of Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, and Doc. 348], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 609–610 [Pgs. 609–610 include portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373]

Anglo-American-Soviet declaration to Axis satellites: American draft declaration, and British and Soviet revisions, 591–592 [Pgs. 591–592 include portions of Doc. 350, Doc. 351, and Doc. 352], 595–596 [Pgs. 595–596 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 599–600 [Pgs. 599–600 include portions of Doc. 357, Doc. 358, and Doc. 359], 605–606 [Pgs. 605–606 include portions of Doc. 366, Doc. 367, and Doc. 368]

Simultaneous release to the press, discussions concerning, and publication on May 12, 600–603 [Pgs. 600–603 include portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364], 606n [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

British interests in Southeastern Europe, 596–599 [Pgs. 596–599 include portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358], 610–611 [Pgs. 610–611 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

Casablanca Conference communiqué (1943), cited in connection with, 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

European Advisory Commission, consideration of surrender terms, 583–584 [Pgs. 583–584 include portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Intelligence activities in Balkans, U. S.-Soviet collaboration in, 580–581 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 340]

Military operations in Bulgaria, Hungary, and Rumania, U. S. position regarding, 607–608 [Pgs. 607–608 include portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370], 612–613 [Pgs. 612–613 include portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375]

Moscow Four Nation Declaration on General Security (1943), cited in connection with, 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 353], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 357]

Spheres of influence in the Balkans, British position regarding, 596–599 [Pgs. 596–599 include portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358], 610–611 [Pgs. 610–611 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

Unconditional surrender terms for Germany (see also German surrender, anticipation of; and Germany, work of European Advisory Commission, etc.: Surrender instrument): Definition and use of tern, question of desirability of, 484–485 [Pgs. 484–485 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 493–494 [Pgs. 493–494 include portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 501n [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 502–505 [Pgs. 502–505 include portions of Doc. 273, Doc. 274, and Doc. 275], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 275], 507–509 [Pgs. 507–509 include portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, and Doc. 279], 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 339]; Roosevelt’s position, 493–494 [Pgs. 493–494 include portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 501–502 [Pgs. 501–502 include portions of Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, and Doc. 279], 509–510 [Pgs. 509–510 include portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]

German reactions, and propaganda use of tern, 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265], 501n [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 505–507 [Pgs. 505–507 include portions of Doc. 274, Doc. 275, and Doc. 276], 517 [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 303], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 303], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319], 567–568 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 333]; resulting pro-Soviet sentiments in Germany, alleged, 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 325]

Instructions to Allied military commanders regarding peace terms, 541–543 [Pgs. 541–543 include portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, and Doc. 310], 549–550 [Pgs. 549–550 include portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319]; concurrence of Marshal Tito, 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

Roosevelt’s position, 493–494 [Pgs. 493–494 include portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 501–502 [Pgs. 501–502 include portions of Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, and Doc. 279], 509–510 [Pgs. 509–510 include portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]; Churchill’s concurrence, 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]

United Kingdom (see also Dumbarton Oaks Conversations; European Advisory Commission; German surrender, anticipation of; Germany; London Coordinating Committee; Nazi atrocities; Unconditional surrender principle, etc.; and Unconditional surrender terms for Germany): Censorship policies, 1508 [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017], 1510n [Pg. 1510 includes portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019], 1512–1518 [Pgs. 1512–1518 include portions of Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, Doc. 1022, Doc. 1023, and Doc. 1024], 1521 [Pg. 1521 includes portions of Doc. 1026 and Doc. 1027], 1522 [Pg. 1522 includes portions of Doc. 1027 and Doc. 1028]; Palestine White Paper of 1939, 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 1011–1013 [Pgs. 1011–1013 include portions of Doc. 572, Doc. 573, and Doc. 574]; protection of British subjects at Budapest, 1218 [Pg. 1218 is part of Doc. 755]

United Nations agencies in Germany, proposals concerning, 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 107], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 107], 214–215 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 111]

United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes, 1265–1409 [Pgs. 1265–1409 include portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856, Doc. 857, Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, Doc. 862, Doc. 863, Doc. 864, Doc. 865, Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, Doc. 869, Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, Doc. 876, Doc. 877, Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, Doc. 884, Doc. 885, Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, Doc. 893, Doc. 894, Doc. 895, Doc. 896, Doc. 897, Doc. 898, Doc. 899, Doc. 900, Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, Doc. 906, Doc. 907, Doc. 908, Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, Doc. 912, Doc. 913, and Doc. 914] Agency to assist Commission in enemy territory, recommendation concerning establishment of, 1330–1331 [Pgs. 1330–1331 include portions of Doc. 848, Doc. 849, and Doc. 850]

Atrocities committed on racial, political, or religious grounds in enemy territory, Anglo-American discussions regarding, 1321–1322 [Pgs. 1321–1322 include portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842], 1351–1353 [Pgs. 1351–1353 include portions of Doc. 864, Doc. 865, Doc. 866, and Doc. 867], 1378–1380 [Pgs. 1378–1380 include portions of Doc. 882, Doc. 883, and Doc. 884], 1401–1405 [Pgs. 1401–1405 include portions of Doc. 909 and Doc. 910]

Brazilian membership, question of, 1285 [Pg. 1285 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1316 [Pg. 1316 includes portions of Doc. 836 and Doc. 837]

Capture of war criminals, recommendations regarding, 1319–1320 [Pgs. 1319–1320 include portions of Doc. 839 and Doc. 840], 1328–1329 [Pgs. 1328–1329 include portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848]

Captured member of SS Deathshead Division, question of treatment of, 1394–1395 [Pgs. 1394–1395 include portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900], 1396–1397 [Pgs. 1396–1397 include portions of Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, and Doc. 905], 1397 [Pg. 1397 includes portions of Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, and Doc. 905], 1406 [Pg. 1406 includes portions of Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

Definition of war crimes, discussions regarding, 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 834], 1311 [Pg. 1311 is part of Doc. 834], 1333–1334 [Pgs. 1333–1334 include portions of Doc. 850 and Doc. 851], 1391 [Pg. 1391 includes portions of Doc. 893 and Doc. 894], 1393 [Pg. 1393 includes portions of Doc. 897 and Doc. 898], 1400 [Pg. 1400 includes portions of Doc. 907 and Doc. 908]

Determination of earliest date on which a war crime could have been committed, 1286 [Pg. 1286 includes portions of Doc. 828 and Doc. 829], 1333–1334 [Pgs. 1333–1334 include portions of Doc. 850 and Doc. 851]

Extradition of war criminals from neutral countries, 1276 [Pg. 1276 includes portions of Doc. 822 and Doc. 823], 1286–1287 [Pgs. 1286–1287 include portions of Doc. 828, Doc. 829, and Doc. 830], 1307 [Pg. 1307 is part of Doc. 834]

Far Eastern and Pacific Sub-Commission, establishment at Chungking on Nov. 28, 1327–1328 [Pgs. 1327–1328 include portions of Doc. 846 and Doc. 847], 1338 [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 854 and Doc. 855], 1351 [Pg. 1351 includes portions of Doc. 864, Doc. 865, and Doc. 866], 1399 [Pg. 1399 includes portions of Doc. 905, Doc. 906, and Doc. 907]

German war crimes in Italy, Anglo-American discussions regarding, 1287–1289 [Pgs. 1287–1289 include portions of Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, and Doc. 832], 1291 [Pg. 1291 is part of Doc. 833], 1297 [Pg. 1297 is part of Doc. 833], 1314–1315 [Pgs. 1314–1315 include portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1324–1325 [Pgs. 1324–1325 include portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, and Doc. 845], 1377–1378 [Pgs. 1377–1378 include portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, and Doc. 883], 1384 [Pg. 1384 includes portions of Doc. 887 and Doc. 888], 1385 [Pg. 1385 includes portions of Doc. 889 and Doc. 890], 1385–1386 [Pgs. 1385–1386 include portions of Doc. 889, Doc. 890, and Doc. 891], 1389 [Pg. 1389 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1393 [Pg. 1393 includes portions of Doc. 897 and Doc. 898], 1397 [Pg. 1397 includes portions of Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, and Doc. 905], 1405–1406 [Pgs. 1405–1406 include portions of Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912], 1407 [Pg. 1407 includes portions of Doc. 912 and Doc. 913], 1408 [Pg. 1408 includes portions of Doc. 913 and Doc. 914]

Italian war crimes, 1376–1377 [Pgs. 1376–1377 include portions of Doc. 880, Doc. 881, and Doc. 882], 1385 [Pg. 1385 includes portions of Doc. 889 and Doc. 890], 1407–1408 [Pgs. 1407–1408 include portions of Doc. 912, Doc. 913, and Doc. 914]

List of war crimes (tentative), and discussions regarding, 1269 [Pg. 1269 is part of Doc. 818], 1272–1273 [Pg. 1272 is part of Doc. 818], 1318n [Pg. 1318 includes portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1339–1340 [Pgs. 1339–1340 include portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857], 1349–1351 [Pgs. 1349–1351 include portions of Doc. 862, Doc. 863, Doc. 864, Doc. 865, and Doc. 866], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 878 and Doc. 879], 1392 [Pg. 1392 includes portions of Doc. 895 and Doc. 896], 1409 [Pg. 1409 is part of Doc. 914]

Military tribunals. See Trial by military tribunal, infra.

Moscow Declaration of German Atrocities, cited, 1279 [Pg. 1279 is part of Doc. 824], 1287 [Pg. 1287 includes portions of Doc. 829 and Doc. 830], 1288 [Pg. 1288 is part of Doc. 830], 1353 [Pg. 1353 includes portions of Doc. 866 and Doc. 867], 1361 [Pg. 1361 includes portions of Doc. 870, Doc. 871, and Doc. 872], 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 878 and Doc. 879], 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885], 1389 [Pg. 1389 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1397 [Pg. 1397 includes portions of Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, and Doc. 905]

Naturalization of citizens of enemy states, question of refusal, 1321 [Pg. 1321 includes portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842]

Offenses committed by Axis authorities against Axis nationals, question of authorization of Commission to consider, and publicity in connection with, 1338 [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 854 and Doc. 855], 1341–1349 [Pgs. 1341–1349 include portions of Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, Doc. 862, Doc. 863, and Doc. 864], 1354 [Pg. 1354 includes portions of Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869]

Scope of activities of Commission, 1321–1322 [Pgs. 1321–1322 include portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842], 1338 [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 854 and Doc. 855], 1351–1354 [Pgs. 1351–1354 include portions of Doc. 864, Doc. 865, Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869], 1360–1361 [Pgs. 1360–1361 include portions of Doc. 869, Doc. 870, Doc. 871, and Doc. 872], 1367 [Pg. 1367 includes portions of Doc. 876 and Doc. 877], 1378–1381 [Pgs. 1378–1381 include portions of Doc. 882, Doc. 883, Doc. 884, and Doc. 885], 1400 [Pg. 1400 includes portions of Doc. 907 and Doc. 908]

Soviet membership, question of, 1265–1266 [Pgs. 1265–1266 include portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, and Doc. 818]

Surrender by Axis Powers of persons wanted for trial as war criminals: Draft article for insertion in the armistice with Germany, 1331–1333 [Pgs. 1331–1333 include portions of Doc. 849, Doc. 850, and Doc. 851]; draft convention and explanatory memorandum, 1354–1360 [Pgs. 1354–1360 include portions of Doc. 867, Doc. 868, Doc. 869, and Doc. 870], 1363–1364 [Pgs. 1363–1364 include portions of Doc. 873 and Doc. 874]; suggestion regarding cooperation with General Eisenhower’s headquarters, 1336–1337 [Pgs. 1336–1337 include portions of Doc. 852 and Doc. 853]

Technical committee of experts, question of establishment of, 1274–1275 [Pgs. 1274–1275 include portions of Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, and Doc. 822], 1278–1279 [Pg. 1278 is part of Doc. 824], 1281–1282 [Pgs. 1281–1282 include portions of Doc. 825, Doc. 826, and Doc. 827], 1367–1368 [Pgs. 1367–1368 include portions of Doc. 876 and Doc. 877]

Trial and punishment of war criminals (see also Trial by military tribunal and United Nations War Crimes Court, infra): International enforcement, discussions regarding, and draft convention, 1282–1285 [Pgs. 1282–1285 include portions of Doc. 826, Doc. 827, and Doc. 828], 1299–1314 [Pgs. 1299–1314 include portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835]

Jurisdiction of military commanders in the field, Anglo-American discussions regarding, 1276–1277 [Pgs. 1276–1277 include portions of Doc. 822 and Doc. 823], 1289–1290 [Pgs. 1289–1290 include portions of Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, and Doc. 833], 1316–1318 [Pgs. 1316–1318 include portions of Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, and Doc. 839], 1323–1324 [Pgs. 1323–1324 include portions of Doc. 843 and Doc. 844], 1325–1326 [Pgs. 1325–1326 include portions of Doc. 844 and Doc. 845], 1329–1330 [Pgs. 1329–1330 include portions of Doc. 847, Doc. 848, and Doc. 849], 1339 [Pg. 1339 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857]; British draft directive, 1329–1330 [Pgs. 1329–1330 include portions of Doc. 847, Doc. 848, and Doc. 849]

“Major war criminals”, question of treatment of, 1353–1354 [Pgs. 1353–1354 include portions of Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869], 1361 [Pg. 1361 includes portions of Doc. 870, Doc. 871, and Doc. 872], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 878 and Doc. 879], 1381 [Pg. 1381 includes portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885]; press release issued by Department of State, 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 878 and Doc. 879]

Measures to ensure capture of war criminals, recommendations, 1319–1320 [Pgs. 1319–1320 include portions of Doc. 839 and Doc. 840]

Obligations of theater commanders in relation to war crimes, British views regarding, 1408–1409 [Pgs. 1408–1409 include portions of Doc. 913 and Doc. 914]

Problems relating to war crimes, 1395 [Pg. 1395 includes portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900], 1397–1399 [Pgs. 1397–1399 include portions of Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, Doc. 906, and Doc. 907]

Soviet attitude, 1364–1365 [Pgs. 1364–1365 include portions of Doc. 873, Doc. 874, and Doc. 875], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 878 and Doc. 879]

Trial by military tribunal: Recommendations by Judge Advocate General, War Department, 1266–1273 [Pgs. 1266–1273 include portions of Doc. 817 and Doc. 818]; recommendations in favor of establishment by Supreme Military Commanders of Mixed Military Tribunals, 1365–1366 [Pgs. 1365–1366 include portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875], 1382–1383 [Pgs. 1382–1383 include portions of Doc. 885, Doc. 886, and Doc. 887]

United Nations War Crimes Court, draft convention for establishment of, and comments regarding, 1370–1376 [Pgs. 1370–1376 include portions of Doc. 880 and Doc. 881], 1381–1382 [Pgs. 1381–1382 include portions of Doc. 884, Doc. 885, and Doc. 886], 1383 [Pg. 1383 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887], 1384 [Pg. 1384 includes portions of Doc. 887 and Doc. 888], 1386–1388 [Pgs. 1386–1388 include portions of Doc. 890 and Doc. 891], 1389–1390 [Pgs. 1389–1390 include portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1390–1391 [Pgs. 1390–1391 include portions of Doc. 893 and Doc. 894], 1406–1407 [Pgs. 1406–1407 include portions of Doc. 910, Doc. 911, Doc. 912, and Doc. 913]

War crimes against non-Allied nationals outside jurisdiction of War Crimes Commission, Belgian proposals and U. S. position, 1290–1298 [Pgs. 1290–1298 include portions of Doc. 832 and Doc. 833], 1318–1319 [Pgs. 1318–1319 include portions of Doc. 838, Doc. 839, and Doc. 840]

United Nations Conference, plans for. See under Dumbarton Oaks Conversations.

United Nations forces, stationing of in Germany, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 79], 124–125 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 79]

United Nations Organization, proposed: Preparations for establishment of. See Dumbarton Oaks Conversations.

Vatican, question of eligibility for membership in, 960–964 [Pgs. 960–964 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, and Doc. 532]

United Nations Organization for Educational and Cultural Reconstruction. See Conference of Allied Ministers of Education.

United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA). See under Refugees from Europe, etc.

Uruguay, 942 [Pg. 942 is part of Doc. 520], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 526], 1022n [Pg. 1022 is part of Doc. 580], 1026n [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 584], 1027n [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1032n [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 589], 1033n [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1096 [Pg. 1096 is part of Doc. 644], 1115 [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 1156 [Pg. 1156 includes portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693], 1157n [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694]

U. S. citizens. See Emergency measures for the welfare of U. S. citizens, etc.

U. S. Congress: House Foreign Affairs Committee, 1163–1164 [Pgs. 1163–1164 include portions of Doc. 701, Doc. 702, and Doc. 703]; Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 1064–1065 [Pgs. 1064–1065 include portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621], 1069 [Pg. 1069 includes portions of Doc. 624 and Doc. 625], 1110 [Pg. 1110 is part of Doc. 655], 1163 [Pg. 1163 includes portions of Doc. 701 and Doc. 702]

U. S. Consulates, reestablishment in Antwerp, 1207 [Pg. 1207 includes portions of Doc. 743 and Doc. 744]; Naples, 1200n [Pg. 1200 includes portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733]; Palermo, 1194n [Pg. 1194 includes portions of Doc. 726 and Doc. 727], 1200 [Pg. 1200 includes portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733]; Rome, 1210n [Pg. 1210 is part of Doc. 748]; Salonika, 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763]

U. S. Department of State: Policy and attitude with regard to censorship, 1507–1523 [Pgs. 1507–1523 include portions of Doc. 1014, Doc. 1015, Doc. 1016, Doc. 1017, Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, Doc. 1022, Doc. 1023, Doc. 1024, Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, Doc. 1027, and Doc. 1028]; reorganization of, 1525–1526 [Pg. 1525 is part of Appendix: Reorganization of the Department of State]

U. S. Embassies, reestablishment in Athens, 1225n [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763]; in Brussels, 1207 [Pg. 1207 includes portions of Doc. 743 and Doc. 744]

U. S. Mission at Paris, opening of, 1207n [Pg. 1207 includes portions of Doc. 743 and Doc. 744]

Vargas, Getulio, 1156 [Pg. 1156 includes portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693]

Vasilev, Gen. A. V., 1465 [Pg. 1465 includes portions of Doc. 986 and Doc. 987]

Vatican (see also under Refugees from Europe, etc.), question of eligibility for membership in proposed United Nations Organization, 960–964 [Pgs. 960–964 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, and Doc. 532]

Vaucher Committee, formation of, 972 [Pg. 972 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540]

Vaucher, Paul, 972 [Pg. 972 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540]

Velloso, Pedro Leão, 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516], 952–953 [Pgs. 952–953 include portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]

Venezuela, 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568], 1021n [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 1026n [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 584], 1027n [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 1072 [Pg. 1072 is part of Doc. 628], 1083 [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 637], 1085 [Pg. 1085 is part of Doc. 637], 1087 [Pg. 1087 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638], 1115n [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 1116n [Pg. 1116 includes portions of Doc. 659 and Doc. 660], 1155–1156 [Pgs. 1155–1156 include portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693], 1157n [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 693 and Doc. 694]

Vinogradov, S. A., 1009 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 571]

Visconti-Venosta, Giovanni, 64–65 [Pgs. 64–65 include portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 53]

Vyshinsky, A. Y., 609–610 [Pgs. 609–610 include portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 411], 1016–1017 [Pgs. 1016–1017 include portions of Doc. 575 and Doc. 576], 1037 [Pg. 1037 includes portions of Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596], 1074 [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 629, Doc. 630, and Doc. 631], 1461 [Pg. 1461 includes portions of Doc. 979, Doc. 980, and Doc. 981]

Walshe, Joseph P., 1430 [Pg. 1430 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939], 1439 [Pg. 1439 includes portions of Doc. 950 and Doc. 951], 1440 [Pg. 1440 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 1444–1445 [Pgs. 1444–1445 include portions of Doc. 958 and Doc. 959], 1449 [Pg. 1449 includes portions of Doc. 965 and Doc. 966], 1450 [Pg. 1450 includes portions of Doc. 967 and Doc. 968]

Wang Chung-hui, 1338 [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 854 and Doc. 855], 1399 [Pg. 1399 includes portions of Doc. 905, Doc. 906, and Doc. 907]

War crimes. See Nazi atrocities, etc.; United Nations Commission for the Investigation of War Crimes; and War criminals.

War criminals, EAC consideration of treatment of, 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 75], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 76], 119–120 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 79], 134–135 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 79], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 106], 219–220 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 112], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 129]

War criminals, representations to neutral governments against granting of asylum to, 1410–1454 [Pgs. 1410–1454 include portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, Doc. 926, Doc. 927, Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, Doc. 932, Doc. 933, Doc. 934, Doc. 935, Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, Doc. 955, Doc. 956, Doc. 957, Doc. 958, Doc. 959, Doc. 960, Doc. 961, Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, Doc. 965, Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, Doc. 972, and Doc. 973] Anglo-American-Soviet joint declaration, proposed, 1423–1425 [Pgs. 1423–1425 include portions of Doc. 930, Doc. 931, and Doc. 932], 1447 [Pg. 1447 includes portions of Doc. 961, Doc. 962, and Doc. 963], 1452–1454 [Pgs. 1452–1454 include portions of Doc. 970, Doc. 971, Doc. 972, and Doc. 973]

Definition of war criminals, 1413–1414 [Pgs. 1413–1414 include portions of Doc. 917, Doc. 918, and Doc. 919], 1425–1426 [Pgs. 1425–1426 include portions of Doc. 931, Doc. 932, and Doc. 933], 1435 [Pg. 1435 includes portions of Doc. 943, Doc. 944, and Doc. 945], 1445 [Pg. 1445 is part of Doc. 959]

Haitian President’s message to President Roosevelt suggesting a United Nations declaration, and President Roosevelt’s reply, 1420–1422 [Pgs. 1420–1422 include portions of Doc. 928 and Doc. 929], 1441 [Pg. 1441 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954]

Instructions to U. S. representatives in neutral countries to renew representations, and discussions with United Kingdom and Soviet Union regarding (see also U. S. and British representations, infra), 1412 [Pg. 1412 includes portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, and Doc. 917], 1412n [Pg. 1412 includes portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, and Doc. 917], 1417 [Pg. 1417 includes portions of Doc. 922 and Doc. 923], 1423–1424 [Pgs. 1423–1424 include portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931]

Soviet position, 1417 [Pg. 1417 includes portions of Doc. 922 and Doc. 923]

Statement to the press by Secretary of State Hull, 1431–1432 [Pgs. 1431–1432 include portions of Doc. 940 and Doc. 941]

Surrender of war criminals to United Nations, question of, 1410 [Pg. 1410 is part of Doc. 915], 1422 [Pg. 1422 is part of Doc. 929], 1426 [Pg. 1426 includes portions of Doc. 932 and Doc. 933], 1431 [Pg. 1431 is part of Doc. 940]

Turkish position, 1432 [Pg. 1432 includes portions of Doc. 940 and Doc. 941], 1436–1437 [Pgs. 1436–1437 include portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948]

U. S. and British representations to and reactions by— Argentina, 1433–1435 [Pgs. 1433–1435 include portions of Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, and Doc. 945]

Ireland, 1426–1427 [Pgs. 1426–1427 include portions of Doc. 932, Doc. 933, and Doc. 934], 1428–1430 [Pgs. 1428–1430 include portions of Doc. 935, Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, and Doc. 939], 1437–1439 [Pgs. 1437–1439 include portions of Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, Doc. 950, and Doc. 951], 1440 [Pg. 1440 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 1441 [Pg. 1441 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954], 1445 [Pg. 1445 is part of Doc. 959], 1446–1447 [Pgs. 1446–1447 include portions of Doc. 960, Doc. 961, Doc. 962, and Doc. 963], 1447–1448 [Pgs. 1447–1448 include portions of Doc. 961, Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965], 1448–1451 [Pgs. 1448–1451 include portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, Doc. 965, Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, Doc. 969, and Doc. 970], 1451–1452 [Pgs. 1451–1452 include portions of Doc. 968, Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]; British views and discussions regarding, 1430 [Pg. 1430 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939], 1442–1444 [Pgs. 1442–1444 include portions of Doc. 954, Doc. 955, Doc. 956, Doc. 957, Doc. 958, and Doc. 959], 1446 [Pg. 1446 includes portions of Doc. 960 and Doc. 961], 1448–1449 [Pgs. 1448–1449 include portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, Doc. 965, and Doc. 966]

Portugal, 1412–1414 [Pgs. 1412–1414 include portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, and Doc. 919], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926], 1419 [Pg. 1419 includes portions of Doc. 927 and Doc. 928], 1425–1426 [Pgs. 1425–1426 include portions of Doc. 931, Doc. 932, and Doc. 933], 1428 [Pg. 1428 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936], 1430 [Pg. 1430 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939], 1435 [Pg. 1435 includes portions of Doc. 943, Doc. 944, and Doc. 945], 1437 [Pg. 1437 includes portions of Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948], 1439–1440 [Pgs. 1439–1440 include portions of Doc. 950, Doc. 951, and Doc. 952]

Spain, 1416–1417 [Pgs. 1416–1417 include portions of Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, and Doc. 923], 1419–1420 [Pgs. 1419–1420 include portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929], 1423 [Pg. 1423 includes portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931], 1432–1433 [Pgs. 1432–1433 include portions of Doc. 940, Doc. 941, and Doc. 942], 1435–1436 [Pgs. 1435–1436 include portions of Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, and Doc. 946], 1451 [Pg. 1451 includes portions of Doc. 968, Doc. 969, and Doc. 970]

Sweden, and Swedish declaration, 1414–1415 [Pgs. 1414–1415 include portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, and Doc. 920], 1416 [Pg. 1416 includes portions of Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 1431–1432 [Pgs. 1431–1432 include portions of Doc. 940 and Doc. 941]

Switzerland, 1410–1412 [Pgs. 1410–1412 include portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, and Doc. 917], 1415–1416 [Pgs. 1415–1416 include portions of Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926], 1432 [Pg. 1432 includes portions of Doc. 940 and Doc. 941], 1448 [Pg. 1448 includes portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965]

War materials. See under Germany.

War Refugee Board. See under Refugees from Europe, etc.

War Relocation Authority, 1066 [Pg. 1066 includes portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622], 1187 [Pg. 1187 is part of Doc. 720]

Ward, J., 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 381]

Warren, George L., 1145 [Pg. 1145 is part of Doc. 683], 1186 [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719], 1187–1188 [Pgs. 1187–1188 include portions of Doc. 720 and Doc. 721]

Webster, Charles K., 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 490], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 490], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 490], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497], 874–876 [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 497], 878–879 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 497], 885–888 [Pgs. 885–888 include portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 507]

Wei Tao-Ming, 638n [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]

Weizsäcker, Ernst von, 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

Weizmann, Chain, 1057n [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 613], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615]

Welch, Air Marshal Sir William, 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 507]

Welles, Sumner, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 303]

Westphal, Gen. Siegfried, 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 303]

Wickersham, Gen. Cornelius W., 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 82], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 100], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 105], 230–231 [Pgs. 230–231 include portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]

Willson, Adm. Russell, 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 398], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 398], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 730n [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 753–754 [Pgs. 753–754 include portions of Doc. 433 and Doc. 434], 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 479], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 479], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 482], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 507], 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509], 937 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 518], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 518], 1469 [Pg. 1469 is part of Doc. 990]

Wilson, Edwin C., 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 8n [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 398], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 699n [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 1034n [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 1473–1474 [Pgs. 1473–1474 include portions of Doc. 992 and Doc. 993]

Wilson, Gen. Sir Henry Maitland, 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 241], 466n [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 308], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 598n [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 357], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 374], 1485 [Pg. 1485 is part of Doc. 1000], 1488 [Pg. 1488 includes portions of Doc. 1002 and Doc. 1003], 1489 [Pg. 1489 includes portions of Doc. 1003, Doc. 1004, and Doc. 1005], 1492 [Pg. 1492 includes portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007], 1500n [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1011], 1508n [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017], 1508 [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017], 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1020 and Doc. 1021], 1517 [Pg. 1517 includes portions of Doc. 1022 and Doc. 1023]

Winant, John G., activities as U. S. representative on EAC. See European Advisory Commission.

Wise, Rabbi Stephen S., 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555]

World Jewish Congress, 986 [Pg. 986 includes portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554], 1020 [Pg. 1020 is part of Doc. 578], 1253 [Pg. 1253 includes portions of Doc. 797 and Doc. 798]

Wright, Lord, 1367 [Pg. 1367 includes portions of Doc. 876 and Doc. 877], 1368 [Pg. 1368 is part of Doc. 877], 1391 [Pg. 1391 includes portions of Doc. 893 and Doc. 894], 1398 [Pg. 1398 is part of Doc. 905]

Wright, Michael, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 55], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 338], 623–624 [Pgs. 623–624 include portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 632–633 [Pgs. 632–633 include portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

X matter. See Dumbarton Oaks Conversations: Soviet republics, question of admission to international organization as member states.

Yalta Conference, 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 339]

Yugoslavia (see also European Advisory Commission: Consultation with other Allied Governments; and under Refugees from Europe, etc.), 440–441 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 231], 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763], 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 807 and Doc. 808], 1398 [Pg. 1398 is part of Doc. 905], 1508 [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017]

Zeitzler, Col. Gen. Kurt, 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 280], 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 301]

Zollinger, Alfred E., 1103 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 649]

Zuechner, Franz, 554–556 [Pgs. 554–556 include portions of Doc. 322, Doc. 323, and Doc. 324], 557–558 [Pgs. 557–558 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 559n [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 325], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 325], 563–564 [Pgs. 563–564 include portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

1  In indexing persons the intention has been to include all references to persons of significance for an understanding of the record, with the following exceptions: (1) The name of the Secretary of State or the Acting Secretary of State appearing as the signer of outgoing instructions unless there is a clear indication of the Secretary’s or Acting Secretary’s personal interest; (2) the name of an American officer in charge of a mission appearing as the signer of reports to the Department of State, except for personal items; (3) the names of persons to whom documents are addressed.

Persons are not identified by office in the index, but usually where a person is first mentioned in any section a footnote identification is given unless that person is identified in the text.
